                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     A TEST OF RACIAL BIAS IN CAPITAL SENTENCING

                                           Alberto F. Alesina
                                           Eliana La Ferrara

                                         Working Paper 16981
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16981


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2011




We thank Shamena Anwar, Abhijit Banerjee, Katherine Barnes, Francesco Corielli, Richard Dieter,
John Donohue, Je˙rey Fagan, James MacKinnon, Nicola Persico, Stephen Ross, Andrei Shleifer and
seminar participants at CIAR, Duke, Warwick, Royal Holloway, IIES Stockholm University, Queen's
University, University of Connecticut, NBER Political Economy Conference, CEPR Public Policy
Conference and Villa La Pietra Conference on New Directions in Applied Microeconomics for helpful
comments. Giulia La Mattina, Lucia Rizzica, Erika Deserranno, Mariagiovanna Di Feo, Damiano
Briguglio, Giovanni Rizzo, Matteo Fiorini and Marta Barazzetta provided excellent research assistance.
This paper was written while Alesina was visiting IGIER Bocconi. He thanks this institution for hospitality.
La Ferrara acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council grant ERC-2007-StG-208661.
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alberto F. Alesina and Eliana La Ferrara. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing
Alberto F. Alesina and Eliana La Ferrara
NBER Working Paper No. 16981
April 2011, Revised March 2013, Revised July 2013
JEL No. K42

                                              ABSTRACT

We propose a test of bias based upon patterns of judicial errors. We model the trial court as minimizing
a weighted sum of type I and II errors. We define racial bias a situation where the weight depends
on defendant/victim race. If the court is unbiased, the error rate should be independent of the combination
defendant/victim race. We test this prediction using an original dataset on all capital appeals in 1973-1995.
We find that in the first and last stage of appeal the probability of error is 3 and 9 percentage points
higher for minority defendants who killed white (vs. minority) victims.


Alberto F. Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Eliana La Ferrara
Universita' Bocconi
Dept of Economics
via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
eliana.laferrara@unibocconi.it
1         Introduction
One of the arguments against the death penalty in the United States is that it is applied with
a racial bias against minorities. Consider for example the following statement, taken from
the opening paragraph of a document by one of the most vocal organizations opposing capital
punishment:

          \African Americans are disproportionately represented among people condemned
          to death in the USA. While they make up 12 per cent of the national population,
          they account for more than 40 per cent of the country's current death row inmates,
          and one in three of those executed since 1977."1

    While factually correct, statements like these can hardly be interpreted as evidence of racial
bias, because violent crime rates are higher amongst minorities than whites. Accounting for
di erences in patterns of crime, and more generally in unobservables that may be correlated
with race, is crucial if one wants to rigorously test for racial bias. We propose a test of racial
bias in capital sentencing that allows for the possibility that members of di erent racial groups
di er along observable and unobservable dimensions, and we collect a large original dataset to
implement this test.
    We develop a model where courts minimize the probability of making judicial errors and
we derive a simple test for racial bias. We build upon the work of Anwar and Fang (2006)
and propose a test based upon the same insight. Even if we do not observe in the data all
the elements that trial courts consider when imposing a death verdict, if the judicial process is
unbiased, ex post we should not observe judicial errors more frequently in cases involving certain
combinations of defendant and victim's race. We exploit a feature of the capital sentencing
process in the US, namely that all rst degree capital sentences are automatically appealed
(so we have no selection bias), and we focus upon errors of rst degree courts reversed by
higher courts. Our test rests on the assumption that superior courts can only improve upon
the accuracy of rst sentencing and therefore remove part or all racial bias.
    Our model allows for the possibility that racial groups di er in their propensity to commit
crimes, in the quality of legal assistance they have access to, and in other unobserved dimensions.
This implies that a simple test comparing errors in judgements against minority defendants
with errors against white defendants is inconclusive, as di erences in error rates may re ect
    1
        Amnesty International, USA Death by Discrimination - The Continuiung Role of Race in Capital Cases,
April 2003, p.1.


                                                      1
di erences in unobservables that are correlated with defendants' race. Under the assumption
that for given defendant's race the distribution of these unobservables does not vary with the
race of the victim, we can build a test based on pairs of victim/defendant races.2 This test
relies upon the idea that the ranking of rst degree mistakes depending upon these pairs should
not violate certain patterns that are consistent with unbiased courts. For example, if courts
commit more errors on minority defendants who killed white victims than on those who killed
non-white victims, they should also commit more errors on white defendants who killed white
victims than on those who killed non-white ones. In other words, for each defendant's race the
ranking of error rates across victims' race must be the same. Failure to satisfy this condition
implies the presence of racial bias in our model. We also discuss an extension of the model
that allows for bias in the work of the police, the prosector or the defense, which implies that
distribution of the evidence may depend on both victim's and defendant's races. In this case
the results of our rank order test cannot be interpreted as bias attributable exclusively to the
court, but can be viewed more generally as a bias in the criminal justice system, that is the
combination of court, police and trial procedures.
   In order to implement our test we embarked on a challenging data collection project. We
started from the data on capital appeals assembled by Liebman, Fagan and West (2000) for
the period 1973-1995. From their data we take information on reversal of rst degree death
sentences at two stages of appeal: the Direct Appeal, which is the rst stage of appeal that
every death sentence undergoes and is ruled by State High Courts, and the Habeas Corpus,
which is the nal stage of appeal and is ruled by Federal Courts. We supplement this data with
information we collected on a case by case basis. An especially di cult variable to reconstruct
was the race of the victim for each case (neither defendant's nor victim's race are available in
Liebman et al.'s data). As a result, our study is the rst to provide even descriptive information
on the racial composition of victims in capital cases for the entire US in the period under study.
As we report below, 51 percent of defendants in the rst stage of appeal are white and 41
percent are African American. On the other hand, 78 percent of these cases involve at least
one white victim, and 17 percent at least one African American victim.
   When we implement our test we nd results consistent with the presence of racial prejudice:
ceteris paribus, rst degree courts are more severe (i.e., they tend to give more death sentences
which are then reversed) against cases involving a minority defendant killing one or more
white victims. For Habeas Corpus cases involving a minority defendant, the error rate was
   2
       The death penalty applies almost exlusively to homicides so there is always at least one well identi ed
victim.


                                                       2
37:5 percent if the victim was white, and 28:4 percent if it was not white, with a statistically
signi cant di erence of 9 percentage points. For cases involving a white defendant the di erence
indicates higher reversal rates when the victim is non-white, but it is not signi cant. In the
Direct Appeal sample, cases involving a minority defendant had an error rate of 37:7 percent if
the victim was white and 34:7 percent if the victim was a minority, with a statistically signi cant
di erence of 3 percentage points. In cases involving a white defendant the di erence is again
in the opposite direction and not signi cant. This pattern of results is consistent with racial
bias according to our rank order test.
   When we disaggregate the results by region, we nd that the e ect is driven by Southern
States. The di erence in error rates in these States is large: in Habeas Corpus cases, the error
rate is 15:5 percentage points higher for minority defendants with white victims as compared
to minority defendants with non-white victims (p-value :01): For the Direct Appeal sample the
corresponding di erence is 3:3 percentage points (p-value :13).
   The validity of our test relies upon several assumptions. The rst is an assumption about the
behavior of the higher courts. If these courts are unbiased and make mistakes uncorrelated with
the race of defendant and victim our tests are exactly speci ed. If higher courts are also racially
biased in the same direction of the lower courts but less so, our test underestimates the amount
of racial bias of rst degree courts. Our test would overestimate the level of bias if higher courts
actively discriminated in favor of minority defendants who killed white victims.3 Note that our
test would not fail if higher courts simply discriminated in favor of minorities, say because of
lower quality of their legal counsel: to invalidate our test the \reverse discrimination" should be
targeting very speci cally the minority defendant / white victim pair. We assess the plausibility
of this interpretation empirically, exploiting di erences in ideology across appeal courts. We
build upon the premise that the judges who would be most likely to reverse discriminate in
favor of minority defendants who killed white victims would be those more \left leaning". Using
various measures of political orientation of higher courts' judges we do not nd any evidence
of this e ect: both left wing and right wing leaning judges exhibit the same pattern of reversal
of rst degree sentences.
   Another assumption upon which our test rests is that possible unobservable characteristics,
such as characteristics of the crime or quality of the evidence, are not systematically di erent
across victims' races, for given defendant's race. To assess the plausibility of this assumption,
we test whether the distribution of observable characteristics correlated with the nature of the
  3
      See Argys and Mocan (2004) on the issue of reverse discrimination in executions and sentence commutations.




                                                        3
crime (e.g., situation, weapon, etc. ) or with its severity (e.g., aggravating and mitigating
factors) di ers systematically across racial pairs, and we nd that for the most part it does
not. We also investigate whether the results of our test are robust to conditioning on a number
of observables and         nd that by and large they are. While this does not rule out possible
di erences in unobservables, the outcome of this battery of tests increases our con dence in the
interpretation of our results as consistent with racial bias.
   As mentioned above our model builds upon the literature on racial bias in motor vehicle
searches and in particular to recent work by Knowles, Persico and Todd (2001), Anwar and
Fang (2006) and Antonovics and Knight (2009). However, our model di ers from those papers
in several ways. In models of car searches the issue is which car to stop and then with certainty
either contraband is found or not. In our model the courts have to evaluate guilt or innocence
based on a noisy signal and there is a review of the rst decision. Guilt or innocence cannot be
decided for sure like in a car search. The objective function of our courts is therefore di erent
from that of a trooper stopping cars, in that it trades o                the extent of type I and type II
errors.4 We share with Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007) an interest in the e ect of bias in judges'
decisions. These authors however address a di erent research question, namely how common
law and the accumulation of precedents leads towards an equilibrium without judicial bias. We
do not pursue this type of dynamic analysis of bias. Two recent papers exploit random variation
to test if there are systematic di erences across judges in the racial gap in sentencing for felony
crimes (Abrams, Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2012) or if there is evidence of bias in felony trial
outcomes depending on the racial composition of the jury (Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson,
2012). This type of random variation is not available for death penalty cases, so our test is
built on di erent grounds, exploiting a prediction on the equilibrium behavior of the court. We
should also clarify that, although it would be extremely interesting to disentangle the behavior
of di erent actors (prosecutor, jurors, judge), our data does not allow us to advance in this
direction and will only allow us to detect a \combined" bias of the criminal justice system up
to the trial stage.
   Our paper is also related to the literature on the death sentence and its usefulness. We do
not touch upon this issue. We focus only on the question of whether or not the death penalty
is applied with a racial bias.5 There are several early contributions in the law literature on
   4
       Both our paper and the literature of motor vehicle searches owe a lot to the path-breaking work by Becker
(1957) on rational models of crime.
   5
     On the deterrence e ect see among others, Erlich (1975), Katz, Levitt and Shustorovich (2003) and Donohue
III and Wolfers (2005) for a review.



                                                        4
the role played by race in capital sentencing and execution. The stylized facts described in
this literature include: (i) the disproportionate execution of blacks compared to whites; and
(ii) the higher likelihood that the death penalty is imposed when the victim is white. Most
of these studies rely on small samples and can be criticized on the grounds that important
factors a ecting the decision of the court may not be observable in the data. This is almost
inevitably the case when a direct test of discrimination at the sentencing stage is attempted.
Even the most comprehensive data source, in fact, will not possibly include all the information
that was available to the court at the moment when the sentence was imposed. One of the most
in uential early attempts at controlling for observable factors is a study by Gross and Mauro
(1984). They constructed an index of aggravating factors and found that, after controlling for
them, the race of the victim was still a strong predictor of capital sentencing (the likelihood of
a death sentence being higher when the victim was white), but the race of the defendant had
no residual explanatory power. Blume, Eisenberg and Wells (2004) combine data on death row
cases for eight US States with homicide data for the same States over the period 1976-1998 and
 nd that murders involving black defendants and white victims are signi cantly more likely to
result in death sentences than white defendant-white victim murders. On the other hand, they
 nd that black defendant-black victim cases are signi cantly under-represented on death row.
Compared to this literature, our test is not subject to the omitted variable bias critique (under
the assumption of the model). At the same time, our test has a more limited scope, in that
it applies to cases that have received the death sentence in the rst trial, and cannot estimate
bias occurring from exclusion errors, i.e. cases that should have received a death sentence and
did not.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 o ers a brief synthesis of the institutional details
useful to understand judicial errors in capital cases in the US. Section 3 describes our model of
behavior of the court and derives our test of racial bias. Section 4 describes the data. Section
5 presents our empirical methodology and results. The last section concludes.



2         Institutional background
Today, thirty-four states in the US allow capital punishment.6 Each state has its own statute
but much similarity exists among them. Most statutes are in fact modelled around the Georgia
one approved by the Supreme Court in Gregg v. Georgia in 1976. That statute prescribed: a)
    6
        The Federal Government has two death penalty statutes, one for the military and the other for non military
crimes. This section draws on Coyne and Enzeroth (2006).


                                                          5
an independent trial of guilt or innocence; b) a second hearing solely to determine the sentence;
c) a nding of at least one aggravating circumstance; d) an automatic review by the Georgia
Supreme Court and e) the comparison to similar cases. Even though the statutes are similar,
the actual application of the death penalty varies greatly across states.


First trial and sentencing

Trials for capital crimes embed two stages: the guilt phase, where the jury deliberates whether
the defendant is guilty or not, and the sentencing stage where, if the defendant is found guilty,
the jury (or in some States and until 2002, the judge) weighs the aggravating and mitigating
factors presented by the prosecutor and the defense and determines the sentence. The Supreme
Court has ruled that no statute can prescribe mandatory capital punishment, that is no one
found guilty of a capital crime can be automatically sentenced to death.7 This implies that
the jury always has discretion in choosing between a death sentence or imprisonment, if the
defendant is found guilty. A death sentence requires the existence of at least one aggravating
circumstance and the consideration of applicable mitigating factors. What constitutes both vary
from State to State. Certain aggravating circumstances or mitigating factors are very clear,
like killing a police o cer (aggravating) or killing under a certain age (mitigating). But other
factors are much less clear cut, like a murder being \in cold blood and pitiless" (aggravating)
or \acting under duress" (mitigating). The Supreme Court has struggled with unclear and
vague de nitions of aggravating circumstances and mitigating factors but quite a large latitude
remains. About one per cent of the murders committed in a year ends up in a death sentence.8


The appeal process

The most important aspect of the capital punishment procedural rules for the purpose of our
study is that all capital sentences, with no exceptions, are automatically appealed in state high
courts. During our study period, in all but two states the appeal run directly from the trial
court to the state court of last resort (typically the state supreme court), while in Alabama
and Ohio it went through an intermediate court of criminal appeals before reaching the highest
court. Sentences that survive state direct appeals are then inspected by state post-conviction
courts and, if they survive this stage too they can be reviewed in federal habeas corpus petitions.
The process often lasts several years. At each stage, the appeal court can overturn the sentence
   7
       Woodson v. North Carolina (1976) and Roberts v. Louisiana (1976).
   8
       See Barnes, Sloss and Thaman (2008) for a recent discussion of criteria according to which prosecutors
purse the death penalty in about 4 percent of capital crimes in Missouri.


                                                       6
if \serious error" is found, i.e. \error that substantially undermines the reliability of the guilt
 nding or death sentence imposed at trial" (Liebman et al., 2000). When all appeals are
exhausted, the only hope left for the defendant is an act of clemency from the State Governor.
    Liebman, Fagan and West (2000) conducted a study of all 4,578 state capital appeals in the
period 1973-1995, plus 248 state post conviction reversals and 599 capital sentences reviewed
by federal habeas corpus courts in the same period. Their ndings were striking: between 1973
and 1995, the proportion of fully reviewed capital judgments in which \serious error" was found
and which were overturned at one of the three stages was 68 percent. This is what happened to
overturned cases at retrial: 7 percent were found to be innocent, 75 percent were resentenced
to less than death, and 18 percent were resentenced to death. These sentence reversals will play
a key role in our empirical test.



3     The model

3.1     Setup
We consider a defendant whom a court can condemn to the death penalty or to a lesser penalty
(which includes the case in which the defendant is set free). If the court decides for the death
penalty, there is an appeal. In case of a lesser sentence or a no guilt verdict there is no appeal
and the decision stands. In appeal, the superior court can either con rm the death penalty or
reverse the decision of the lower court because of errors. An error can occur in establishing
the guilt of the defendant or in sentencing the death penalty for a crime that did not warrant
it. Our assumption (to be discussed below) is that while the lower courts can make mistakes,
higher courts make no mistakes. Our empirical test holds identically under the more general
assumption that even the highest courts can make mistakes but these are uncorrelated with
the race of the defendant and of the victim. Before formally presenting the setup of the model,
it is useful to introduce two de nitions that we will use to simplify the exposition and that
constitute a slight abuse of terminology.
    De nition: We label \guilty" a defendant who has committed a crime deserving of the death
penalty according to the law. We de ne \innocent" a defendant who has committed no crime
or has committed a crime which does not deserve the death penalty.
    Thus sentencing an \innocent" may mean sentencing to the death penalty someone for a
crime which instead deserved say a life term. Empirically, as we shall see below, most of the
\errors" imply sentencing to death somebody guilty of a crime not deserving death.


                                                7
   De nition: We denote as \court" the combination of judge and jury.
   While in reality judge and jury are obviously distinct, our data does not allow to separately
test for bias among the two, hence we consider them jointly in the model because this matches
the empirical test we conduct.
   We assume that each crime involves one defendant and one victim. Defendants are charac-
terized by their race and by a set of characteristics of the person or the crime or the relationship
between the person and crime. Let r 2 fw; mg be the race of the defendant, where w stands
for \white" and m for \minority". Let's de ne the race of the victim as R 2 fW; M g where W
stands for white and M for minority. The court observes various signals about the character-
istics of the defendant and of the crime, provided by the police and the trial proceedings and
summarizes them in a single dimension which we denote with x and that we can denote as \the
evidence." We normalize the support of x to x [0; 1] : The distribution of evidence can depend
upon the race of the defendant, for instance because of the quality of his/her legal assistance:
if minority defendants (on average poorer) have a lower quality defense, they may carry a less
precise signal and face more errors against them in the rst trials.9 While the quality of defense
is not explicitly modeled in our framework, it can be incorporated in a di erent distribution of
evidence faced by the courts for minority and white defendants. In the benchmark derivation
of our test we allow Fgr (x) and Fnr (x) to depend on the race of the defendant but not on the
combination of defendant and victim race. In section 3.3 we discuss possible ways of relaxing
this hypothesis and the implications for interpreting our test.
   We assume that the signal is informative for the court and the densities fgr (x) and fnr (x)
satisfy the strict monotone likelihood ratio property (MLRP), that is:

   MLRP: fgr (x)=fnr (x) is strictly increasing in x, for r 2 fw; mg.

   This property implies that higher values of the signal x are associated with a relatively
higher probability of guilt. We also assume fgr (x)=fnr (x) ! +1 as x ! 1.


The problem of the court

An individual considering whether to commit a capital crime (crime in short) compares the
costs and bene ts of it. In the Online Appendix we model this problem, but for the purpose
                                                                                               r
of our test we can equivalently assume that there exist an exogenous probability                   that an
   9
       Results by Iyengar (2007) indeed suggest that this may be the case. When comparing the e ectiveness
of two types of defense lawyers provided for indigent defendants, namely public defenders or court private
lawyers compensated by the hours, she      nds that the former perform better and minority defendants are
disproportionately represented by the latter.


                                                     8
individual of race r commits a crime. We allow this probability to vary across defendant races.
In section 3.3 we discuss whether             is likely to also depend on victim's race and how this may
a ect our results.
   The court wants to sentence guilty defendants to the death penalty, but wants to avoid the
mistake of sentencing defendants who do not deserve the death penalty (labeled as \innocent").10
These considerations can be summarized by assuming that the court minimizes a weighted av-
erage of the probability of condemning an innocent (type I error) and the probability of letting
a guilty person free (type II error). Therefore the court chooses the optimal xrR as the value
of x which solves:


                                          r
                        min     rR   [1       ] [1   Fnr (xrR )] + (1             rR )
                                                                                           r
                                                                                               Fgr (xrR )             (1)
                        xrR


with 0 <        rR   < 1; r 2 fw; mg and R 2 fW; M g : The                            rst and second term in (1) are,
respectively, the type I and type II error. The parameter                             rR   represents the relative weight
given by the court to type I error and will be crucial for de ning our test of racial bias. The
court chooses to sentence the defendant to death if the evidence is above a certain threshold.
We de ne the threshold xrR , which as indicated in the notation could vary with the race of the
defendant and of the victim, allowing the court to choose four potentially di erent thresholds.
The probability that an individual of race r killing an individual of race R is sentenced to death
is: pr (x) = Pr (x > xrR ).The optimal decision of the court in a case involving a defendant of
race r and a victim of race R is to impose a death sentence if and only if the signal x exceeds
the threshold xrR given by the court's rst order condition:


                                          fgr (xrR )           rR         1       r
                                                     =                                                                (2)
                                          fnr (xrR )   1             rR
                                                                              r


The cuto value xrR is thus the \standard of proof" applied by the court. Inspection of (2)
immediately reveals that xrR is increasing in                 rR ,   i.e. the higher the relative concern about
condemning an innocent, the higher will be the standard of proof required before imposing a
death sentence.
  10
       Note that under the assumption that the higher courts never make mistakes the costs of sentencing an
innocent for the lower courts are the moral costs of in icting high costs to innocent defendants and the costs
of reputation losses of having made mistakes. In the more general version of the model in which even superior
courts can actually make mistakes, although uncorrelated with race, lower courts also have to worry about the
possibility that innocent people sentenced to death are never released, which implies a very high moral cost.



                                                          9
   Note that even if    rR   =   for any r and R; the equilibrium cuto point chosen by the court
can be, and in general will be, di erent for white and minority defendants. In fact the left
hand side of (2) depends on the race of the defendant, r, because fgr and fnr depend on r; and
                                                                   r
the right hand side of (2) depends on r through                        . For example, if minorities have a higher
probability of committing crimes, ceteris paribus the court will choose xmR < xwR . On the
other hand, under the assumptions of our model the only way the race of the victim R can
enter (2) is through the parameter            rR .   This is the key insight upon which our test is based.
W e then discuss how we can relax this assumption.


3.2       A test of racial bias
In our model a court could be biased in di erent ways.

De nition 1 Bias only on the race of the defendant:                         rR   = (r)

      depends upon the race of the defendant (r), but not the race of the victim (R). A bias
against minority defendants is represented by                 mM   =        mW    <    wM   =      wW ,   as the court places
less weight on the possibility of wrongly condemning a minority defendant.

De nition 2 Bias only on the race of the victim:                       rR   = (R)

      depends on the race of the victim (R), but not on the race of the defendant (r). A bias
in favor of white victims is represented by            mW     =    wW       <     mM   =    wM ,   as the court places less
weight on the possibility of wrongly condemning someone who has killed a white victim.

De nition 3 Bias on both the race of the victim (R) and the race of the defendant (r):                                  rR   =
 (r; R)

The court applies a di erential treatment on the basis of the race of the victim, but it further
di erentiates depending on who has killed that victim. For example, a situation where the
court treats minority defendants who have killed white victims more harshly than whites who
have killed whites, but is relatively and equally lenient on both if the victim is non-white, can
be represented as:     mW    <   wW   <       mM   =   wM :


   We now derive a test for racial bias. De ne the capital sentencing rate for r; R pairs as:


                                      r
                        (r; R) =          1     Fgr (xrR ) + [1             r
                                                                                ] [1   Fnr (xrR )] :                      (3)


                                                         10
The equilibrium error rate on r; R pairs, which we denote as E(r; R); is:


                                                         r
                                                              1    Fgr (xrR )
                                      E(r; R) = 1                                                          (4)
                                                                  (r; R)

with (r; R) given by (3). As shown in the Appendix, under MLRP E(r; R) is monotonically
decreasing in xrR : the higher the standard of proof, the lower the error rate.
   The parameter         rR   enters the error rate (4) through the optimal threshold xrR derived from
(2), allowing us to build a test of racial bias. The race of the victim R only a ects xrR if                rR

depends on R. Therefore if the court does not discriminate over the race of the victim, the error
rate should be independent of it, even though it could depend upon the race of the defendant.
If for given race of the defendant we nd higher error rates in cases involving white victims
compared to minority victims, this is evidence of racial bias in favor of white victims. In the
benchmark version of our model, this bias originates from a lower weight given to type I errors
in cases involving a white victim (         rW   <   rM ),   which led the court to apply a lower standard
of proof, ceteris paribus. The intuition for this result is illustrated in gure 1, which shows the
density functions of the signal x for non-guilty and guilty defendants, holding constant the race
of the defendant. The type I error is the shaded area to the right of the threshold x : When we
hold constant the race of the defendant and vary the race of the victim, the assumptions of our
model imply that the distributions fnr and fgr do not shift. Hence the only way one could obtain
di erent error rates is through a shift in the value of x ; which in turn must re ect di erent
values of : Figure 1 shows an example where                   decreases (e.g., less weight is given to type I
errors against defendants who killed white victims), the threshold x moves left, and the error
rate increases.
   On the other hand, a similar inference cannot be made if one holds constant the race of the
victim and compares errors against defendants of di erent races. In other words, we cannot
derive from our model the implication that if the court does not discriminate across defendants
we should nd the same error rate for white and minority defendants when we hold constant the
race of the victim. Figure 2 illustrates the point. The top and bottom panels of gure 2 display,
respectively, the signal distributions for white and minority defendants, holding constant the
race of the victim. Because our model allows fnr and fgr to di er according to the defendant's
race r; error rates (the shaded areas in gure 2) may di er even when the court is unbiased and
selects the same threshold x :11
  11
       The fact that the threshold x is the same for both defendant races is neither a necessary nor a su cient
condition for unbiasedeness of the court. It is used in gure 2 purely for illustrative purposes. Also, the fact


                                                        11
   Thus we cannot test for the presence of bias only on the race of the defendant, while we
can test for bias which depends on the race of the victim (bias type 2 and 3 in the de nition
above). We now derive a test for the relatively more conservative de nition that bias is purely a
function of victim's race (bias of type 2). This amounts to asking the question: in the presence
of bias related to the victim's race, does this bias a ect defendants of di erent races in the
same way? In the empirical section we will show that the answer is \no", and that according
to our results the behavior of the court is consistent with a bias that depends on the particular
combination of defendant and victim race (bias type 3).

Proposition 1 If        rR   =   R   independent of r, then the ranking of average error rates E(r; M )
and E(r; W ) should not depend on r; for r 2 fm; wg.

   Proof: Suppose without loss of generality that                   mW   =    wW   <       mM   =       wM :   Consider
 rst minority defendants. Because xrR is strictly increasing in                     rR ;    mW      <     mM       implies
xmW < xmM ; which in turn implies E(m; W ) > E(m; M ) due to the fact that E(r; R) is strictly
decreasing in xrR : The same reasoning applies to white defendants, with                   mW    =      wW     <    wM   =
 mM   implying E(w; W ) > E(w; M ):

   Thus the following condition must hold if the court discriminates on the basis of victims'
race but treats defendants of di erent races in an unbiased way:12



                             E(m; W ) > E(m; M ) () E(w; W ) > E(w; M )                                                (5)

Expression (5) says that if we nd a higher error rate on minority defendants who killed white
victims, compared to minority defendants who killed minority victims, then we should also nd
a higher error rate on white defendants who killed white victims than on white defendants who
killed minority victims, and vice versa. This forms the basis for our rank order test.
   Our use of rank order tests is in the same spirit of Anwar and Fang (2006), with the di erence
that in their case one of the two dimensions over which troopers' success rates are computed
pertains to the behavior of the agent who may be discriminating (i.e., the police o cer), while
in our case the two dimensions pertain to o ender and victim characteristics, and not features
of the court.
                                         r
that we allow the probability of guilt       to di er across races implies that we could not make inference on bias
by comparing errors across defendant races even if the signal distributions were the same.
  12
     Expression (5) refers to the case of bias in favor of white victims. Obviously for bias in favor of minority
victims the inequalities should be reversed.


                                                          12
3.3        Discussion and extensions
In this section we discuss some important assumptions underlying our model, possible exten-
sions, and how they a ect the interpretation of our results. We start with the probability of
guilt     r,   then move to the shape of the signal distributions Fnr (x) and Fgr (x), and nally discuss
the behavior of superior courts and the role of plea bargain.


Di erent probabilities of guilt

It is well known that the frequency of homicides varies depending on the combination of o en-
dant and victim races, namely that intra-racial homicides are more frequent than inter-racial
ones. However, the parameter             r   in our model does not represent the frequency of crimes but
the probability of guilt, or more precisely the likelihood that the defendant has actually com-
mitted a crime that deserves the death penalty. The question then is: does this probability
depend on the four combinations of defendant and victim race in a way that would invalidate
our test, leading us to attribute to bias di erences in errors that arise from di erences in                 rR ?

To answer this question we rst present some available empirical evidence and then discuss
from a theoretical point of view under what con gurations di erences in                    rR   would create a
problem for interpreting our results.
   We are not aware of a comprehensive dataset including information on guilt rates by race of
defendant and victim for the period under study. So we resorted to two alternative sources.13
The rst is a representative sample of murders adjudicated in 1988 in 33 of the largest counties
in the US (US Dept. of Justice, 1996). This dataset includes information on race of the
defendant and of the victim, as well as the nal disposition outcome of the case. We restricted
the sample to rst degree murders, which are the ones potentially eligible for the death penalty,
and to cases that underwent trial, to provide as close a benchmark as possible to our dataset.
To investigate whether the di erential incidence of intra-racial murders may be indicative of
di erences in        rR ,   we regressed the average guilt rate in the county on the fraction of murders
in which defendant and victim belonged to the same race group. The estimated coe cient
was       :05, with a standard error of :31. Figure 3 plots the raw data (with the size of the
circles proportional to the number of homicides in the county) and clearly shows that there
is no correlation between the two variables. We also exploited the individual level data and
  13
       Other than these two sources, to the best of our knowledge existing public use data typically include
defendant's race (and in some cases the disposition of the case) but not victims' race. Datasets with information
on defendant and victim race typically do not have information on the disposition of the case, which means we
could not calculate guilt rates.


                                                        13
regressed the probability that the defendant was found guilty on the race of the defendant, the
race of the victim, and an interaction of the two. The coe cient on the latter term was again
not statistically di erent from zero.14
   A second source of empirical evidence is the work of Blume, Eisenberg and Wells (2004).
They calculate death sentence rates for eight US States over the period 1977-2000 as the ratio
of number of death sentences and number of murders in the State. While this is not the
empirical equivalent of our guilt rate (among other things, because the numerator includes
biased decisions of trial courts), a rough correction can be applied by subtracting State and
race-pair speci c relief rates (which we computed in our data) and assuming that the share
of guilt sentences that were a rmed are correct. Again, looking at the pattern of guilt rates
computed in this way no systematic correlation emerges between same race pairs and guilt
rates.15
   Even though di erences in              rR   do not seem warranted on the basis of the above evidence,
it is useful to discuss in what direction our results would be a ected if such di erences were
present. This amounts to assessing the sign of the derivative of the error rate (4) with respect
to : In the Online Appendix we show that this derivative can be decomposed in two parts.
The rst includes a \direct e ect" of                    on the error E that would obtain if x were treated
as exogenous. This e ect is negative and captures the fact that, for given standard of proof
x, higher values of          imply that fewer of the people condemned will be innocent, hence the
error rate is lower. The second part of the derivative is an \indirect e ect" that works through
endogenous changes in x: To see how, notice that x is decreasing in                       (from (2) and MLRP),
                                                                                              @E
and E is decreasing in x; hence the indirect e ect pushes in the direction of                 @
                                                                                                   > 0: Intuitively,
this occurs because when            increases the court chooses a lower standard of proof, which                 for
given         increases the size of the Type I error. Which of the two e ects dominates depends on
the value of        and on the shape of the functions Fnr (x) and Fgr (x): In the Online Appendix we
  14
       Speci cally, our estimated linear probability model is

                                  :755          :013             :116        :049
                      Guilty =            +             ND +            WV            (N D W V )
                                 (:089)        (:091)          (:086)        (:086)

where N D is a dummy for non-white defendant, W V is a dummy for white victim, and standard errors (in
parenthesis) are clustered at the county level. Results are very similar if we run the regression on the full sample
of rst degree murders (including cases that did not go to trial and guilty pleas) or if we include county xed
e ects.
  15
     Results available from the authors. Note that we do not have access to the raw data used by Blume et al.
(2004), so we conducted this meta-analysis using the published data in their paper.



                                                            14
provide some simulations where the direct e ect dominates when the fn distribution is relatively
more dispersed than fg .16
   In summary, what matters four our test is the cross pattern of guilt rates for the four
pairs of defendant and victim races. Contrary to perceptions based on the higher frequency of
intra-racial homicides, the (admittedly scant) evidence that we are aware of does not allow to
establish any systematic pattern in this respect. In the remainder of the paper we maintain the
assumption that           does not systematically vary with the combination of defendant and victim
race.


Bias in the collection of evidence

A second important assumption underlying our test is that the functions Fnr (x) and Fgr (x)
do not depend both on the race of the defendant and of the victim.17 Given our test the
critical question is whether, in particular, FnmW (x) di ers from FnmM (x) and FgmW (x) di ers
from FgmM (x): The two pairs of functions may not be the same for two reasons. One is the
nature of the crime: the types of crimes involving defendant/victim pairs of di erent race may
be \objectively" di erent and lead to di erent type I errors for any given level of evidence x.
The second reason is that there may be no intrinsic di erence in the nature of the crime but
the combination of police work, prosecutor work and defense attornies' work leads the court to
face di erent distributions as a function of the defendant/victim pair.18
   Let's begin with the second case. More precisely let's assume that if the police, prosecutor
and defense attorney were unbiased, the distributions would indeed not depend on the race of
the victim. We denote these as the \unbiased" distributions Fnr (x) and Fgr (x). Suppose now
that a biased \police, prosecutor, or defense" (in short PPD) distort the information available
to the court so that the distributions the court uses in its optimization problem, hence in (2),
are instead FenrR (x) and FegrR (x): How might these di er from the true ones and what would be
the implications for our test? To answer this question, let us consider the example of a murder
  16
       High relative dispersion of fn implies that decreases of x in response to increases of   translate into relatively
small increases in the area corresponding to the type I error as compared to the decreases in the type II error,
resulting in a decrease of the overall error rate. Conversely, in cases where fg has much fatter tails than fn the
opposite e ect may prevail.
  17
       A similar restriction is common to Anwar and Fang's (2006) test of prejudice.
  18
       Empirically, Radelet and Pierce (1985) analyzed a sample of 1017 homicides in Florida in the period 1973-77
and compared the descriptions of the homicides in police reports with the (later) descriptions given by courts.
They found that homicides involving African American suspects and white victims were more likely to be
described as \felony" by prosecutors.



                                                           15
involving a minority defendant and a white victim. Figure 4 reports the unbiased distributions
for this case, fn (x) and fg (x) (for simplicity we omit superscripts) and denotes as x the solution
of an unbiased court in this case. A biased PPD may want to convince the court that for a given
threshold of evidence the probability of convicting an innocent is (arti cially) low compared to
the risk of acquitting a guilty person. In the gure this is represented by the function fen (x): In
correspondence of x the size of the \perceived" Type I error has now decreased relative to type
II (which is unchanged in the example). An unbiased court would thus adjust the standard of
                                       e < x : This would result in a higher type I error
proof downwards and choose a threshold x
ex post when the appeal court has available the unbiased distribution fn (x): In other words,
the court would commit more type I error given the \true" distributions while acting on the
\wrong" ones. In this case the observed higher error rate for the minority/white pair would be
the result of a PPD bias not a court bias. Obviously, if the court were also biased the observed
error rate would be the combination if the two. What this discussion suggests is that if we
allowed the PPD to manipulate the distribution of the signal di erentially depending on the
combination of defendant and victim race, we would need to qualify the interpretation of our
test. The observed error would not necessarily derive from a bias in the parameter          (i.e., it
may not necessarily be attributable to the court). But one would still consider this error as
resulting from racial bias in the criminal justice system.
   Consider now the other case, namely PPD are unbiased but FnmW (x) di ers from FnmM (x)
and/or FgmW (x) di ers from FgmM (x) because the type of crime is objectively di erent. For
instance murders with minorities killing whites may involve \worse" crimes or cases where the
evidence is less clear cut, something which would go against the validity of our test. In this case
more errors might be made by the courts simply because of the nature of the crime. One way
of addressing this issue is to examine empirically whether observable indicators of the nature
of the crime (e.g., aggravating and mitigating factors) di er systematically across racial pairs,
and test if our results are robust to conditioning on observable characteristics. This should give
some insights about the potential bias due to di erences in unobservables. This is what we do
in section 5.2.
   To sum up, we have discussed two reasons why the assumption that Fnr (x) and Fgr (x) do not
depend on R may be violated. One reason relates to the behavior of the police, prosecutor or
defense attorney, who may distort the \true" distribution of the signal in a way that produces
more type I errors. This possibility requires that we interpret the higher error not as resulting
from a bias of the court, but from a bias of another part of the criminal justice system. But it is
bias nonetheless. The second potential violation occurs if the severity of the crime is objectively

                                                16
di erent in inter-racial homicides. This case could generate higher error even if all parts of the
criminal justice system are unbiased. We cannot rule out this possibility on theoretical grounds,
but we assess empirically how serious a concern it may be and nd results that we believe are
supportive of our interpretation.


Bias in the decisions of superior courts

Another hypothesis in our model is that superior courts never make mistakes and are racially
unbiased. If superior courts made errors which were uncorrelated with the combination of
defendant/victim race, this would not invalidate our test of racial bias. We can also relax this
assumption in one direction. Suppose for example that superior courts were racially biased in
the same direction of lower courts. This would go against nding higher error rates on certain
racial pairs because the superior courts would simply rea rm the rst sentence. That is, if
we did not nd evidence of racial bias based upon our test it could mean that the same bias
applies to all levels of courts. Thus not nding a bias could be inconclusive but nding it would
not. Note that if the racial bias declines with subsequent stages of revision (from state courts
to federal Habeas Corpus courts) then we should nd that the di erence in errors rates across
pairs of defendant's and victim's race should become larger in later stages of appeal. This is
what we nd below.
   What we cannot allow in our model is that superior courts are biased in the opposite
direction to lower courts, because in this case higher error rates may be interpreted as \reverse
discrimination" rather than evidence of mistakes by lower courts. We are not aware of a
literature that documents such bias in opposite directions, and at the same time the pattern
of inequalities that we nd in our tests (higher error rates on cases in which defendant and
victim are from di erent racial groups) would require a particular pattern of bias by superior
courts, not in favor of a particular group but of speci c \pairings" of races. Having said this,
in the empirical part of the paper we try to address the possibility of bias by superior courts
by testing if our results depend on certain characteristics of the appeal court (e.g., political
orientation). We do not nd evidence that the pattern of reversal we uncover is driven by the
ideology of the appeal judges.


Plea bargain

Many potential capital cases are plea bargained. The strength of the evidence against the
defendant and the severity of the crime are critical factors in determining the incentive for


                                               17
defense and prosecution to pursue a plea bargain. Comprehensive empirical studies of the
nature and characteristics of plea agreements are hard to come by due to data limitations. There
is evidence that minority defendants and defendants with previous criminal history receive a
harsher plea bargained prison term (Humphrey and Fogarty, 1987). Models of plea bargain
typically involve asymmetric information between prosecutor and defendant about the strength
of the case, as in for instance Grossman and Katz (1983) and Reinganum (1988). In our
model we do not have this asymmetry and only with this extension (which we leave for future
research) we could incorporate plea bargain in a meaningful way. As far as our empirical test
is concerned, if the likelihood that a case is plea bargained were uncorrelated to the races of the
racial pair defendant/victim, our test would be una ected. If it were not, then this correlation
might introduce a bias, but the direction of the bias is unclear, as it would depend among other
things on the shape of the signal distribution.
    We tried to empirically assess the potential relevance of this source of bias using data on a
representative sample of murders adjudicated in 1988 in 33 of the largest counties in the US
(US Dept. of Justice, 1996). This dataset includes information on race of the defendant and
of the victim, as well as the nal disposition outcome of the case (among which guilty plea).
When we regress the likelihood of guilty plea on race of the defendant, race of the victim, and
the interaction of the two, the coe cient on the interaction is not statistically di erent from
zero.19



4        The data
To implement our test of racial bias we could not rely on any readily available dataset. In fact
all existing data sets containing information on the race of the defendant and of the victim
in capital cases have limited geographical and temporal coverage and { most importantly for
our purposes { do not contain information on whether the capital sentence was rea rmed in
appeal. The only comprehensive dataset containing information on judicial errors in capital
cases, that is the one used in Liebman et al's (2000) study and compiled by Fagan and Liebman
(2002) {from now on FL{, does not contain information on the race of the defendant nor on
  19
       Speci cally, our estimated linear probability model is

                                 :307         :039             :093          :025
                       P lea =            +            ND +             WV            (N D W V )
                                 (:054)       (:063)           (:049)        (:072)

where N D is a dummy for non-white defendant, W V is a dummy for white victim, and standard errors are
clustered at the county level. The results are similar if we include county xed e ects.


                                                              18
the race of the victim. We therefore constructed our dataset by examining each individual
record in FL's data and searching for information on the race of the defendant and of the
victim. For a detailed description of FL's data collection methodology and variable de nition
we refer the reader to Liebman et al. (2000). In what follows we start by brie y reviewing the
characteristics and scope of FL's data, then discuss our search methodology and present some
descriptive statistics.


Data coverage

FL's data is the rst systematic collection of information on capital appeals in the modern
death penalty era in the US. We use two datasets originally compiled by FL:20

         direct appeal dataset (DA from now on): 4,546 state capital cases whose direct appeal
         decisions became nal between January 1, 1973 and December 31, 1995.21 This is the
         universe of all capital sentences that were reviewed on direct appeal by a state high court.

         habeas corpus dataset (HC from now on): 557 capital cases whose review was nalized
         by a federal Habeas Corpus court between January 1, 1973 and December 31, 1995. This
         is the universe of all capital sentences that were nally reviewed over this period.

   After eliminating cases for which the name of the defendant could not be identi ed, we are
left with a pool of 4,416 observations in DA and 531 observations in HC.22
  20
       FL also compiled a \post-conviction" dataset which, however, is incomplete due to the fact that state post-
conviction decisions are often not published and includes a selected subset of cases, all of which resulted in a
reversal. In our analysis we therefore only employ the DA and HC datasets, which comprise the universe of
available cases at those stages.
  21
     \Became nal" should be understood as \the highest state court with jurisdiction to review capital judg-
ments in the relevant state must have taken one or two actions during the study period: (1) a rmed the
capital judgment or (2) overturned the capital judgement (either the conviction or the sentence) on one or more
grounds" (Liebman et al. (2000), p. 126).
  22
     For 26 of the 557 cases in HC, either the sentence indicated in FL's data or the name of the defendant could
not be found in Lexis-Nexis, hence we drop those cases. In the DA dataset, the sentence could not be found
for 84 of the 4,546 available cases. Also, because some observations in the DA dataset correspond to multiple
sentences for the same rst degree trial and we want to record error once for each trial, we use one observation
per appeal-trial pair and attribute an error if it was found in the rst stage appeal (the one automatically
granted by all States).




                                                         19
De nition of error

In FL's data, \error" is de ned as such only if it led to the reversal of a capital conviction
or sentence. If an error was discovered that did not result in a reversal, this is not coded as
\error" in the database. For DA cases, a \serious error" that warrants reversal must have three
characteristics. First, it must be \prejudicial", in the sense of a ecting the outcome of the case
(harmless errors do not lead to reversals). Second, it must have been \properly preserved", in
the sense that the claim must have been asserted at the time and in the way required by the
law. Third, obviously the error must have been discovered. At the federal HC stage, a serious
error is reversible if, in addition to satisfying the three conditions required for DA, it violates
the federal Constitution.23


Collection of the race variables

FL's data does not contain any information on the race of the defendant, nor of the victim.
To collect such information, we relied on a number of sources including the Lexis Nexis data-
base, the quarterly publication \Death Row USA" issued by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund,
information from the Department of Corrections of several states, FBI UCR Supplementary
Homicide Files, the CDC National Death Index, a number of web sites specialized in death
penalty issues, plus communications with police o cers and defense lawyers.24 We assembled
an almost complete data set for HC and a very extensive one for DA. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the only dataset currently spanning two decades of trials for the entire US that
contains information on race of defendant and victim.
   Table A1 of the Online Appendix reports a tabulation of cases with missing information on
the race of defendant and victim for the HC (Panel A) and the DA (panel B) datasets. In the
HC data, we achieved almost full coverage of the defendant's race (3 missing cases out of 531),
but we are missing information on the race of the victim in 20 cases out of the 528 for which
we have the race of the defendant. Thus we have a usable sample of 508 cases out of 531. In
the DA data, we have information on defendants' race for 4,146 cases out of 4,416 (94 percent
of the sample), and on victims' race for 3,717 cases out of these 4,146 (90 percent). Appendix
Tables A2 and A3 contain summary statistics on the share of missing observations by state and
by year.
   In Appendix Table A4 we try to gauge the extent of possible selection in the pattern of
 23
      Some additional technical rules for reversibility at the HC stage are listed in Liebman et al. (2000), p. 130.
 24
      A detailed description of the search procedure and of the sources is available from the authors upon request.



                                                         20
missing data for victims' race for all cases in which we have information on the defendant's race.
We report the means of several variables related to defendant, victim, and crime characteristics
for the sub sample in which we have information on victims' race (column 1) and the cases
in which we don't (column 2). We conduct a t-test for the equality of means and report the
p-values in column 3. Overall we do not nd statistically signi cant di erences across the two
samples, with the exception of victim's gender in the Habeas Corpus data, but we show below
that our results are robust to excluding female victims. This increases our con dence that there
may not be a signi cant degree of selection on unobservables in the cases for which we have
information on victim race.25


4.1        Descriptive statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics on the main variables of interest in the HC (Panel A) and
DA (Panel B) datasets. In the HC data the error rate, measured by the variable \Relief" as
the fact that relief is granted at some stage of the review process, is :36: Regarding the race of
the defendant, 51 percent of the cases involve white defendants, 44 percent African Americans,
with the remaining fraction being mostly constituted by Hispanics. In contrast to the relatively
even split between white and African American in the defendant's race, 83 percent of the cases
involve a white victim, and only 13 percent an African American victim. Cases in which a
non-white defendant killed a white victim constitute 36 percent of the total, as opposed to 3
percent for the cases in which a white defendant killed a non-white victim. The remaining cases
are split between non-whites who killed non-whites (13 percent) and whites who killed whites
(48 percent). The proportions are fairly similar for the DA sample: 37 percent of the sentences
are overturned; 51 percent of the defendants are white, 41 percent are African American; 78
percent of the cases involve a white victim, as opposed to 17 percent with an African American
victim. In this sample the share of non-white defendants who killed a white victim is :30:



5        Results
The test for racial bias we derived in section 3 required that, in the absence of bias against
particular defendant/victim pairs, a di erence in error rates for defendants of a given race
depending on the victim's race should be maintained in the same direction for defendants of a
  25
       One possible reason for the unbalance in the gender variable is greater media coverage of murders involving
women, since media coverage makes it easier for us to nd information on the race of the victim.



                                                         21
di erent race. To implement this test we use a rank order test reminiscent of Anwar and Fang's
(2006) test for prejudice.
  We hold constant the defendant's race r; and compare error rates across victim's race,
                                  \
R 2 fW; M g : Let us denote with E(r; R), the average error rate for cases in which a defendant
                                                       \
of race r killed a victim of race R: We test the null E(r;        \
                                                           W ) = E(r; M ) (absence of racial bias)
                           \
against the alternative E(r;          \
                               W ) > E(r; M ) (racial bias in favor of white victims) using the
Z-statistic:
                                                 \
                                                E(r; W)           \
                                                                 E(r; M)
                                             Z= q                                                           (6)
                                                      SV arrW       SV arrM
                                                       nrW
                                                                +    nrM


where r 2 fw; mg; SV arrR is the sample variance of the error variable in the cases involving a
defendant of race r and a victim of race R; and nrR is the number of cases involving a defendant
of race r and a victim of race R, with R 2 fW; M g : Under the null hypothesis and given our
large sample, Z has a standard normal distribution by the Central Limit Theorem. We will
thus reject the null in favor of the alternative if expression (6) exceeds a threshold value z ;
where          is the signi cance level of the test and         (z ) = 1      : Performing this test separately
for each defendant race allows us to test the prediction of our model, expression (5).


5.1           Main results
Table 2 contains the outcome of our test for the HC (Panel A) and the DA (Panel B) datasets
and the main result of the paper. Each cell reports the average probability of error (\Relief")
                                                           \
for a given combination of defendant's and victim's race, E(r; R), and the associated standard
error (in parenthesis). The p-values reported at the end of each row are those associated with
test statistic (6). They represent the probability that, for a given defendant's race reported in
that row, a di erence in the error rates between white and minority victims at least as large as
the one reported can be found, given that the null (of no racial bias against defendant/victim
pairs) is true.
      The rst row of Table 2, Panel A shows that in cases involving a white defendant the average
error rate is 36 percent if the victim is white and 47 percent if it is non-white, with a di erence
of         11 percentage points.26 On the other hand, in cases involving a minority defendant, the
error rate is 37:5 if the victim is white, and 28:4 percent if it is non-white, with a di erence of
+9 percentage points (or a 32 percent increase over the the non-white/non-white error rate).
     26
          Note that, compared to other combinations, the number of cases involving white defendants and minority
victims is quite small.


                                                         22
The di erences in error rates across victim's race thus go in opposite directions depending on
the defendant's race. For the cases involving minority defendants, we reject the null of no
di erence against the alternative of a positive di erence in error rates with a p-value of :08;
for cases involving white defendants we fail to reject the null against the alternative (p-value
:80). Based on our rank order test, we therefore reject the hypothesis of no racial bias on
defendant/victim racial pairs on behalf of trial courts.
   In Panel B we show the same result for the DA sample. In the case of white defendants there
is a     2 percentage points di erence in error rates between white and non-white victim, though
not statistically signi cant. In the case of minority defendants the di erence is +3 percentage
points (a 9 percent increase over the the non-white/non-white error rate of :35) and is signi cant
at the 10 percent level. Again, we reject the null of no racial bias on defendant/victim racial
pairs.
   The rank order test implies that the di erence in error rates across columns should go in the
same direction for both rows in the previous tables (and in all those that follow). We shall see
that for the case of minority defendants (second row) the rst entry is always larger than the
second entry almost always in a statistically signi cant way, while for white defendants ( rst
row) the pattern of relative sizes of error rates typically goes in the opposite direction. Note
also that the fact that the di erence in errors is larger for the HC sample is consistent with
the possibility that racial bias is eliminated in steps, that is, the DA courts may be less biased
than the rst degree courts but still biased relative to the nal federal panels.
   In Table 3 we       nd that the pattern of racial bias we uncovered is driven by Southern
states. In the HC sample when we restrict the sample to sentences imposed by Southern courts
we nd a very large and statistically signi cant di erence in errors for minority defendants
who killed whites compared to minorities who killed non-whites: the di erence is striking at
15:4 percentage points (a 66 percent increase over the non-white/non-white error rate of :23),
with a p-value of 0:01: The di erence goes in the opposite direction and is not signi cant for
white defendants. A similar pattern emerges for DA cases in the South (Panel B), but with
a smaller di erence (3:3 percentage points for minority defendants, p-value 0:13). Again, the
corresponding di erence for white defendants has the opposite sign and is not signi cant.
   When we conduct analogous tests for other regions we fail to reject the null for both HC and
DA. In HC the error rate is higher with non-white than with white victims both if the defendant
is white and if he is not. In DA the sign pattern in the di erences is reversed compared to the
South, but none of these di erences is statistically signi cant. One caveat about the results
for regions other than the South in the HC sample, however, is that they cover a substantially

                                                23
smaller number of cases compared to those for the South.


5.2    Potential confounding factors
We have suggested that our results on the rank order tests show a racial bias on behalf of the
criminal justice system up to the level of the trial court. An alternative interpretation would be
that the pattern of inequalities in error rates is generated by unobserved characteristics of the
crime that are systematically correlated with di erent combinations of defendant and victim
races. In the notation of our model, this would imply that the distribution of the evidence de-
pends on the combination of races, i.e., Fnr;R (x) and Fgr;R (x). Although we cannot test for this
possibility explicitly, in this section we aim at providing evidence on the importance of poten-
tially omitted factors in two ways. First, we test whether the distribution of observable crime
characteristics is systematically correlated with defendant/victim pairs. Second, we perform
our rank order test conditioning on a set of available characteristics that might be correlated
with the severity of the crime or the quality of available evidence.


Balance tests on crime characteristics

As we discussed in section 2, the choice between a death sentence and life imprisonment often
rests in the relative weight given to aggravating and mitigating circumstances associated with
the defendant and/or the crime. We start by examining whether the description of aggravating
and mitigating circumstances di ers systematically between murders involving di erent race
combinations. Information on a rich set of aggravating and mitigating factors put forward
in the trial is available from FL for the HC dataset (not for DA) and includes the following
categories:

      Aggravating: heinous and atrocious crime; pecuniary gain motive; attempt to avoid arrest
      and hinder law enforcement; murder during a violent felony; murder by a person under
      prison sentence; previous felony convictions; killed a police, reman, guard, or other public
      o cial; multiple victims; young or old victim; great risk of death to many people; cold,
      calculated, premeditated;

      Mitigating: young age; no prior record; extreme emotional distress; intoxication; mental
      retardation and limited capacity; deprived or abused background; good prison record;
      lack of intent; duress.



                                               24
   Table 4 reports the fraction of cases for which a given aggravating or mitigating circumstance
is recorded when the defendant is white (columns 1-2) or non-white (columns 4-5) and the victim
is white (columns 1, 4) or non-white (columns 2, 5). For each defendant's race, the p-value
associated with the di erence in average prevalence of a circumstance between the two races
of victims is reported in columns 3 and 6. Most important, the \di erence in di erences" and
its associated p-value are reported in columns 7 and 8. The latter is useful to test whether, in
case a certain aggravating or mitigating circumstance is more common in murders involving,
say, a white victim, this di erence is similar across defendant races. For the purpose of our
analysis, we would like the di erences -if any- to be similar across defendant races because this
would imply that the cases we are considering are relatively comparable in terms of aggravating
or mitigating circumstances. Columns 9 to 16 in Table 4 report similar statistics, but for the
Southern subsample.
   As we can see in Panel B of Table 4, all of the mitigating circumstances are balanced
across defendant/victim pairs (p-values in the range of :4     :9 in column 8), and this is true
also of most aggravating circumstances. In particular, the most common aggravating circum-
stances -\Heinous or atrocious crime"; \Murder during a violent felony", and \Previous felony
conviction"- are perfectly balanced (p-values of :98; :83 and :40, respectively in the full sample
and similarly in the South subsample). The only exceptions are the following. \Murder by
a person under prison sentence" is more common among whites killing nonwhites in the full
sample, but is balanced in the South. \Great risk of death to many people" is more common on
same-race pairs, while \Cold, calculated and premeditated" is more common among mix-race
pairs. The fact that the unbalance goes in opposite direction in the latter two cases makes it
di cult to assess what the net e ect may be. Overall, based on the results in Table 4, there
does not seem to be a systematic pattern of aggravating or mitigating circumstances being more
likely associated with cross racial defendant/victim cases, which increases our con dence in the
interpretation of our test as detecting bias.
   Aggravating and mitigating circumstances are particularly important when thinking about
unobservables potentially correlated with race, because these circumstances are the ones that
the court is required to weigh when deciding between a death sentence and a lesser one. We
also collected information on other crime characteristics, related to the victim (gender and
number) and the weapon used (knife, handgun, shotgun, ri e, or strangulation) for the HC
and DA datasets. Furthermore, for HC cases information on the following circumstances is also
available: defendant connected to the community where the crime occurred; murder occurred
during a burglary, theft, robbery, kidnapping, rape or institutional killing. Appendix Table A5

                                                25
reports a series of balance tests like the ones in Table 4 for these other variables. We nd that
in HC cases all the above crime characteristics are balanced. In the DA dataset, the type of
weapon used is balanced, while variables related to the victim are not: same race pairs are
more likely to invoke multiple victims and women. While ex ante it is not obvious in which
direction this may bias our test, in the next section we show that our results are largely robust
to excluding these categories of crimes.


Robustness: crime characteristics

We replicate our test for racial bias conditioning on several observable variables that characterize
the crime. While this does not constitute direct evidence against the possibility that di erences
in unobservables are driving our results, it does shed some light on how important a similar
concern may be.
   In Table 5, Panel A we start from the HC sample, for which relatively detailed information
on the crime was collected by FL. The leftmost part of the table uses the full sample, while
the righmost part restricts the sample to Southern states. First we test whether the gender of
the victim is a signi cant factor in our results. In the rst panel of Table 5A we restrict the
attention to cases in which none of the victims was female. We nd higher error on minority
defendants who killed white men than on those who killed non-white men (the di erence is 10:6
percentage points, p-value :12 in the full sample, and 16 percentage points, p-value :05 in the
South). The corresponding di erence for white defendants is       11:6 and    14:4; not signi cant.
   An aggravating factor that may be responsible for the results we nd is the presence of
multiple victims. Restricting the analysis to homicides with only one victim shows a di erence
of 9 percentage points (15 in the South) for nonwhite defendants who killed white versus
nonwhite victims (p-values :09 and :02; respectively) and an insigni cant di erence on the
opposite direction for white defendants.
   The remaining of Table 5A reports results for other crime characteristics which are available
only for the HC sample. A possible aggravating factor is the fact that the defendant killed
a policeman, or reman, or guard, or other public o cial. One could conjecture that crimes
involving minority defendants and white victims are more represented in this category and that
this generates the higher error rates we nd. When we repeat the analysis considering cases in
which none of the victims was one of these public o cials (indicated as \no police victim" in
the table), we nd no signi cant di erence in error rates for white defendants, and a di erence
of 13 percentage points for minority defendants, with p-value :03, in the full sample. In the
South the di erence is even larger (18 percentage points) and signi cant at the 1 percent level.

                                                26
So our results are not driven by this types of murders.
   A commonly held view is that cases in which an outsider who does not know the victim
commits a murder are perceived as particularly threatening and sanctioned with more severely.
Perhaps cases involving minority defendants and white victims fall disproportionately in this
category. In the fourth panel of Table 5A we examine the subset of cases where the defendant
was not connected to the community where the crime occurred, according to the information
recorded in FL. These cases should be relatively comparable along this dimension. Our results
show that in the full sample the likelihood of error is 15 percentage points higher for minority
defendants who killed white victims compared to minority defendants whose victims were not
white (p-value :03). In the South the di erence is 21 percentage points, signi cant at the 1
percent level. The corresponding di erence in error rates for white defendants has the opposite
sign and is not statistically signi cant. In the fth panel we consider the subset of cases where
the victims were not \high status", as classi ed by FL. We nd a di erence of 9 percentage
points (p-value 0:12) in the full sample and 16 percentage points (p-value :02) in the South for
the combination of minority defendants and white victim, and no di erence for the opposite
combination.
   Another way to gauge the role of potentially omitted crime characteristics is to con ne our
attention to murders that occurred in \similar" environmental conditions. In particular, in the
sixth panel of Table 5A we consider murders committed during a robbery. The likelihood of
judicial error is 18 percentage points higher for minority defendants who killed at least one white
victim during a robbery compared to minority defendants whose victims were all non-white,
and is signi cant at the 5 percent level. Results are even stronger in the South, with a di erence
of 32 percentage points, signi cant at the 1 percent level. The di erence for white defendants is
in the opposite direction and not statistically signi cant. Finally, when we restrict the sample
to cases that are similar in the sense of being classi ed as \felony murders", we nd again a
higher error rate for nonwhite defendants who killed white victims (13 percentage points in the
full sample, 22 in the South, with p-values :07 and :004; respectively), and no corresponding
di erence for white defendants.
   We have less information on crime characteristics for the DA compared to the HC sample.
In Table 5B we begin by testing whether the gender of the victim is a signi cant factor in
our results. In the rst panel we restrict the attention to cases in which none of the victims
was female. We nd 8 percentage points higher error on minority defendants who killed white
men than on those who killed nonwhite men (p-values :01 and :02 in the full sample and in
the South, respectively). The corresponding di erence for white defendants is in the opposite

                                                27
direction and not signi cant. In the second panel we restrict the analysis to homicides with
only one victim we nd a di erence of 3 percentage points for nonwhite defendants who killed
white vs. nonwhite victims, both in the full sample and in the South, but the p-values increase
to :16 and :26; respectively.


Robustness: legal assistance

We now analyze whether di erences in error rates are due to unequal quality of legal assistance
of the defendant. A possible interpretation of our nding is that minority defendants who killed
a white victim receive systematically worse legal assistance compared to minority defendants
who killed a minority victim. This would actually be another source of racial bias, which we
discussed in section 3.3 and which would \distort" the distribution of the signal for given char-
acteristics of the crime. Note that if a minority defendant received a worse defense regardless
of the race of the victim, this would not invalidate our test nor change the interpretation of the
results.
   In Table 6 we repeat our tests restricting the sample to cases that are relatively similar
in terms of some trial characteristics. We can only do this for HC cases because no trial
characteristic is available in the DA dataset. As a proxy for the quality of legal assistance at
the trial stage we use the fact that \ine ective assistance of counsel" in the guilt and sentencing
phase was included among the claims for relief. We start by restricting the sample to 220 HC
cases in which ine ective assistance of counsel was not raised among the claims in the appeal.
In this subset of cases the di erence in error rates for minority defendants who killed a white vs.
a non-white victim is 19 percentage points (p-value :04) in the full sample, and 29 percentage
points (p-value :003) in the South. Comparing these results to those in Tables 2 and 3 suggests
that variation in the quality of legal assistance across racial combinations of defendants and
victims may actually lead us to underestimate the extent of bias.
   In the remaining parts of Table 6, we consider the subset of cases in which \prosecutor's
suppression or withholding of evidence or other prosecutorial misconduct" was not raised among
the claims, nor was \improper interrogation", that is, there was no involuntary confession or
guilty plea or request for attorney denied. In both sub-samples the order of magnitude of the
di erences in error rates and the signi cance level remain comparable to those of Tables 2 and
3, and the rank order test rejects the null of absence of racial bias according to our model in all
cases except for the second panel in the full sample, where the p-value for nonwhite defendants
increases to :16.
   Note that although the above variables seem reasonably good proxies for the quality of

                                                28
legal assistance, some of them re ect discretionary choices on behalf of the defense in the
appeal process (e.g., which claims to present) and in this sense they may not be fully objective.
Nonetheless, we take the evidence in Table 6 as suggestive that di erences in the quality of
legal assistance are not entirely responsible for our results.


Robustness: reverse discrimination of appeal courts

So far we have assumed that the appeal courts are unbiased. As we mentioned above, errors
uncorrelated with pairs of defendant/victim races are irrelevant for our empirical test. If the
appeal court is biased in the same direction of the trial court, our test will underestimate
the extent of racial bias because the (biased) appeal court will reverse the trial court decision
less often than an unbiased court would do. The challenge for us would arise from a bias
in the opposite direction, namely if the appeal court were inclined to give relief more often
than an unbiased court would do.       Note that a simple bias of the appeal courts in favor of
black defendants (for example on the ground that they are on average poorer and may not
be able to a ord good legal assistance) would not invalidate our tests of racial bias. What
would be problematic for us is a situation where the bias is linked to a particular combination
of defendant/victim race, e.g. if the appeal court rules systematically more in favor of non-
white defendants who killed white victims. Although we cannot rule this out a priori, we
test the plausibility of this scenario by exploiting information on the political orientation of
appeal judges. We conjecture that, if a bias in favor of minorities who killed white victims
existed, this would more likely be found among liberal judges than among conservative ones,
characteristics which we assume to be correlated with party a liation. Thus we repeat our
analysis conditioning on party a liation of the appeal judges.
   Let's begin with the HC sample. For each sentence, we collected the names of the judges who
served on the appeal court that decided on that sentence, and recovered information on these
judges from the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges available from the Federal Judicial
center. This directory contains biographical information on all judges that served on U.S.
District Courts, the U.S. Courts of Appeals, the Supreme Court and the U.S. Circuit Courts
since 1789. We recorded the year in which each judge was appointed to the relevant court
and classi ed the political orientation of the judge as \Republican" if he or she was appointed
under a Republican president and \Democratic" if he or she was appointed under a Democratic
president. If our results were driven by \reverse discrimination" on behalf of appeal judges, we
should not nd discrimination (or nd it to a lesser extent) when we look at courts that are
predominantly composed of republican judges.

                                                29
   Table 7A reports the results for the subset of HC cases where the majority ( rst panel) or
the totality (second panel) of the judges were appointed under a Republican president. The
leftmost part of the table employs the full sample, while the righmost part restricts the analysis
to the South. Both sets of results are consistent with our earlier                ndings, and indicate a
higher likelihood of relief for nonwhite defendants who killed white victims. When we consider
appeal courts where a majority of the judges are Republican ( rst panel), the magnitude of the
di erence in error rates is 7 percentage points in the full sample and 12 percentage points in
the South (p-values :20 and :08; respectively). This di erences increase to 13 and 16 percentage
points when we restrict our test to courts that are entirely composed of republican-appointed
judges (second panel, p-values :09 and :06).
   In the third panel of Table 7A we consider the possibility that the political climate in a
given year may a ect relief rates, and restrict the sample to Habeas Corpus appeal sentences
that occurred under a Republican administration. We nd a di erence of 17 percentage points
in the full sample and 25 percentage points in the South for non-white defendants who killed
white victims, both signi cant at the 1 percent level. In all three panels the corresponding
di erence for white defendants is in the opposite direction and not signi cant.
   In Table 7B we conduct a similar exercise for the DA dataset. In this case we have available
both the party a liation of the Direct Appeal judges and the measure of judges' ideology
proposed by Brace, Langer and Hall (2000), which they label PAJID.27 The rst panel of Table
7B shows that when we restrict the sample to rst stage appeals decided by courts in which at
least 50 percent of the judges were Republican, error rates on nonwhite defendants who killed
white victims are higher than on those who killed nonwhite victims (7:5 and 24 percentage
points in the full sample and in the South, respectively, with p-values :05 and :03). For white
defendants, error rates are virtually the same across victim races.
   In the remaining panels we rely on the continuous measure of ideology proposed by Brace
et al. (2000) and de ne as \conservative" judges whose ideology score falls in the top 50
percent of the distribution of PAJID. The second panel restricts the sample to courts whose
median member (in terms of ideology) is \conservative", while the third does the same but with
reference to the Chief Justice. In both cases we nd that the direction and the magnitude of
the di erences in error rates are comparable to our main results in Tables 2 and 3, though we
lose statistical signi cance. Furthermore, this result does not depend on the particular cuto
  27
       Essentially PAIJD measures judges' ideology on a scale from conservative to liberal based upon party
a liation modi ed by a set of criteria allowing for di erences across states. We match this measure to re ect
the composition of the state appeal court the year in which the appeal sentence was issued.



                                                     30
for the de nition of \conservative". Figure 5 shows that the positive di erence in error rates
for minority defendants who killed white versus nonwhite victims holds for each and every
quartile of the distribution of PAJID, indicating that our main result is not driven by the
ideological orientation of the court. The corresponding di erences for white defendants are
instead sometimes positive, sometimes negative, and vary by quartile.
    To sum up, we nd no evidence that left liberal leaning judges are those who \correct" more
mistakes in pairs involving minority defendants and white victims. In fact we nd that our
results hold strong when we restrict the sample to relatively conservative appeal courts. Thus,
we nd no obvious evidence of reverse discrimination by higher courts.



6     Conclusions
This paper proposes a test for racial bias in capital sentencing in the US over the period 1973-
1995. We use the share of judicial errors in rst degree sentencing as an indicator of racial
bias of such courts. Using an originally collected dataset, we uncover a bias against minority
defendants killing white victims. The bias is present, according to our test, only in Southern
States. More precisely, according to our interpretation rst degree courts tend to place less
weight on the possibility of condemning an innocent in cases of minority defendants with one
or more white victims relative to minority defendants who did not kill whites. The same
does not hold for white defendants. This result is not explained by di erences in observable
characteristics of the crime or of the trial, nor by the ideological orientation of appeal courts.



Appendix - Proof that the error rate is decreasing in x
To simplify the notation, here we omit subscripts and superscripts related to race, i.e. we write
                                  r
x instead of xrR ;   instead of       ; and fg ; fn instead of fgr ; fnr : The error rate (4) is

                                                                    1
                                  E(r; R) = 1                  1    1 Fn (x )
                                                                                    :                             (A1)
                                                          1+        1 Fg (x )

                                                                1       1 Fn (x )
Expression (A1) is decreasing in x if and only if                       1 Fg (x )
                                                                                        is decreasing in x : Taking the
 rst derivative of this product with respect to x , its sign is the same as the sign of:


                                        Z     1                         Z    1
                           1
                                                  fg (x )fn (x)dx                fg (x)fn (x )dx :                (A2)
                     [1   Fg (x )]2       x                              x



                                                          31
To see that the term in square brackets is negative, recall that from MLRP we know that
fg (x)       fg (x )
fn (x)
         >   fn (x )
                       for any x > x : Because the integrals in (A2) are calculated for x 2 (x ; 1]; then
in this range fg (x )fn (x) < fg (x)fn (x ); hence (A2) is negative.



References
 [1] Abrams D. M. Bertrand and S. Mullainathan (2012), \Do Judges Vary in their Treatment
         of Race?", Journal of Legal Studies, 41(2), 347-383.

 [2] Antonovics, K. and B. Knight (2009), \A New Look at Racial Pro ling: Evidence from
         the Boston Police Department", Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 163-175.

 [3] Anwar, S., P. Bayer and R. Hjalmarsson (2012), \The Impact of Jury race in Criminal
         Trials", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 1017-1055.

 [4] Anwar, S. and H. Fang (2006), \An Alternative Test of Racial Pro ling in Motor Vehicle
         Searches: Theory and Evidence", American Economic Review, 96(1), 127-151.

 [5] Argys, L. and N. Mocan (2004), \Who Shall Live and Who Shall Die? An Analysis of
         Prisoners on Death Row in the United States", Journal of Legal Studies, 33(2), pp. 255-92.

 [6] Barnes, K., D. Sloss, and S. Thaman (2008), \Life and Death Decisions: Prosecutorial
         Discretion and Capital Punishment in Missouri", unpublished.

 [7] Becker G. (1957) The Economics of Discrimination, Chicago: University of Chicago Press

 [8] Blume, J., T. Eisenberg and M.T. Wells (2004), \Explaining Death Row's Population and
         Racial Composition", Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 1(1), 165-207.

 [9] Brace, P., L. Langer and M. Gann Hall (2000), \Measuring the Preferences of Supreme
         Court Judges", Journal of Politics, May, 387-413.

[10] Coyne, R. and L. Entzeroth (2006), Capital Punishment and the Judicial Process, Carolina
         Academic Press.

[11] Donohue III, J. and J. Wolfers (2005), \Uses and Abuses of Empirical Evidence in the
         Death Penalty Debate", Stanford Law Review, 58(3), 791-846.

[12] Erlich, I. (1975), \The Deterrent E ect of Capital Punishment: A Matter of Life and
         Death", American Economic Review, 65(3), 397-417.

                                                       32
[13] Fagan, J. and J. Liebman (2002), Processing and Outcome of Death Penalty Appeals After
    Furman v. Georgia, 1973-95. ICPSR version 3468. New York City, NY: Columbia School of
    Law and Mailman School of Public Health [producers]. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR [distrib.].

[14] Gennaioli N. and A Shleifer (2007), \The Evolution of Common Law", Journal of Political
    Economy, 115(1) 43-67.

[15] Gross, S.R. and R. Mauro (1984), \Patterns of Death: An Analysis of Racial Disparities
    in Capital Sentencing and Homicide Victimization", Stanford Law Review, 37, 27-153

[16] Grossman G. and M. Katz (1983), \Plea Bargain and Social Welfare", American Economic
    Review, 73(4), 749-57

[17] Humphrey, J. and T. J. Fogarty (1987), \Race and Plea Bargained Outcomes: A Research
    Note," Social Forces, 66, 176-85.

[18] Katz, L., S. Levitt and E. Shustorovich (2003), \Prison Conditions, Capital Punishment,
    and Deterrence", American Law and Economics Review, 5(2), 318-343.

[19] Knowles J., N. Persico and P. Todd (2001), \Racial Bias in motor vehicles searches:Theory
    and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 203-29.

[20] Iyengar, R. (2007), \An Analysis of Attorney Performance in the Federal Indigent Defense
    System", NBER Working Paper, n. 13187.

[21] Liebman, J., J. Fagan and V. West (2000), A Broken System: Error Rates in Capital
    Cases, 1973-1995; Columbia University.

[22] Radelet, M. and G. Pierce (1985), \Race and Prosecutorial Discretion in Homicide
    Cases",19 Law and Society Review, 587, 601{15.

[23] Reinganum, J. (1988), \Plea Bargain and Prosecutorial Discretion", American Economic
    Review, 78 (4), 713-27.

[24] U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Murder Cases in 33 Large Urban
    Counties in the United States, 1988. Distributed by ICPSR 9907, 1996.




                                             33
Figure 1: Error rate for given defendant’s race




          Figure 2: Error rate for given victim’s race
       1
       .8   .6
  Guilt rate
.4     .2
       0




                 .6    .7              .8              .9   1
                      Frequency of same race homicides


Figure 3: Guilt rate and frequency of homicides


                                     34
   Figure 4: Bias in the collection of evidence




Figure 5: Error rate and ideology of Appeal Courts


                        35
                     Table 1: Error rate for given defendant’s race

                                             Panel A: Habeas Corpus                     Panel B: Direct Appeal
                                       No. Obs      Mean           Std. Dev.         No. Obs     Mean     Std. Dev.
Relief                                   508        0.36             0.48             3717       0.37       0.48
African American defendant               508        0.44             0.50             3717       0.41       0.49
White defendant                          508        0.51             0.50             3717       0.51       0.50
African American victim                  508        0.13             0.34             3717       0.17       0.38
White victim                             508        0.83             0.37             3717       0.78       0.41
White def., Non-white vict.              508        0.03             0.18             3717       0.03       0.17
Non-white def., White vict.              508        0.36             0.48             3717       0.30       0.46
White def., White vict.                  508        0.48             0.50             3717       0.48       0.50
Non-white def., Non-white vict.          508        0.13             0.34             3717       0.19       0.39




                  Table 2: Error rate by defendant and victim race

                               Panel A: Habeas Corpus                              Panel B: Direct Appeal
                                     Victim's race                                       Victim's race
Defendant's race          White   Non-white p-values N.obs                White     Non-white p-values    N.obs
   White                  0.358     0.471       0.809 260                 0.373       0.395       0.673    1908
                         (0.031)   (0.125)                               (0.011)     (0.046)
   Non-white              0.375     0.284       0.083 251                 0.377       0.347       0.097    1809
                         (0.036)   (0.055)                               (0.015)     (0.018)
N.obs                      427          84                                2911        806
Note: Standard errors of the means in parenthesis




                            Table 3: Error rate by race and region

Panel A: Habeas Corpus
                                         South                                         Other regions
                                      Victim's race                                     Victim's race
Defendant's race         White     Non-white p-values      N.obs          White    Non-white p-values      N.obs
White                    0.350       0.455       0.741      208           0.391      0.500        0.678      52
                        (0.034)     (0.157)                              (0.073)    (0.224)
Non-white                0.387       0.232       0.012      219           0.286      0.545       0.917       32
                        (0.038)     (0.057)                              (0.101)    (0.157)
N.obs                     360           67                                 67         17
Panel B: Direct Appeal
                                         South                                         Other regions
                                      Victim's race                                     Victim's race
Defendant's race         White     Non-white p-values      N.obs          White    Non-white p-values      N.obs
White                    0.397       0.443       0.785      1305          0.322      0.286       0.324      603
                        (0.014)     (0.056)                              (0.020)    (0.077)
Non-white                0.409       0.376       0.134     1234           0.288      0.304       0.657      575
                        (0.017)     (0.024)                              (0.026)    (0.028)
N.obs                    2048          491                                 863        315
Note: Standard errors of the means in parenthesis




                                                           36
                        Table 4: Balance test on aggravating and mitigating circumstances
                                                  Full sample                                                              South
                          White defendant           Non-white defendant      Diff-in-diff           White defendant        Non-white defendant      Diff-in-diff
                      White Non-white Diff=0      White Non-white Diff=0                     White Non-white Diff=0      White Non-white Diff=0
                                                                             ΔΔ    (p-val)                                                          ΔΔ     (p-val)
                      victim victim (p-val)       victim victim   (p-val)                    victim victim   (p-val)     victim victim   (p-val)
                        (1)     (2)         (3)    (4)      (5)      (6)    (7)      (8)      (9)        (10)     (11)    (12)    (13)     (14)    (15)     (16)
Panel A: Aggravating circumstances
 Heinous, atrocious     0.44   0.41     0.79      0.36     0.33     0.60     0.00 0.98       0.44        0.54     0.48   0.38     0.34     0.58    -0.15    0.38
 Pecuniary gain         0.16   0.18     0.86      0.13     0.13     0.88    -0.01 0.93       0.15        0.27     0.26   0.11     0.11     0.98    -0.12    0.28
 Avoid arrest, hinder
 law enforcement        0.15   0.06     0.29      0.12     0.13     0.70    0.11    0.26     0.15        0.09     0.61   0.11     0.14     0.55    0.09     0.46
 Murder during violent
 felony                 0.40   0.29     0.39      0.46     0.33     0.06    -0.03 0.83       0.44        0.36     0.61   0.47     0.36     0.15    -0.03    0.85
 Murder by person
 under prison           0.09   0.29     0.01      0.08     0.09     0.87    -0.20 0.02       0.07        0.09     0.80   0.07     0.09     0.62    0.00     0.99
 Previous felony
 conviction             0.23   0.29     0.58      0.22     0.18     0.47    -0.10 0.40       0.20        0.27     0.58   0.19     0.16     0.59    -0.10    0.46
 Killed police, fireman
 or guard               0.01   0.00     0.65      0.06     0.04     0.63    0.00    0.94     0.02        0.00     0.68   0.05     0.05     0.92    0.02     0.76
 Killed other public
 official               0.06   0.06     0.98      0.06     0.04     0.63    -0.02 0.80       0.07        0.09     0.75   0.07     0.04     0.37    -0.06    0.50
 Multiple victims       0.02   0.00     0.51      0.02     0.03     0.73     0.03 0.46       0.01        0.00     0.74   0.01     0.04     0.11    0.04     0.29
 Young or old victim    0.00   0.00       .       0.01     0.01     0.81     0.00 0.86       0.00        0.00       .    0.01     0.02     0.77    0.01     0.85
 Great risk of death to
 many people            0.13   0.00     0.11      0.05     0.10     0.12    0.19    0.03     0.14        0.00     0.18   0.04     0.11     0.05    0.21     0.04
 Cold, calculated,
 premeditated           0.04   0.12     0.15      0.06     0.01     0.17    -0.12 0.05       0.04        0.18     0.02   0.06     0.02     0.19    -0.19    0.01
Panel B: Mitigating circumstances
 Age                      0.04  0.00    0.42      0.06     0.06     0.89    0.04    0.49     0.03        0.00     0.53   0.06     0.07     0.82     0.04    0.55
 No prior record          0.05  0.06    0.80      0.05     0.06     0.76    0.00    0.96     0.04        0.09     0.43   0.05     0.07     0.55    -0.03    0.70
 Extreme emotional
 distress                 0.03  0.06    0.57      0.01     0.01     0.81    -0.02 0.62       0.02        0.09     0.21   0.01     0.02     0.77    -0.06    0.23
 Intoxication             0.02  0.00    0.60      0.01     0.01     0.46     0.03 0.41       0.02        0.00     0.68   0.01     0.02     0.44     0.03    0.47
 Mental retardation,
 limited capacity         0.03  0.06    0.49      0.01     0.00     0.54    -0.04 0.35       0.03        0.09     0.28   0.00     0.00       .     -0.06    0.17
 Deprived/abused
 background               0.02  0.00    0.51      0.01     0.01     0.46    0.03    0.34     0.02        0.00     0.64   0.01     0.02     0.44    0.03     0.44
 Good prison/jail record 0.004  0.00    0.79      0.01     0.01     0.80    0.01    0.76     0.01        0.00     0.81   0.01     0.02     0.77    0.01     0.76
 Lack of intent          0.004  0.00    0.79      0.00     0.00       .     0.00    0.75     0.00        0.00       .    0.00     0.00       .     0.00       .
 Duress                  0.004  0.00    0.79      0.00     0.00       .     0.00    0.75     0.01        0.00     0.81   0.00     0.00       .     0.01     0.76




                                                                             37
         Table 5: Error rate conditional on crime characteristics

Panel A: Habeas Corpus
                                 Full sample                                      South
                                                      No female victim
                                Victim's race                                  Victim's race
Defendant's race   White      Non-white p-values          N.obs      White Non-white p-values    N.obs
 White              0.384       0.500       0.769          124       0.356   0.500      0.264     96
                   (0.046)     (0.151)                              (0.051) (0.224)
 Non-white          0.363       0.257       0.117      137           0.370   0.214      0.049     120
                   (0.048)     (0.075)                              (0.051) (0.079)
 N.obs               214          47                                  182      34
                                                       Single victim
                   White      Non-white   p-values    N.obs          White Non-white p-values    N.obs
 White              0.359       0.471       0.808      254           0.354   0.455
                   (0.031)     (0.125)                              (0.034) (0.157)      0.266    206
 Non-white          0.383       0.292      0.089       245           0.389   0.241
                   (0.036)     (0.057)                              (0.038) (0.059)      0.017    216
 N.obs               417          82                                  357      65
                                                      No police victim
                   White      Non-white   p-values    N.obs          White Non-white p-values    N.obs
 White              0.367       0.438       0.703      242           0.365   0.400      0.416     191
                   (0.032)     (0.128)                              (0.036) (0.163)
 Non-white          0.391       0.262      0.030       222           0.399   0.216      0.005     194
                   (0.039)     (0.057)                              (0.041) (0.058)
 N.obs               387          77                                  324      61
                             Defendant not connected to community where crime occurred
                   White      Non-white p-values   N.obs          White Non-white p-values       N.obs
 White              0.384        0.500    0.790      191          0.362   0.500    0.211          159
                   (0.037)      (0.139)                          (0.040) (0.167)
 Non-white          0.413        0.265    0.027      187          0.432   0.220    0.004          166
                   (0.042)      (0.064)                          (0.044) (0.065)
 N.obs               315           63                              274      51
                                                 No high status victim
                   White      Non-white p-values   N.obs          White Non-white p-values       N.obs
 White              0.398        0.385    0.463      209          0.386   0.375    0.476          166
                   (0.035)      (0.140)                          (0.039) (0.183)
 Non-white          0.397        0.309    0.124      186          0.402   0.244    0.024          162
                   (0.043)      (0.063)                          (0.046) (0.065)
 N.obs               327           68                              275      53
                                                       Robbery
                   White      Non-white p-values   N.obs          White Non-white p-values       N.obs
 White              0.342        0.600    0.848      81           0.292   0.600    0.111          70
                   (0.055)      (0.245)                          (0.057) (0.245)
 Non-white          0.430        0.250    0.045      103          0.425   0.105    0.000          92
                   (0.056)      (0.090)                          (0.058) (0.072)
 N.obs               155           29                              138      24
                                                        Felony
                   White      Non-white p-values   N.obs          White Non-white p-values       N.obs
 White              0.344        0.429    0.658      129          0.305   0.429    0.275          112
                   (0.043)      (0.202)                          (0.045) (0.202)
 Non-white          0.385        0.257    0.073      152          0.387   0.167    0.004          136
                   (0.045)      (0.075)                          (0.048) (0.069)
 N.obs               239           42                              211      37




                                                     38
    Table 5: Error rate conditional on crime characteristics (cont’d)

Panel B: Direct Appeal
                                         Full sample                                          South

                                                                 No female victim
                                       Victim's race                                       Victim's race
Defendant's race         White      Non-white p-values          N.obs         White     Non-white p-values      N.obs
 White                    0.358       0.403       0.768          831           0.393      0.463       0.164      576
                         (0.017)     (0.058)                                  (0.021)    (0.068)
 Non-white                0.413       0.333       0.008          926           0.444      0.360       0.022      638
                         (0.020)     (0.026)                                  (0.024)    (0.034)
 N.obs                    1343         414                                      963        251
                                                                   Single victim
                         White      Non-white       p-values    N.obs         White     Non-white    p-values   N.obs
 White                    0.389       0.374           0.389      1419          0.414      0.418        0.474    1012
                         (0.013)     (0.051)                                  (0.016)    (0.061)
 Non-white                0.388       0.361           0.163      1382          0.412      0.391       0.264     1001
                         (0.016)     (0.022)                                  (0.019)    (0.028)
 N.obs                    2220         581                                     1639        374
Note: Standard errors of the means in parenthesis




             Table 6: Error rate conditional on trial characteristics

Habeas Corpus
                                     Full sample                                             South
                       Victim's race                                 Victim's race
                                     Ineffective assistance of counsel not in any claim
                    White Non-white p-values          N.obs        White     Non-white p-values N.obs
White                0.458      0.571       0.708       114        0.471        0.500    0.461   91
                    (0.048)    (0.202)                            (0.054)      (0.289)
Non-white            0.417      0.227       0.037       106        0.444        0.158    0.003   91
                    (0.054)    (0.091)                            (0.059)      (0.086)
N.obs                 191         29                                159           23
                            Prosecutorial suppression/witholding of evidence not in any claim
                    White Non-white p-values          N.obs        White     Non-white p-values N.obs
White                0.383      0.600       0.902       177        0.366        0.667    0.081   137
                    (0.038)    (0.163)                            (0.042)      (0.211)
Non-white            0.383      0.300       0.162       173        0.387        0.235    0.040   153
                    (0.042)    (0.073)                            (0.045)      (0.074)
N.obs                 300         50                                250           40
                                          Improper interrogation not in any claim
                    White       Non-white      p-values        N.obs
White                0.362        0.500          0.849          234          0.348       0.500       0.187      188
                    (0.033)      (0.129)                                    (0.036)     (0.167)
Non-white            0.387        0.283             0.070       223          0.396       0.220       0.007      194
                    (0.038)      (0.059)                                    (0.041)     (0.059)
N.obs                 381           76                                        322          60
Note: Standard errors of the means in parenthesis




                                                               39
                         Table 7: Possible bias of Appeal Courts

Panel A: Habeas Corpus
                                    Full sample                           South

                                    Majority of final federal panel Republican
                     Victim's race                                Victim's race
Defendant's race White      Non-white p-values N.obs            White Non-white p-values N.obs
 White            0.355       0.455       0.730    149          0.361      0.500  0.728   114
                 (0.041)     (0.157)                           (0.046)    (0.224)
 Non-white        0.284       0.216       0.200    146          0.313      0.194  0.084   127
                 (0.043)     (0.069)                           (0.048)    (0.072)
 N.obs             247          48                               204         37
                                     All judges appointed under Republican
                  White     Non-white p-values N.obs            White Non-white p-values N.obs
 White            0.250       0.500       0.799     40          0.212      0.500  0.716    35
                 (0.073)     (0.289)                           (0.072)    (0.500)
 Non-white        0.216       0.083       0.096     63          0.244      0.083  0.063    57
                 (0.058)     (0.083)                           (0.065)    (0.083)
 N.obs              87          16                                78         14
                                   Sentence under Republican administration
                  White     Non-white p-values N.obs            White Non-white p-values N.obs
 White            0.347       0.438       0.751    183          0.333      0.400  0.654   148
                 (0.037)     (0.128)                           (0.040)    (0.163)
 Non-white        0.402       0.234       0.013    179          0.412      0.158  0.000   157
                 (0.043)     (0.062)                           (0.045)    (0.060)
 N.obs             299          63                               257         48
Panel B: Direct Appeal
                                  Majority of State Supreme Court Republican
                    Victim's race                              Victim's race
Defendant's race White     Non-white p-values N.obs          White Non-white p-values N.obs
 White            0.285      0.280      0.477      428       0.365      0.333   0.463   66
                 (0.023)    (0.092)                         (0.061)    (0.333)
 Non-white        0.292      0.217      0.051      368       0.419      0.176   0.032   48
                 (0.031)    (0.034)                         (0.090)    (0.095)
 N.obs             619        177                             94          20
                            Median ideology of State Supreme Court conservative
                 White     Non-white p-values N.obs          White Non-white p-values N.obs
 White            0.364      0.406      0.745     1151       0.377      0.421   0.740  974
                 (0.015)    (0.062)                         (0.016)    (0.066)
 Non-white        0.380      0.354      0.199     1050       0.386      0.367   0.286  957
                 (0.018)    (0.025)                         (0.019)    (0.027)
 N.obs            1781        420                            1555        376
                               Chief justice of State Supreme Court conservative
                 White     Non-white p-values N.obs          White Non-white p-values N.obs
 White            0.363      0.426      0.845     1155       0.380      0.443   0.829  993
                 (0.015)    (0.060)                         (0.016)    (0.064)
 Non-white        0.385      0.352      0.142     1072       0.391      0.366   0.221  988
                 (0.018)    (0.025)                         (0.019)    (0.026)
 N.obs            1790        437                            1584        397
Note: Standard errors of the means in parenthesis



                                                    40
Online Appendix - not for publication

A. Endogenizing the behavior of the criminal
This section of the appendix discusses an extension of our model where the probability of
           r
guilt,         is endogenously derived from an optimization problem of the criminal. We start by
presenting the case where the race of the victim is given and known to the criminal, then
discuss cases in which the race of the victim is ex ante unknown or in which it can be chosen
by the criminal.


A1. Problem of the criminal

An individual who is considering whether to commit a capital crime trades of the expected
bene ts and costs of it. Let the bene t of committing the crime and getting away with it be
b > 0; think of it as the money stolen from a bank (with a killing during the robbery) or the
pleasure of killing an enemy. The cost of being sentenced to death having committed the
crime is cg > 0. The cost of being sentenced to death not having committed the crime is cn ,
with 0 < cn < cg .1 All of the above b, cg and cn are public information. For an individual
the cost of committing a crime, which may include the moral cost, is v and it is drawn
from a distribution =r (v) with support in R+ . The court knows the distribution but not the
realization of v which is known only to the individual. We allow the distribution of costs to
di er across races, thus allowing a higher propensity of minorities to commit crimes. The
individual chooses whether to commit a crime taking into account the likelihood of being
convicted and takes xrR as given since it is chosen by the court.
   In certain types of crimes the defendant cannot choose the victim and therefore his or her
race. One example is a bank robbery with the killing of guards, whose race was unknown to
the criminals ex ante. In a second type of crime the defendant wants to kill, say, a relative,
in which case he also cannot choose the race of the victim but the race of the victim is known
ex ante. In a third type of crime the defendant can choose the race of the victim, say in a
rape with murder. We present the second case here. The others are discussed below.
   The expected payo from the crime for an individual with race r and a certain realization
v is given by:
   1
       Remember that by assumption there are no mistakes in the nal ruling of higher courts, therefore no
innocent individual is executed. Thus the cost cn represents the costs of being on death row until the rst
sentence is reversed.



                                                     i
                             1     Fgr (xrR ) [ v     cg ] + Fgr (xrR ) [b        v]

The rst term represents the cost of being convicted, the second term the bene t of getting
away with the crime. The expected payo from not committing that crime is:

                                              [1   Fnr (xrR )] cn :

Comparing costs and bene ts, an individual commits a crime if and only if:



                v 6 Fgr (xrR ) b    1    Fgr (xrR ) cg + [1       Fnr (xrR )] cn          v r (xrR )   (1)


   Thus v r (xrR ) is the threshold of individual cost v below which an individual of race r
chooses to commit a crime against a victim of race R. De ne:



                         P rob (v 6 v r (xrR )) = =r (v r (xrR ))            r
                                                                                 (xrR )                (2)

as the probability of guilt, i.e. the probability that the realization of v is low enough so that
a crime is committed. Note that if the court applied a di erent standard of proof depending
on the race of the victim, e.g. xm;W < xm;M ; then potential criminals would internalize
that and ceteris paribus we would observe fewer crimes involving m; W pairs than m; M
pairs. With an endogenous probability of committing a crime the potential criminal would
incorporate in his calculations the courts' behavior. With exogenous probabilities, of course
he would not.
   The equilibrium of the model is given by (??) in the text together with:


                                        r
                                            (xrR ) = =r (v r (xrR ))                                   (3)

By Brouwer's xed point theorem an equilibrium exists. The proof of uniqueness is below.


A.2 Proof of uniqueness of the equilibrium


To simplify the notation, in sections A.2 and A.3 we omit subscripts and superscripts related
to race, i.e. we write x instead of xrR ; v instead of v r ; and fg ; fn instead of fgr ; fnr :

                                                     ii
                                                                  @v (x)
                            b 2 [0; 1) such that
   Claim 1. There exists an x                                       @x
                                                                                           b:
                                                                           > 0 for all x > x

   Proof. From (1) we can calculate the derivative of v (x) with respect to x as
                                @v (x)
                                       = fg (x)b + fg (x)cg fn (x)cn
                                  @x
                                                   fg (x) (b + cg )
                                       = fn (x)cn                   1 :                                             (A1)
                                                   fn (x) cn
                 fg (x)                                                        fg (x)
From MLRP,       fn (x)
                          is strictly increasing in x: By assumption           fn (x)
                                                                                        ! +1 as x ! 1: Therefore
                     b 2 [0; 1) such that the expression in square brackets in (A1) is positive
there exists a value x
            b:
for all x > x

                                             b:
   Claim 2. If x is an equilibrium, then x > x

   Proof. From (1) we have v (0) = cn                cg < 0. From (3) we have =(v (0)) = 0 because
= has support in R+ . Furthermore, =(v (x)) = 0 for all x                        b: Suppose that in equilibrium
                                                                                 x
   b: Then we would have (x ) = =(v (x )) = 0: But in this case the optimal response
x <x
                                     b, a contradiction.
of the court would be to set x = 1 > x

   Claim 3. The equilibrium x is unique.

                                                       b < x0 < x1 . From Claim 1 this would
   Suppose there were two equilibria, x0 and x1 ; with x
imply 0 < v (x0 ) < v (x1 ); and in turn (x0 ) < (x1 ). But then the optimal response of the
court would involve setting x0 > x1 ; a contradiction.


A.3 Proof that the equilibrium error rate is decreasing in x

The error rate (4) can be rewritten as
                                                                      1
                                    E(r; R) = 1               1    (x ) 1 Fn (x )
                                                                                    :                               (A2)
                                                     1+           (x ) 1 Fg (x )

                                                                  1    (x ) 1 Fn (x )
Expression (A2) is decreasing in x if and only if                     (x ) 1 Fg (x )
                                                                                        is decreasing in x : Taking
the rst derivative of this product with respect to x we obtain:

                                                     Z    1                             Z   1
             1     @ (x )                 1
                 2        +                                   fg (x )fn (x)dx                   fg (x)fn (x )dx :
          [ (x )] @x        [1           Fg (x )]2    x                                 x
                                                                                                                    (A3)

The rst addendum in (A3) is negative because the equilibrium                                    (x ) is increasing in x ,
following Claims 1 and 2 above. To see that the second addendum is also negative, recall that

                                                      iii
                                    fg (x)       fg (x )
from MLRP we know that              fn (x)
                                             >   fn (x )
                                                           for any x > x : Because the integrals in (A3) are
calculated for x 2 (x ; 1]; then in this range fg (x )fn (x) < fg (x)fn (x ); hence the expression
in square brackets is negative.


A.4 Case with random race of the victim

Consider the case in which the defendant cannot choose the race of the victim and the latter
is unknown ex ante. De ne                2 (0; 1) as the exogenous probability that the victim of the
crime is white. The expected payo to an individual of race r from committing the crime is:



                           1        Fgr (xrW ) ( v           cg ) + Fgr (xrW ) (b    v)
                     +(1            )    1       Fgr (xrM ) ( v        cg ) + Fgr (xrM ) (b     v) :

The payo from not committing a crime is:

                               [1       Fnr (xrW )] cn        (1      ) [1   Fnr (xrM )] cn :

Let us de ne

                           g (xrW ; xrM )                  Fgr (xrW ) + (1      )Fgr (xrM )

                           n (xrW ; xrM )                  Fnr (xrW ) + (1      )Fnr (xrM )

Following the same procedure as in the text, we obtain the threshold level of v below which
a crime is committed.

   v6    g (xrW ; xrM )b    [1          g (xrW ; xrM )] cg     + [1      n (xrW ; xrM )] cn     v ( ; xrW ; xrM ):

Obviously, v ( ) depends on all the other parameters, namely , b, cg and cn , but the latter
do not depend upon the races neither of the defendant nor of the victim and are common
knowledge. Relative to the case developed in the text, now the choice of each potential
criminal depends on both cuto points relative to the race of the victim. Repeating the
same steps of the proof in the text one reaches the same implications for our test of racial
bias.


A.5 Case where the race of the victim can be chosen

Consider now the case in which the criminal can choose the race of the victim. Under the
assumptions of our model if the court were biased and this led to setting a lower threshold

                                                              iv
of evidence x for, say, white victims, all potential criminals would choose minority victims.
If instead the court were unbiased potential criminals would be indi erent on the race of
the victim and would randomize. This implies that under the assumptions of our model in
the presence of bias we should not observe in equilibrium a condition (killing white victims)
that allows us to test for bias. To be able to derive a test for bias in cases where the race of
the victim is a choice variable one should adopt a di erent theoretical framework, e.g. one
in which there are di erential bene ts to killing victims of di erent races or the potential
criminal was uncertain about the bias of the court or the distribution of the signal. This
goes beyond the scope of the current analysis.



B. How the error rate varies with
In this section we discuss how the error rate changes when the proportion of guilty individu-
als, , changes. For the sake of compactness, we omit superscripts for race (and occasionally
arguments) in the formulas below.2
   The error rate E is:

                                              (1    ) [1 Fn (x( ))]
                          E(x) =                                                                 (4)
                                     [1    Fg (x( ))] + [1   ] [1 Fn (x( ))]

where x( ) is implicitly de ned by.


                                          fg (x)            1
                                                 =                                               (5)
                                          fn (x)   1

The numerator of (4) captures the Type I error, as it is the product of (i) the area to the
right of the standard of proof x and below the signal distribution for non-guilty defendants,
fn , and (ii) the proportion of non-guilty people in the population, 1            : The denominator
is the sentencing rate, given by the mass of people (guilty and non-guilty) whose realized
signal is to the right of x:
   We want to assess the sign of the derivative dE(x)=dx:

   As a preliminary step, it is useful to observe that             has two e ects on E(x) that go in
opposite directions - we may call them \direct" and \indirect" e ect.
  2
      In other words, when we write fg and Fg we mean fg (x) and Fg (x), etc.




                                                     v
   To see the direct e ect of ; suppose that x were independent of : In that case:
@E( )              (1     Fn )[ (1     Fg ) + (1    )(1 Fn )] (1   )(1 Fn )[(1                            Fg )    (1         Fn )]
      =
 @                                             [ (1 Fg ) + (1  )(1 Fn )]2
 sign               (1     Fn )(1     Fg ) (1      )(1 Fn )(1 Fg )
            =     (1      Fn )(1     Fg ) < 0:

Intuitively, the direct e ect captures the fact that, for given standard of proof x, higher
values of       imply that fewer of the people condemned will be innocent, hence the error rate
is lower.

   The indirect e ect of                  on E works through endogenous changes in x: To see how,
                    @x                                                 @E
notice that (i)     @
                         < 0 (from (5) and MLRP), and (ii)             @x
                                                                           < 0 (proved in the Appendix of                     the
paper). Together, (i) and (ii) push in the direction                 of @E
                                                                        @
                                                                           > 0: Intuitively, the indirect e                   ect
captures the fact that when                 increases the court chooses a lower standard of proof, which
  for given         increases the size of the Type I error.

   The combined e ect is obtained by taking the total derivative of (4) with respect to .
The sign of this derivative is determined by:


                         dE   S          @x
                                     (1      Fg )    fg
                                               [ (1 Fg ) + (1    )(1 Fn )] +
                         dx              @
                                             @x                         @x
                    + (1 Fg ) (1 Fg )     fg         (1 Fn ) (1     )fn
                                             @                          @
                                                                          @x
                  =  (1 Fn )(1 Fg )   (1      ) [fn (1 Fg ) fg (1 Fn )]                                                       (6)
                                                                          @
The rst addendum in (6) is negative and captures the direct e ect. The second addendum
is positive (notice that the term in square brackets is positive by MLRP) and captures the
indirect e ect. Which of the two dominates depends on the value of                                   and the functional
form of Fg ; Fn :


An example

In what follows we provide an illustration assuming a simple Normal parameterization for
Fg and Fn : Fg (x) = N ( g ;         g );   Fn (x) = N (   n;   n)   with   n   <     g   and    g   =k   n;    k > 0:
  The equilibrium value of x in this case is given by
                     r                                    h                                                                           i
        2       2                                                                                                 1      g
   2( n g     g n) +   (2 n g2 2 g n2 )2 4( n2        g
                                                       2)                       2 2
                                                                                g n
                                                                                           2 2
                                                                                           n g   + 2 ln     1            n
                                                                                                                                2 2
                                                                                                                                g n
x=                                                                                                                                        :
                                             2( g2   2
                                                     n)


                                                           vi
     Denote with Erf c(z) the complementary
                               Z 1            error function
                                     t2
     Erf c(z) = 1 erf(z) = p2      e 2 dt and de ne
                                              z


                           2 2    2                              2                             1        g             2        2
                           g n    g       2       g n    +       n    + 2 ln                                     (    g        n)   :
                                                                                    1                   n

Then the error rate is
                                                                h                          2       2
                                                                                                        p        i
                                                                                         n n     g n+
                                              (1            ) 2             Erf c        p
                                                                                          2(   3   2
                                                                                               n   g n)
                  E(x) =                             2            2
                                                                        p
                                                                                                                  2       2
                                                                                                                                p       :
                                                   g g          n g                                             n n     g n+
                           2     Erf c             p
                                                       2(   3         2           +(          1)Erf c           p
                                                                                                                      3   2
                                                            g       g n)                                         2(   n   g n)




     Figure 1 shows how E varies with                               for di erent degrees of relative noise in the signal
distributions.3 The ratio          g= n       measured on the rightmost axis is allowed to take values in
(0; 4]: The remaining parameters are set at                                  = 0:5,       n    = 0:3;       g   = 6;      n    = 2.
     In this example when         g   <       n;   i.e. k < 1; the error rate is monotonically decreasing in :
For intermediate values of k the relationship is non-monotonic, i.e. the error rst decreases
and then increases with ; and for                           g   >>          n   the latter e ect dominates. Underlying this
pattern is the relative size of the change in the Type I and Type II errors. To understand
why, consider gure 2.
     Figure 2 depicts the density functions fn (x) and fg (x) parameterized as above and the
equilibrium value of x; indicated by a vertical line. In panel (a)                                          g   = 0:5     n.   When         increases
from 0:1 (top graph) to 0:8 (bottom graph), the equilibrium value of x decreases from 4:7
to 3:4: This leads to a relative small increase in the area corresponding to the type I error
(1       Fn (x ) goes from :01 to :06) and a relatively larger decrease in the area corresponding to
the type II error (Fg (x ) goes from :09 to :005). The latter declines at a faster rate because
the distribution fg is less dispersed. The overall e ect is a decrease in the error rate from
:12 to :01:
     When we consider panel (b), where                              g   = 2:5       n,   the pattern is reversed. Here the same
increase in         from 0:1 to 0:8 induces a much larger reduction in x , from 5:3 to 0:9: This
in turn leads to a relatively large increase of the area corresponding to the type I error
(1        Fn (x ) goes from :01 to :06) relative to the decrease in the area Fg (x ) (from :45 to :16),
with a corresponding increase in the error rate from :09 to :10.
     3
         The parameterization used in this gure allows x to take values outside [0; 1] because this improves
the readability of the graphs. Qualitatively similar patterns can be obtained using the truncated Normal
distribution in [0; 1]: Also note that the arguments used in this section are based on MLRP which does not
require x to be de ned on a compact set.


                                                                            vii
   We can thus summarize the role played by           in our model and the implications for
the interpretation of our results. First, the variable    is not the proportion of homicides
committed across races (in which case one may conjecture that the proportion of intra-racial
homicides would be larger). The variable        is the probability that an individual brought
to court for a homicide is guilty of the death penalty. Second, based upon the (limited)
empirical evidence that we were able to assemble and that we discuss in the text of the
paper there is no clear pattern of   rR   which would allow to take a stand on their relative
size. In particular, there is no evidence that the (imperfectly) predictable patterns of    rR

would systematically go in a direction that in ciates the validity of our test. Notice also
that even if we had perfect information about the relative size of   rR   we would have to take
a stand on the shape of the distributions Fg (x) and Fn (x). In the text we then proceed with
the assumption that    does not systematically di er across pairs of defendant/victim races.


C. Additional empirical results
This section of the Appendix contains some additional empirical results.
   First, we provide descriptive statistics on the missingness of victim's race. We start by
tabulating the number of cases with missing race of the victim (Table A1), then we present a
breakdown of the number of observations for which we could not nd the race of the victim
by year and by state, for both the Habeas Corpus (Table A2) and for the Direct Appeal
(Table A3) datasets. We also assess the potential selection in missingness of victim's race
through a balance test on observables (Table A4). Finally, We report a balance test for
crime characteristics across pairs of defendant and victim's races (Table A5).




                                              viii
                  Appendix Table A1: Missingness of race

                 Panel A: Habeas Corpus
                                               Missing victim's race
                                                  No         Yes         Total
                   Missing
                                No               508          20          528
                 defendant's
                                Yes                3           0           3
                    race
                                Total            511          20          531

                 Panel B: Direct Appeal
                                               Missing victim's race
                                                  No         Yes         Total
                   Missing
                                No              3,717        447         4,146
                 defendant's
                                Yes              130         122          252
                    race
                                Total           3,847        569         4416




                        Appendix Table A2:
   Missingness of victim’s race by year and State, Habeas Corpus

Years of 1st    No.    No. Missing   Share                     No. Total No. Missing   Share
               Total                                   State
 sentence                  obs       missing                     obs         obs       missing
                obs
   1973           4         0           0.00            AL         19            1      0.05
   1974          25         4           0.16            AR         24            0      0.00
   1975          30         5           0.17            AZ         14            1      0.07
   1976          25         2           0.08            CA          4            0      0.00
   1977          45         3           0.07            DE          2            0      0.00
   1978          48         1           0.02            FL         95            4      0.04
   1979          51         2           0.04            GA         84            2      0.02
   1980          53         1           0.02            ID          3            0      0.00
   1981          66         0           0.00            IL         10            0      0.00
   1982          68         1           0.01            IN          4            0      0.00
   1983          41         0           0.00            KY          1            0      0.00
   1984          26         1           0.04            LA         34            0      0.00
   1985          25         0           0.00            MD          1            0      0.00
   1986          15         0           0.00            MO         26            1      0.04
   1987           6         0           0.00            MS         21            0      0.00
   1988           2         0           0.00            MT          4            0      0.00
   1989           1         0           0.00            NC         10            0      0.00
                                          .             NE          6            0      0.00
                                                        NV          4            0      0.00
                                                        OK         11            2      0.18
                                                        PA          3            0      0.00
                                                        SC          7            0      0.00
                                                        TN          1            0      0.00
                                                        TX         108           9      0.08
                                                        UT          3            0      0.00
                                                        VA         27            0      0.00
                                                        WA          3            0      0.00
                                                        WY          2            0      0.00




                                                ix
                          Appendix Table A3:
     Missingness of victim’s race by year and State, Direct Appeal


Years od 1st No. Total No. Missing   Share                 No. Total No. Missing   Share
                                                   State
 sentence      obs         obs       missing                 obs         obs       missing
   1974        10           1         0.10         AL        256         50         0.20
   1975        27           9         0.33         AR         75          9         0.12
   1976        45           9         0.20         AZ        189         31         0.16
   1977        61          22         0.36         CA        229         26         0.11
   1978        77          15         0.19         CO         2           0         0.00
   1979        118         23         0.19         CT         2           0         0.00
   1980        128         25         0.20         DE         22          0         0.00
   1981        161         20         0.12         FL        709         80         0.11
   1982        159         16         0.10         GA        269         11         0.04
   1983        219         17         0.08         ID         31         11         0.35
   1984        238         18         0.08         IL        218          0         0.00
   1985        271         27         0.10         IN         67          0         0.00
   1986        215         17         0.08         KY         44         13         0.30
   1987        246         20         0.08         LA         88          4         0.05
   1988        320         30         0.09         MD         42          6         0.14
   1989        253         30         0.12         MO         81          6         0.07
   1990        238         22         0.09         MS        110          3         0.03
   1991        280         28         0.10         MT         13          2         0.15
   1992        300         27         0.09         NC        226          6         0.03
   1993        258         24         0.09         NE         22          5         0.23
   1994        306         26         0.08         NJ         36          3         0.08
   1995        234         21         0.09         NM         8           0         0.00
                                                   NV         91         17         0.19
                                                   OH        104          0         0.00
                                                   OK        186         32         0.17
                                                   OR         29          4         0.14
                                                   PA        178         42         0.24
                                                   SC        115         11         0.10
                                                   TN        102         13         0.13
                                                   TX        495         51         0.10
                                                   UT         13          3         0.23
                                                   VA         93          4         0.04
                                                   WA         15          4         0.27
                                                   WY         4           0         0.00




                                               x
                           Appendix Table A4:
                Selection in missingness of victim’s race

                                         Nonmissing   Missing
                                                                 Diff=0
Variable                                   victim's   victim's
                                                                 (p-val)
                                             race       race

Panel A: Habeas Corpus
Defendant characteristics
    Defendant is White                      0.51       0.45       0.59
    Defendant is African American           0.44       0.50       0.60
    Male defendant                          0.99       1.00       0.66
    Age of defendant                        28.2       41.5       0.11
    Prior felony                            0.22       0.25       0.79
    History of alcohol abuse                0.13       0.00       0.09
    History of drug abuse                   0.17       0.10       0.44
    Deprived/Abused background              0.02       0.00       0.57
Victim characteristics
    Number of victims                       1.41       1.22       0.65
    Female victim                           0.48       0.24       0.05
    High status victim                      0.23       0.30       0.46
    Police victim                           0.09       0.00       0.16
Crime characteristics
   Defendant knew victim                    0.26       0.25       0.94
   Heinous crime                            0.40       0.30       0.37

Panel B: Direct Appeal
Defendant characteristics
    Defendant is White                      0.51       0.52       0.68
    Defendant is African American           0.41       0.40       0.69
    Male defendant                          0.98       0.98       0.50
    Age of defendant                        31.3       32.9       0.00
Victim characteristics
    Number of victims                       1.37       1.44       0.22
    Female victim                           0.52       0.50       0.41




                                    xi
                                        Appendix Table A5: Balance test on crime characteristics
                                                      Full sample                                                              South
                             White defendant            Non-white defendant      Diff-in-diff         White defendant         Non-white defendant      Diff-in-diff
                          White Non-white Diff=0      White Non-white Diff=0                      White Non-white Diff=0    White Non-white Diff=0
                                                                                 ΔΔ     (p-val)                                                        ΔΔ     (p-val)
                          victim victim (p-val)       victim victim   (p-val)                     victim victim   (p-val)   victim victim   (p-val)
Panel A: Habeas Corpus
Victim
  Multiple victims        0.02      0.00     0.51      0.02    0.03     0.73    0.03     0.46     0.01      0       0.74    0.01       0.04   0.11    0.04     0.29
  Female victim           0.53      0.29     0.06      0.43    0.44     0.97    0.24     0.10     0.53     0.45     0.61    0.42       0.46   0.64    0.12     0.50
Weapon
  Knife                   0.19      0.27     0.48      0.14    0.18     0.50    -0.04    0.77     0.18     0.20     0.86    0.13       0.17   0.57    0.01     0.92
  Handgun                 0.37      0.20     0.20      0.50    0.41     0.25     0.07    0.65     0.40     0.30     0.53    0.50       0.38   0.17    -0.02    0.91
  Shotgun or rifle        0.16      0.27     0.32      0.20    0.18     0.77    -0.12    0.33     0.18     0.30     0.34    0.20       0.21   0.84    -0.11    0.47
  Strangulation           0.09      0.07     0.74      0.04    0.08     0.23     0.07    0.39     0.08     0.00     0.37    0.04       0.07   0.48     0.10    0.25
Circumstances
  Defendant
  connected to            0.27      0.18     0.39      0.24    0.27     0.68    0.12     0.34     0.24     0.09     0.25    0.23       0.27   0.52     0.20    0.19
  Burglary or theft       0.12      0.06     0.50      0.11    0.07     0.41    0.02     0.85     0.13     0.00     0.22    0.10       0.08   0.68     0.11    0.32
  Robbery                 0.36      0.31     0.69      0.47    0.42     0.53    0.00     1.00     0.38     0.50     0.44    0.49       0.39   0.22    -0.22    0.21
  Kidnapping              0.07      0.06     0.95      0.07    0.07     0.92    0.01     0.92     0.06     0.10     0.66    0.06       0.08   0.62    -0.02    0.86
  Rape or sex related     0.21      0.13     0.40      0.19    0.16     0.56    0.05     0.65     0.23     0.20     0.81    0.18       0.18   1.00     0.03    0.83
  Institutional killing   0.04      0.06     0.71      0.10    0.09     0.85    -0.03    0.71     0.05     0.00     0.46    0.09       0.08   0.88     0.04    0.62

Panel B: Direct Appeal
Victim
  Multiple victims        0.26      0.19     0.12      0.20    0.29     0.00    0.16     0.00     0.23     0.14     0.05    0.15       0.25   0.00    0.19     0.00
  Female victim           0.57      0.37     0.00      0.47    0.50     0.28    0.23     0.00     0.57     0.32     0.00    0.46       0.52   0.07    0.31     0.00
Weapon(a)
  Knife                   0.28      0.35     0.47      0.27    0.26     0.87    -0.08    0.46     0.26     0.25     0.90    0.28       0.27   0.95    0.01     0.93
  Handgun                 0.34      0.45     0.32      0.45    0.42     0.60    -0.14    0.27     0.35     0.38     0.83    0.46       0.42   0.51    -0.06    0.64
  Shotgun or rifle        0.12      0.15     0.66      0.06    0.08     0.52    -0.02    0.85     0.10     0.19     0.28    0.06       0.09   0.47    -0.06    0.45
  Strangulation           0.09      0.00     0.17      0.02    0.00     0.10     0.07    0.23     0.09     0.00     0.22    0.02       0.00   0.16     0.07    0.30
Notes: (a) information available for 935 out of 3717 cases




                                                                                 xii
