                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CASH HOLDINGS AND CREDIT RISK

                                          Viral V. Acharya
                                        Sergei A. Davydenko
                                         Ilya A. Strebulaev

                                        Working Paper 16995
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16995


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




We thank Heitor Almeida, Mark Carey, Darrell Duffie, Espen Eckbo, Zsuzsanna Fluck, Ron Giammarino,
David Goldreich, Bruce Haslem, Mitchell Petersen, Bryan Routledge, Paola Sapienza, Jan Mahrt-Smith,
Roger Stein, Michael Weisbach, Tony Whited, Youchang Wu, and seminar participants at McMaster
University, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Toronto, Bank of Canada, Barclays
Global Investors, Moody's KMV, the CEPR Risk Management Conference, Gerzensee Symposium
2007, Gutmann Symposium on Credit Risk, Moody's 2007 Credit Risk Conference, the Northern Finance
Association 2008 meetings, and the Western Finance Association 2008 meetings for their comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Viral V. Acharya, Sergei A. Davydenko, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cash Holdings and Credit Risk
Viral V. Acharya, Sergei A. Davydenko, and Ilya A. Strebulaev
NBER Working Paper No. 16995
April 2011
JEL No. G32,G33

                                              ABSTRACT

Intuition suggests that firms with higher cash holdings are safer and should have lower credit spreads.
Yet empirically, the correlation between cash and spreads is robustly positive and higher for lower
credit ratings. This puzzling finding can be explained by the precautionary motive for saving cash.
In our model endogenously determined optimal cash reserves are positively related to credit risk, resulting
in a positive correlation between cash and spreads. In contrast, spreads are negatively related to the
"exogenous'' component of cash holdings that is independent of credit risk factors. Similarly, although
firms with higher cash reserves are less likely to default over short horizons, endogenously determined
liquidity may be related positively to the longer-term probability of default. Our empirical analysis
confirms these predictions, suggesting that precautionary savings are central to understanding the effects
of cash on credit risk.


Viral V. Acharya                                     Ilya A. Strebulaev
Stern School of Business                             Graduate School of Business
New York University                                  Stanford University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84                       518 Memorial Way
New York, NY 10012                                   Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                             and NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu                               istrebulaev@stanford.edu

Sergei A. Davydenko
Assistant Professor of Finance
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St George Street, Toronto
Canada M5S 3E6˘
davydenko@rotman.utoronto.ca
                                      Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


1. Introduction

A firm’s holdings of liquid assets, such as cash, affects the probability of corporate default and

bankruptcy. This observation may in turn affect the firm’s decision to retain a cash reserve that

could otherwise be invested or paid out to shareholders. Standard econometric techniques commonly

used in empirical studies of credit spreads and default probabilities ignore the interaction between

the possibility of default and the firm’s optimal cash policy, and may produce counter-intuitive and

misleading results. This paper shows that the effect of cash holdings on credit risk is more subtle

than traditional studies have implicitly assumed, and highlights the importance of adopting the

corporate finance prospective of the firm in credit risk and other areas of asset pricing studies.

    Since Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1974), a vast majority of theoretical models of

risky debt pricing have ignored the role of cash. According to the standard view of the levered

firm adopted by traditional “structural” models, should the firm find itself in a temporary cash

shortage, it will always be able to avoid default by selling new equity at no cost, as long as the

share price remains positive. As a result, the firm’s cash holdings are irrelevant in most prominent

credit risk models, including Black and Cox (1976), Leland (1994), Longstaff and Schwartz (1995),

Leland and Toft (1996), Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001), and others.1 This view is mirrored in

empirical studies of credit spreads and corporate bond returns, which also do not consider the role

of cash holdings (e.g., Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001), Duffee (1998), and Schaefer

and Strebulaev (2008)).

    By contrast, since Altman’s (1968) z-score model, most empirical default-predicting models have

used various controls for balance sheet liquidity (e.g., Ohlson (1980), Zmijewski (1984), Shumway

(2001), and Chava and Jarrow (2004)). Such studies select a set of accounting- or equity-based

variables, and, taking them as given, estimate logit or hazard models of default or bankruptcy.

With few exceptions, they typically control for corporate liquidity by using one or more liquidity

proxies on the right-hand side. The results regarding the role of liquidity in these studies are mixed

and often puzzling: For example, the coefficient for the current ratio is positive in Zmijewski (1984)

and negative in Shumway (2001), whereas working capital is negative and significant in Ohlson
   1
     Prominent exceptions include recently developed models by Acharya, Huang, Subrahmanyam, and Sundaram
(2006), Anderson and Carverhill (2007), Gamba and Triantis (2008), Asvanunt, Broadie, and Sundaresan (2010), and
Gryglewicz (2011), which allow for optimal cash holdings in the presence of costly external financing.

                                                       1
                                         Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


(1980) but positive and significant in Hillegeist et al. (2004). Yet such proxies continue to be used

in this way in default-predicting studies due to their intuitive appeal.

    Liquidity is expected to play a role in distress because, contrary to the assumption of perfect

capital markets adopted by structural models, in reality firms’ access to external financing may

be restricted (e.g., Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988)). As a result of market frictions, cash

reserves affect the timing of default after controlling for the firm’s economic prospects (Davydenko

(2010)). Ceteris paribus, firms with larger liquid asset reserves are expected to be safer and thus

have lower credit spreads and smaller default probabilities.

    Yet the standard reduced-form empirical approach commonly used to study spreads and the

probability of default appears to lead to an opposite conclusion, that firms with larger liquid assets

exhibit higher degree of credit risk. OLS regressions of bond spreads for non-financial firms reveal

that spreads are positively, not negatively, correlated with cash holdings. This result holds true

with and without controls for standard credit risk factors used in empirical studies, such as leverage,

volatility, and credit rating. The effect is robust, persistent, and significant, both statistically and

economically. A one standard deviation increase in the cash-to-asset ratio is associated with a 20

basis point increase in credit spreads. Furthermore, intuition suggests that even if for most firms

default triggered by a cash shortage is a remote possibility, cash holdings should be relatively more

beneficial for riskiest firms, for which such a possibility looms large. Hence, the correlation between

cash and spreads should be more negative for lower-rated firms. Yet once again this intuition appears

in conflict with the data. Figure 1 shows the point estimate and the 95% confidence interval for

the coefficient for cash holdings (normalized by book assets) in a panel regression that controls for

leverage, asset volatility, firm size, debt maturity, and time effects.2 The spread-cash coefficient

is positive for all ratings, and increases monotonically as the rating deteriorates. The correlation

between cash and spreads is almost 25 times as high for the lowest ratings (B–CCC) as for the

AAA–AA-rated bonds – and positive.

    Similar relationships are found in predictive regressions of the long-term probability of default.

These tests are closely related to a series of classic empirical default-predicting models, including

Altman’s (1968) Z-score, Ohlson’s (1980) O-score, Shumway (2001), Chava and Jarrow (2004), and
   2
     Specifically, this is the coefficient for Cash/Assets obtained from regression (3) of Table 4, estimated separately
for different ratings. A detailed description of the data and the empirical methodology is provided in Section 4.

                                                           2
                                     Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


         14.0


         12.0
                                                                                           11.60

         10.0

                                                                            8.47
          8.0


          6.0
                                                          5.42                             5.47
                                                                          4.58
          4.0
                                                          3.08
          2.0                              2.25

                         0.99              1.00           0.73              0.69
          0.0            0.25
                         ‐0.49             ‐0.24                                           ‐0.72
                   AAA‐AA              A              BBB              BB             B‐CCC
          ‐2.0


Fig. 1. The correlation between credit spreads of cash holdings by rating. This graph shows the
point estimate and the 95% confidence interval for the coefficient for Cash/TA in regression (3) of Table 4,
estimated separately for each rating group.


many others. For illustration, we use the model suggested by Zmijewski (1984), although many

other specifications work similarly. Zmijewski regresses the one-year probability of bankruptcy on

the current ratio (current assets over current liabilities), which is a commonly used measure of

liquidity, and two other accounting ratios. Surprisingly, he finds liquidity to be positively (albeit

insignificantly) associated with default in most subsamples. We re-estimate his model for prediction

horizons between one quarter and three years, and find that the correlation of liquidity with default

depends on the horizon, as shown in Figure 2. The short-term probability of default is lower

when liquid asset reserves are high, consistent with intuition and the findings of Davydenko (2010).

However, for horizons of one year and more, the correlation between cash and default reverses sign,

as in Zmijewski (1984), and soon becomes strongly statistically significant – again with the wrong

sign.

   The positive correlation between corporate liquidity and both credit spreads and the long-term

default probability is a robust phenomenon, observed for other data sets and time periods. Thus,

standard tests used in empirical studies of spreads and default probabilities seem to suggest that

higher liquidity results in higher credit risk.

                                                     3
                                                            Cash Holdings and Credit Risk




                                        0.40




                                        0.20
         Logit regression coefficient




                                        0.00
                                                1   2   3     4     5     6     7     8        9       10      11      12

                                                                                            Prediction horizon in quarters
                                        ‐0.20




                                        ‐0.40




                                        ‐0.60




Fig. 2. Liquid assets and the probability of default at different horizons. This graph shows the
point estimate and the 95% confidence interval for the coefficient for the current ratio QA/CL in regression
(2) of Table 6 for different prediction horizons. For a horizon of m quarters, the dependent variable equals
one if the firm defaults no more than in m quarters from the observation date.


   How can these puzzling empirical findings be reconciled with the simple economic intuition that

cash makes firms safer? We suggest an explanation based on the endogeneity of cash holdings.

Although endogeneity is recognized as a major issue in empirical corporate finance and many other

areas of economic research (Roberts and Whited (2011)), it has attracted less attention than it

warrants in credit risk studies and many other the fields of asset pricing.

   We argue that the endogeneity of cash holdings is of first-order importance for understanding

the role of cash in credit risk. In the presence of financing constraints, riskier firms may choose to

maintain higher cash reserves as a buffer against the possible cash flow shortfall. Such endogenous

adjustments in cash holdings can induce a spurious positive correlation between credit spreads and

cash holdings in equilibrium. This effect means that standard OLS and logit regressions common

in empirical credit risk research may yield misleading results. To show how a positive correlation

between cash and credit spreads can arise under endogenous cash policy, we first construct a simple

model of cash in the presence of credit risk. We then present evidence that the positive correlation

between cash and spreads is spurious rather that causal, and that it is reversed when we control for

the endogeneity of cash holdings.
                                                                         4
                                   Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


   Our model features a levered firm that can either invest its cash in a long-term project or retain

it as a cash buffer against a possible shortfall that can occur when the firm’s debt comes due. Future

cash flows cannot be pledged fully as collateral because of market frictions, and default is costly. In

this setting, higher investment implies higher cash flows in the future, provided the firm does not

default in the interim period. At the same time, higher cash reserves mean a lower probability of a

cash shortage when the debt payment is due.

   An exogenous change in factors that affect firm’s credit risk affect its credit spreads not only

directly but also indirectly as the firm adjusts its cash reserve in response. For example, if the

expected future cash flows decline exogenously, the probability of default rises, causing credit spreads

to increase. At the same time, the firm optimally increases its cash holdings, which reduces the

probability of a cash shortfall when the debt comes due, implying lower spreads. We show that the

direct effect dominates as long as constraints on external financing are binding, so that riskier firms

have both higher optimal cash reserves and higher credit spreads, inducing a positive correlation

between the two, which we empirically find is the case in the cross-section of firms.

   However, “exogenous” variation in cash holdings unrelated to credit risk factors, for instance, due

to managerial self-interest, is negatively correlated with spreads, in line with the simple intuition.

Empirically, we find that the correlation between cash and spreads turns negative when we use

instrument variations in cash by variables implied by the model (proxies for managerial self-interest

and firm’s long-term investment opportunities).

   The model also shows that the correlation between liquid assets and the probability of default

depends on the prediction horizon, consistent with Figure 2. Higher cash reserves reduce the prob-

ability of default in the short term, but may increase it over a longer period. This happens because

in order to save more cash the constrained firm reduces investment, which results in lower future

cash flows and a higher probability of a long-term cash flow shortfall. Empirically, we find that for

prediction horizons of one year or more, which most researchers focus on, the positive correlation

between liquidity and default reverses sign in instrumental variable regressions.

   The main implication of our results is that empirical studies of credit risk (and potentially other

areas of asset pricing) should devote more attention to the potential endogeneity of some of the

variables that are often taken as given. Otherwise, using some of the most common variables, such

                                                   5
                                      Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


as corporate liquidity proxies, in some of the most standard tests, such as predictive regressions of

default, may yield grossly misleading results.

      Theoretical and empirical research in corporate finance has focused increasingly on the fact

that corporate cash holdings are endogenously determined.3 The primary focus of this literature is

on financial constraints, which create a precautionary motive for hoarding cash. However, extant

studies do not explicitly link cash holdings to credit risk or credit spreads. Moreover, empirical

corporate finance studies focusing on constraints and cash holdings classify firms as constrained

when they are small, do not have a credit rating, and have no access to the public bond market.

In contrast, our focus in this paper is on explaining the linkage between cash holdings and credit

risks for large firms with rated public bonds, which would be considered unconstrained according

to the standard corporate finance classification. Our model derives a relationship between cash

holdings and credit risk, holding constant the difficulty of accessing external finance. The model

thus lends itself naturally to studying cross-sectional variations within firms that are publicly rated

but differing in their credit risk levels.

      The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the model. Section 3

describes the data set. Section 4 studies the relationship between cash and credit spreads, and

Section 5 look at the role of liquidity in empirical default-predicting models. Section 6 concludes.

Proofs are provided in the Appendices.


2. The model

This section develops a simple stylized model of the firm’s endogenous cash policy in the presence

of costly default and restricted access to outside financing. Our main goal is to show that cash

holdings in equilibrium can be positively correlated with credit spreads and default risk, and to

disentangle the intuitive prediction that cash-rich firms should be ‘safer’ from the confounding

effects of endogeneity.
  3
    Studies of corporate cash holdings include, among others, Kim, Mauer, and Sherman (1998), Opler, Pinkowitz,
Stulz, and Williamson (1999), Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), and Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2008).




                                                      6
                                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


2.1. Base case model setup

The model features a firm in a three-period investment economy. At date t = 0, the firm has access

to a long-term investment opportunity that yields a deterministic cash flow of f (I) at t = 2, where

I is the amount invested at time 0, and f (I) is a standard increasing concave production function.

In the interim period t = 1, the firm’s existing capital stock yields a single random cash flow of

δ̂ = δ + ψ, where δ is a known constant, and ψ is a zero-mean cash flow shock, unknown at t = 0.

The cash flow shock ψ is the only source of randomness in our model. The probability distribution

of ψ is described by the density function g(ψ), with the associated cumulative distribution function

denoted G(ψ) and the hazard rate h(ψ), defined as

                                                            g(ψ)
                                                h(ψ) =             .                                               (1)
                                                          1 − G(ψ)

In what follows, we assume the hazard rate h(ψ) to be weakly monotonic.4

       At t = 0, the firm has a cash endowment of c0 , which can be fully or partially invested in the

long-term project, or retained within the firm as a buffer carried over from date 0 to date 1 to meet

a future cash shortfall. We denote the investment amount as I and the cash buffer as c, equal to

(c0 − I). The shortfall in future can arise as the firm needs to make a debt repayment at date 1 and

has uncertain cash flows arriving at date 1 from assets in place. In particular, at t = 1, the firm

receives a random cash inflow of δ̂ = δ + ψ but owes a fixed amount B in debt. In the model, debt

level is predetermined (a legacy of the past), whereas retained cash reserves can be chosen by the

firm at t = 0.5 We also assume that debt cannot be renegotiated due to high bargaining costs; for

example, it might be held by dispersed bondholders prone to co-ordination problems.

       If the firm has insufficient funds to repay the debt in full at t = 1, it defaults and is liquidated,

in which case future cash flows from the long-term investment, f (I), are lost. We model a financing
   4
      This assumption is unrestrictive and often appears in economic applications, such as game theory and auctions
(e.g., Fudenberg and Tirole (1991, p. 267)). Bagnoli and Bergstrom (2005) show that the hazard rate is weakly
monotonic if function (1 − G(ψ)) is log-concave, which holds for uniform, normal, logistic, exponential, and many
other probability distributions.
   5
     Although firms can choose not only cash holdings but also debt levels, observed variations in cash holdings are
much larger than those in leverage ratios. For the median non-financial firm in Compustat with a non-trivial amount
of debt in the capital structure, the coefficient of variation (standard deviation divided by the mean) for cash as a
proportion of total assets is 0.80, compared with 0.36 for total debt over total assets and only 0.27 for book equity
over total assets, with differences significant at the 1% level. Thus, cash policy is likely to be more easily adjusted
than debt levels. We therefore treat debt as exogenous in our analysis of the optimal cash policy.

                                                          7
                                          Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


                                                                         c + dˆ ³ B
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                     f ( I * ) realized



             0                                               1
        cash c* and                                cash flow dˆ
        investment I *                             debt B matures
        are chosen

                                                                         c + dˆ < B
                                                                         default


                                          Fig. 3. Timeline of the model


friction at t = 1 by assuming that the firm can use only a fraction τ of its future cash flows as

collateral for new financing, where 0 ≤ τ < 1 and τ = 0 corresponds to the case of extreme

financing frictions, when the firm cannot raise any external financing against its future cash flows.6

The firm’s equityholders maximize the final period return. The risk-free rate of interest is normalized

to zero, and in the base case, managers act in the best interest of shareholders. Figure 3 illustrates

the model’s timeline.

    The maximum amount of cash available for debt service at date 1 is c + δ + ψ + τ f (I), which

is the sum of the cash reserve c, the random cash flow δ̂ = δ + ψ, and the newly borrowed amount

τ f (I). The “default boundary,” or the minimum cash flow shock that allows the firm to repay B in

full and avoid default, is:

                                           ψB = B − c0 − δ + I − τ f (I).                                                 (2)

The total payoff to equityholders is the sum of the initial cash endowment, the period 1 cash flow,

and the payoff from long-term investment, less the invested amount and debt payment, provided

that the firm does not default on its debt. The market value of equity is therefore

                                      Z   ∞
                                E=            [−I + c0 + δ + ψ − B + f (I)]g(ψ)dψ.                                        (3)
                                        ψB


Conditional on survival, raising new financing at t = 1 in this setting is value neutral, so we assume
   6
     One economic interpretation of τ is that it represents the extent to which future cash flows are verifiable at date
1. Low values of τ correspond to unverifiable cash flows that are difficult to pledge as collateral to providers of outside
finance.

                                                            8
                                       Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


without loss of generality that the firm always raises the maximum available amount, τ f (I). The

equity value in Equation (3) can be rewritten as

                                      Z   ∞
                                 E=           [(ψ − ψB ) + (1 − τ )f (I)]g(ψ)dψ,                       (4)
                                        ψB


where ψ − ψB is the amount of cash left in the firm after B is repaid, and (1 − τ )f (I) is shareholders’

claim on period 2 cash flow, conditional on the firm not defaulting in the interim.

   In period 0, the firm’s shareholders face the following trade-off in choosing whether to invest cash

or to retain it until the next period. On the one hand, higher retained cash holdings imply lower

investment, which results in lower cash flows generated by the long-term investment. On the other

hand, an increase in cash holdings reduces the probability of a cash shortage at date 1, increasing

the likelihood that the firm survives until date 2 to reap the benefits of the long-term investment.

   The market value of the firm’s debt, D, is

                                                  Z   ψB
                                     D=B−                  [B − (c + δ̂)]g(ψ)dψ,                       (5)
                                                   −∞


which can be interpreted as the face value of debt B, adjusted for the loss that creditors expect to

incur in default states [−∞, ψB ]. Note that creditors recover the amount (c + δ̂) in case of default.

Because interest rates are zero, the credit spread, denoted s, equals the total debt yield, given by

                                                            B
                                                      s=      − 1.                                     (6)
                                                            D


   In what follows, we study how changes in model parameters affect credit spreads and cash

holdings. The effect of any variable x on the credit spread can be decomposed into two components.

First, the spread may depend on x directly. Second, it may be affected indirectly if changes in x

induce a change in the cash reserve c, which in turn affects spreads. Formally,

                                               ds   ∂s ∂s   dc
                                                  =   +   ×    .                                       (7)
                                               dx   ∂x ∂c dx

                          ∂s
It is easy to show that   ∂c   < 0, which is the intuitive result that higher cash holdings result in lower

credit spreads provided everything else is held constant. At the same time, the direct effect of x on
                                                             9
                                       Cash Holdings and Credit Risk

              ∂s                             dc
the spread,   ∂x ,   and on cash holdings,   dx ,   depends on the nature of x. As the next subsection shows,

these two effects can work in opposite directions and yield a positive overall correlation between

credit spreads and cash.


2.2. Endogenous cash policy and credit risk

In this subsection, we show that variations in the firm’s expected cash flow δ may result in a positive

correlation between credit spreads and optimal cash holdings.

   Let I ∗ denote the firm’s optimal investment and c∗ the optimally chosen cash reserve: c∗ = c0 −I ∗ .

Let s∗ represent its credit spread in equilibrium, s∗ = s(c∗ ). The following proposition summarizes

the effect of the expected interim cash flow δ on equilibrium cash holdings, as well as its net effect

on the credit spread (see the Appendices for all proofs).

   Proposition 1. If the hazard rate h(·) is non-decreasing, then


  1. Equilibrium cash reserve c∗ is a non-increasing function of δ for any τ < 1; and

  2. There exists a threshold level of pledgeability τ̄ , such that the equilibrium credit spread s∗ is

      decreasing in δ for any τ < τ̄ .


   The first part of Proposition 1 states that if the hazard rate h(·) is non-decreasingand external

financing is restricted (τ < 1), then “riskier” firms with lower expected interim cash flow, which

face a higher risk of a cash flow shortage at the time when debt is due, optimally choose a higher

cash reserve. Empirical evidence in support of this prediction appears in Figure 4b, which shows

that for firms with low interest coverage ratios for which our effects are relevant, cash holdings are

decreasing with the size of the cash flow (scaled by debt service).

   The second part of Proposition 1 states that despite their larger cash buffer, firms with lower

expected cash flows have higher credit spreads, provided that restrictions on external financing are

binding (that is, the pledgeability of assets is sufficiently low). Thus, the direct effect of the lower

cash flow is to increase spreads by more than the indirect effect decreases them through the rise
                                                                                            ∂s
in precautionary savings. Formally, in Equation (7) with x = δ, we have                     ∂δ   < 0 (other things
                                                                          dc∗
being equal, an increase in the cash flow reduces spreads),               dδ    ≤ 0 (higher cash flow means lower
                                                    ∂s
precautionary savings), and even though             ∂c∗   < 0 (lower savings mean higher spreads), the first effect
                                                             10
                                         Cash Holdings and Credit Risk

                       ds
dominates, so that     dδ   < 0 (overall, spreads and cash flows are negatively correlated). Hence, both

the spread s∗ and the cash reserve c∗ increase when expected cash flows fall. In practice, this means

that when cash flow levels are allowed to vary over time or in the cross-section, this variation is

likely to induce a positive correlation between endogenously chosen cash reserves and credit spreads.

       It should be noted that the same effect may arise due to variation in firm characteristics other

than cash flow, if they affect both spreads and optimal cash holdings. For example, consider vari-

ations in debt levels across firms. Suppose that the firm’s debt level increases. The direct effect

of this increase is to raise spreads. However, at the same, time optimal cash holdings also rise,

which dampens the effect of higher debt levels on spreads. It can be shown that the direct effect

dominates, much as in the case of varying cash flows in Proposition 1. As a result, more indebted

firms have both higher cash levels and higher spreads, implying a positive cross-sectional correlation

between the two.


2.3. Exogenous variations in cash

In this subsection, we look at the effect of “exogenous” variations in cash, which are not induced

by variations in credit risk factors. Suppose that cash holdings also depend on a variable x that
                                                                  ∂s
does not affect spreads directly, so that in Equation (7),        ∂x   = 0, implying that x can be correlated

with spreads only through its effect on cash. Then, variations in cash induced by variations in x

are negatively correlated with spreads. This dependence is consistent with the simple intuition that

firms with more cash should be “safer” and have lower credit spreads.

                             ∂s
       Proposition 2. If     ∂x   = 0, the credit spread s is negatively related to variations in cash holdings

induced by changes in x.

       What economic factors might affect cash holdings but not the value of debt, other than indi-

rectly through their effect on cash? As an illustration, we augment the model to allow managers’

optimally chosen cash holdings to depend on growth options (future investment opportunities) and

the structure of managerial compensation.7

Growth options:         We model the firm’s growth options as an investment opportunity that will be

open to the firm at the interim date t = 1 and will yield a cash flow at date 2. If this investment is
   7
    Other examples include cash windfalls or losses unrelated to managers’ cash policy decisions. For instance, the
firm may win a lawsuit, resulting in a cash inflow from the defendant.
                                                        11
                                      Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


not pledgeable at t = 1, then its presence does not affect the value of the debt that must be repaid

at date 1, other than through its effect on cash reserves. For simplicity, assume that these growth

options have a fixed value of z > 0, independent of other firm characteristics. If the firm defaults on

its debt, this investment opportunity is lost, perhaps due to loss of customers, the inability to retain

management, or the non-transferability of human capital. Crucially, the growth option increases

the value of equity conditional on survival and hence enhances shareholders’ incentive to conserve

cash to avoid default, but it does not benefit short-term creditors directly.

   Formally, equityholders’ value can be written as:

                              Z   ∞
                         E=           [−I + c0 + δ + ψ − B + f (I) + z]g(ψ)dψ .                      (8)
                                ψB



   We show in Appendix B that the presence of growth options decreases initial investment, because

the incentive to survive is now stronger. In particular, the total effect of the change in growth options

on credit spreads consists of only the indirect effect through the optimal cash balance. Hence, the

cross-sectional variation in optimal cash holdings induced by growth options should be negatively

correlated with credit spreads.

Managerial losses in distress: Default involves private costs for the management. Gilson (1989)

notes that such costs may arise because of the loss of future income, firm-specific human capital,

or non-pecuniary benefits, such as power and prestige, and because of adverse reputation effects.

He finds empirically that the top management of distressed firms is almost three times as likely to

be replaced as that of non-distressed firms. Managers’ private costs of distress likely depend on

the structure of their compensation contracts. Differences in managerial compensation across firms

should thus result in different incentives for managers to avoid default, because the private costs

differ. That is, for managers of two firms with the same underlying credit risk, the precautionary

motive for saving cash may be weaker or stronger, depending on their compensation structure. In

this way, differences in managerial compensation induce an exogenous variation in cash holdings.

   Suppose that the firm’s risk-neutral manager owns a share θ > 0 of the equity E and incurs a

fixed, private cost γ > 0 if the firm defaults. For a given ownership level θ, the manager’s incentive to

retain cash increases with the private cost of distress γ. Conversely, given γ, the manager’s incentive

to hold cash declines with her ownership of the firm θ. The overall effect on the manager’s chosen
                                                12
                                           Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


cash policy depends on the ratio of managerial cost to equity stake, γθ , which can be interpreted as

a measure of agency problems between the manager and equityholders. The higher the manager’s

private cost of default and the lower her equity stake, the more conservative the firm’s cash policy

(relative to one that maximizes the overall value of equity), resulting in lower credit spreads for the

same underlying level of credit risk. Formally, the manager’s objective is to choose investment I to

maximize:

                                                 M = θ × E − γG(ψB ).                                                       (9)

We show in Appendix B this case is very similar to that of growth options, and the cross-sectional
                                                                                                                        γ
correlation between cash holdings and spreads induced by variations in the agency factor                                θ    is

negative.

2.4. Cash and the probability of default

Another important aspect of credit risk that we investigate is the correlation of cash with the

probability of default. We show that the correlation between the two depends on the horizon over

which we measure the likelihood of default. In choosing the optimal cash reserve, the firm’s managers

trade off the reduction in the risk of default at date 1 (short-term effect) against investment returns

realized only at date 2 (long-term effect). We extend our model to show that higher cash reserves

reduce the likelihood of default in the short run, but smay increase it in the long run.

      Consider a modification of our earlier setting, in which the firm’s total debt consists of two

tranches of different maturities, so that part of the debt with a face value B1 is due at the interim

date 1, whereas that with a face value B2 = B − B1 is due at date 2. We assume for simplicity that

no part of investment return f (I) is pledgeable at date 1 (i.e., τ = 0), whereas it is fully pledgeable

at date 2. (Partial pledgeability in both periods does not affect our conclusions.) The threshold

level of date 1 cash flow shock, below which the firm cannot meet its payment at date 1, is given by

ψB1 = B1 − (c0 + δ − I), which is decreasing in the cash reserve c = c0 − I.

      Next, consider the risk of default at date 2. Suppose that the firm has not defaulted at date 1,

so that ψ > ψB . Then, the firm’s available resources for debt payment at date 2 are the surplus

cash reserve carried over from period 1, which is equal to δ + ψ + c − B1 , and the investment cash

flow f (I).8 Default occurs at date 2 whenever (δ + ψ + c − B1 ) + f (I) < B2 , which implies a default
  8
      For simplicity, we assume that the firm carries its surplus cash reserve to date 2. In general, if B2 due is very high,
                                                             13
                                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


boundary below which the firm defaults at date 2, expressed in terms of date 1 cash flow shock, as

ψB2 = ψB1 + B2 − f (I). Because we assume that cash flows at date 2 are known with certainty, if

the firm survives at date 1 and its outstanding debt B2 is lower than the investment return f (I),

then its conditional likelihood of default at date 2 is zero. If B2 is higher than the investment return

f (I), there is a positive probability of default at date 2 as well. To avoid default in future, the firm’s

remaining cash after date 1 debt repayment must be sufficiently high.9

    The effect of the initial level of investment on the date-2 default boundary is described by

                                      dψB2   dψB1
                                           =      − f 0 (I) = 1 − f 0 (I).                                      (10)
                                       dI     dI

Because the probability of default in period 2 is increasing in ψB2 , this equation formalizes the
                                                                                                         dψB1
following trade-off: Higher cash reserves decrease the probability of default at date 1,                  dI    > 0.

However, since 1 − f 0 (I) < 0 whenever there is a financing friction, the probability of default in the

longer-term increases as the firm increases its cash reserve at the expense of long-term investment:

    Proposition 3. An increase in cash balances reduces the likelihood of default at date 1 and

increases the likelihood of default at date 2.


3. Data description

In our empirical analysis, we use a sample of firms with observed bond spreads to study how liquid

asset holdings are related to spreads and the probability of default.


3.1. Data sources and sample composition

We study yield spreads on bonds included in the Merrill Lynch U.S. Investment Grade Index and

High Yield Master II Index between December 1996 and December 2003. The Merrill Lynch indices

include corporate bonds with a par amount of at least 100 million dollars and remaining maturity

of at least one year. The bond pricing database consists of monthly bid quotes from Merrill Lynch’s
equityholders may have a strategic motive to pay out the cash reserves as dividends in earlier periods, as otherwise
all this cash would simply accrue to creditors (Acharya, Huang, Subrahmanyam, and Sundaram (2006)). We assume
that covenants restrict such strategic dividends, as is typically the case.
    9
      Note that with complete revelation of information about the interim cash flow δ̂ at date 1, anticipated default
at date 2 should simply trigger default at date 1. However, a small amount of residual uncertainty, either in the
investment return f (I) or in an additional date 2 cash flow, would suffice to avoid such an outcome.

                                                        14
                                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


bond trading desks. We augment these data with descriptive bond information from the Fixed

Income Securities Database (FISD) provided by Mergent. We merge the data with quarterly Com-

pustat and CRSP, and also use expected default frequencies (EDFs) and estimates of the volatility

of assets supplied by Moody’s/KMV. Also, we use the Default Research Service database from

Moody’s to identify all public bond defaults in our sample, including missed payments, distressed

bond exchanges, and bankruptcy filings.

    During the sample period, the two Merrill Lynch indices include 429,420 monthly corporate

bond quotes. We exclude observations that we cannot reliably merge with FISD and Compustat,

and in most of our tests, unless specifically stated otherwise, we also exclude bonds issued by

financial companies (SIC codes 6000–6999). We eliminate non-fixed coupon bonds; asset-backed

issues; bonds with embedded optionalities, such as callable, puttable, exchangeable, and convertible

securities; and bonds with sinking fund provisions. Finally, we exclude bonds with remaining time

to maturity of less than one year or more than thirty years, because the data on the risk-free rate

that we use to estimate spreads are not available for these maturities. The final sample includes

82,676 bond spreads for 485 different firms.

    Table 1 shows the composition of our sample by rating and by industry. Most of our regressions

include one firm observation per month; we have 24,496 such observations. Three quarters of

the sample are concentrated in the two lowest investment-grade categories, A and BBB. Junk

firms (those rated BB and lower) represent 16.4% of the sample. This composition is similar to

that documented in other corporate bond and credit default swap data sets (e.g., Collin-Dufresne,

Goldstein, and Martin (2001), Davydenko and Strebulaev (2007), Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008)).10

Panel B of Table 1 shows the composition of the sample by industry. The highest proportion of

firms are in manufacturing, followed by utilities and transportation, and then consumer goods.

                                               [TABLE 1 HERE]



  10
     The number of firms in each rating class does not stay constant throughout the sample period, because ratings
can change over time. Statistics reported in the first column of Table 1 show ratings for the 485 firms as of the date
when they first appear in the sample. During our sample period, more firms were downgraded than upgraded. As a
result, for junk ratings, the proportion of firm-months in the sample is higher than the proportion of junk firms firms
in the second column of the table.



                                                         15
                                   Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


3.2. Statistics on spreads and liquidity ratios

We measure the credit spread as the difference between the bond’s promised yield implied by its

price, and the yield on a portfolio of risk-free zero-coupon securities (STRIPS) with the same

promised cash flow, as suggested by Davydenko and Strebulaev (2007). This estimation method

controls accurately for the shape of the term structure. Our initial data set is an unbalanced panel of

monthly observations of spreads. A potential issue with this data structure is that large firms with

many outstanding bonds may be overrepresented in any given month. Because we are interested

in the relationship between credit risk and liquid assets, which are firm– rather than bond-specific,

using all bond-month observations may bias the results toward large firms. We address this issue

by computing the average spreads across bonds for a given firm in a given month, and using one

observation per firm-month in our analysis. We also use the average bond maturity of all bonds for

which spreads are available; all other variables in our tests are measured at the firm level.

   Panel A of Table 2 reports descriptive statistics on the spreads. The mean spread in the sample

is 192 basis points, and the median is 135 basis points. Unsurprisingly, spreads are higher for lower-

rated bonds. Untabulated comparisons of bonds with different maturities suggest that for a given

rating, spreads typically increase in maturity. It is interesting to note that the average BB spread

(372 basis points) is more than twice as high as that for BBB bonds (181 basis points). This jump

in the spread is likely attributable to not only the increase in the probability of default but also the

lower liquidity of speculative-grade bonds (BB and below) compared with investment-grade bonds.

   Panel B summarizes various measures of balance sheet liquidity. To measure liquid asset reserves,

we use the Cash/Assets ratio popular in empirical corporate finance studies, as well as liquidity

ratios employed in empirical default-predicting models. Among the best known models, Altman’s

(1968) Z-score includes WC/TA, the ratio of working capital (the difference between current assets

and current liabilities) to total assets; Zmijewski’s (1984) model and the ZETA-score model of

Altman, Haldeman, and Narayanan (1977) use the current ratio CA/CL (current assets over current

liabilities); and Ohlson (1980) and Chava and Roberts (2004) use both WC/TA and CL/CA to

proxy for liquidity. Davydenko (2010) uses the quick ratio, QA/CL, equal to current assets less

inventories, over current liabilities. The quick ratio is similar to the current ratio, but does not

consider inventories to be part of liquid asset holdings, because distressed firms may find it difficult
                                                  16
                                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


to convert their inventories into cash. Panel B shows that, our firms have substantially lower

cash reserves on average than those in the broader Compustat samples typically used in empirical

studies of cash holdings. For instance, in Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999), the mean

(median) ratio of cash to assets is 17% (6.5%), compared with 3.9% (2.0%) in our sample.11

                                              [TABLE 2 HERE]

The potentially ambiguous nature of the spread-cash relationship is illustrated by Figure 4a, which

summarizes cash holdings by credit rating and by the interest coverage ratio. The graph shows that

cash is roughly U-shaped in the firm’s credit quality. Safe AAA and AA firms have higher-than-

average cash holdings and low debt levels. Their high balance sheet liquidity and low net leverage

are likely important reasons for why rating agencies rate them so highly in the first place. For such

firms, the risk of default is unlikely to be a leading factor shaping their cash policy. However, at the

other end of the ratings spectrum, speculative-grade (junk) firms (those rated below BBB–) also

have higher-than-average cash holdings, and lower grades of junk generally correspond to higher

cash reserves. We argue that this pattern is due to levered firms’ precautionary motives for saving

cash. Despite their relatively high cash reserves, these firms remain riskier than A- or BBB-rated

firms because of their much higher levels of debt relative to their cash flows. Indeed, even relatively

high cash holdings of 5.8% of net assets for B-rated firms fade to insignificance next to their leverage

ratios, which on average exceed 66%. As a result of these pattern of cash holdings, cash turns out to

be positively associated with spreads in cross-section, with a stronger relationship for riskier firms.

    Figure 4b shows a similar U-shaped relationship between cash and the interest coverage ratio,

defined as cash flow over interest payments. Firms with lower coverage ratios face a higher risk of

a cash flow shortage, so that, in contrast to Figure 4a, riskier firms are represented by the left part

of this graph. Our model predicts that equilibrium cash holdings are non-increasing in cash flow.

Figure 4b demonstrates that in the region where credit risk is likely to be a concern (i.e., in the left

part of the graph), cash holdings increase as the cash flow (normalized by debt payments) decreases,

as predicted by the model.


  11
     These differences arise in part because our sample does not include firms with zero or near-zero leverage, which
tend to hold significant amounts of cash (Strebulaev and Yang (2006)), and in part because bond issuers are likely
to be less financially constrained and value cash holdings less than an average Compustat firm (which should work
against our finding of any effects related to the optimally chosen cash policy).
                                                        17
                                                   Cash Holdings and Credit Risk



                                                     Cash holdings by Rating


                0.10
           Cash/Assets
            0.050.00




                         AAA       AA                 A              BBB      BB              B       CCC

                                                                Mean           Median
                         Credit risk increasing along the horizontal axis



Fig. 4a. Cash holdings by rating. This graph shows means and medians of the ratio of cash to total
assets by the firm’s senior unsecured rating.




                                           Cash holdings by Interest Coverage
                 0.10
                 0.08
           Cash/Assets
           0.04 0.06
                 0.02
                 0.00




                          1         2          3        4         5       6       7       8       9    10
                                                     Deciles of Interest Coverage Ratio

                                                                 Mean           Median
                         Credit risk decreasing along the horizontal axis



Fig. 4b. Cash holdings by interest coverage. This graph shows means and medians of the ratio of cash
to total assets by deciles of the interest coverage ratio, computed as EBITDA divided by interest expense.
                                                                      18
                                   Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


3.3. Control variables

Table 3 presents descriptive statistics on the control variables used in regressions of spreads and

default probabilities, which we borrow from extant empirical research.

   Based on insights from structural models of credit risk, empirical studies of spreads control for

leverage, volatility, debt maturity, and various macroeconomic factors, in particularly those related

to the term structure of the risk-free rate of interest (e.g., Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin

(2001)). We estimate the (quasi-market) leverage ratio as the book value of total debt divided by

the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity at the end of the previous fiscal

quarter. Another factor featuring prominently in credit risk models, the volatility of assets, is not

directly observable. We use estimates of firm asset volatility supplied by Moody’s/KMV, which

employs a proprietary algorithm based on the Merton (1974) model to infer volatility from the time

series of equity prices. To control for the term premium in corporate bond yields, we use the average

remaining time to maturity of all sample bonds outstanding for the firm at each observation date.

We include the logarithm of total book assets to control for all influences that the firm’s size may

exert on debt spreads. In some of the regressions we also use the firm’s senior unsecured credit

ratings by notch from Standard and Poor’s (AAA, AA+, AA, AA–, . . . , C), which summarizes

the credit agency’s opinion of the firm’s creditworthiness and incorporates not only its financial

characteristics but also industry conditions and other, frequently soft, information. Finally, Collin-

Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) find that a significant part of monthly changes in spreads

is driven by unidentified systematic factors. To control for all economy-wide factors, including the

risk-free rate of interest, we use monthly dummies in our regressions of spreads.

   Default-predicting models have identified a large number of accounting- and market-based vari-

ables related to default. We re-estimate two of the best-known models, those of Altman (1968)

and Zmijewski (1984), as well as one that uses the Expected Default Frequency (EDF) from

Moody’s/KMV. Altman’s z-score includes WC/TA (the liquidity proxy), as well as RE/TA (Re-

tained Earnings over Total Assets), EBIT/TA (Earnings Before Interest and Tax over Total Assets),

ME/TL (equity market capitalization over Total Liabilities), and S/TA (Sales over Total Assets).

Zmijewski’s model includes the current ratio CA/CL as the liquidity proxy, NI/TA (net income

over Total Assets), and TL/TA (Total Liabilities over Total Assets). Finally, we estimate a simple
                                                 19
                                   Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


model that uses the quick ratio QA/QL as the liquidity proxy and the EDF from Moody’s/KMV

as a summary measure of credit risk. MKMV estimates the EDF based on the firm’s equity prices

and liability structure using a version of the Merton (1974) model in conjunction with a proprietary

data set of defaults (Crosbie and Bohn (2002)). Hillegeist et al. (2004) and Bharath and Shumway

(2008) show that variants of this variable are strong predictors of default.

   Table 3 shows that our firms are relatively large in size, with median total book assets of almost

$6.5Bn. This is to be expected, given that all of them issue public bonds. They also have relatively

high leverage ratios compared with broad Compustat samples not conditioned on the presence of

public bonds in the capital structure. Statistics on leverage and asset volatility are similar to those

in other credit risk studies. Looking at firm characteristics by rating (not reported), we find that

firms with higher ratings are larger, less levered, and more profitable; have slightly larger capital

expenditures; and return substantially more cash to shareholders via dividends and repurchases

than do riskier firms. Comparing the values of Altman’s and Zmijewski’s default factors with those

reported in Shumway (2001), our firms appear more distressed than the average Compustat firm –

again, likely because of the presence of bonds, which implies higher-than-average leverage ratios.

                                         [TABLE 3 HERE]



4. Cash holdings and credit spreads

This section studies the relationship between balance sheet liquidity and bond spreads. First, we

show that standard OLS regressions used in empirical studies of spreads appear to suggest that

higher cash holdings result in higher spreads. Then, we use instrumental variables suggested by the

model, and demonstrate that in IV regressions, higher cash holdings correspond to lower spreads.

   In these tests, the dependent variable is the bond spread relative to a cash flow-matched portfolio

of Treasuries, averaged across all of the firm’s outstanding bonds for each date. To proxy for balance

sheet liquidity, we use the ratio of cash to total assets, as well as working capital over total assets

(as in Altman’s (1968) z-score), and the current ratio, equal to current assets over current liabilities

(as in Zmijewski (1984)), although many other proxies yield similar results. We include standard

controls for leverage, volatility, bond maturity, firm size, and credit rating, and also use monthly

dummies to abstract from the effect of all macroeconomic variables.
                                                20
                                      Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


   The regressions results are presented in Table 4. The effect of standard credit risk factors is in line

with economic intuition and corroborates evidence from other studies of spreads (e.g., Davydenko

and Strebulaev (2007)): More levered, more volatile, and smaller firms are riskier and consequently

have higher credit spreads. Adding monthly and rating dummies substantially increases the R2 in

regressions (3) and (4), from 49% to 55% and 68%, even though the regression in column (2) already

controls for credit risk by using leverage and volatility proxies. Thus, though ratings provide an

admittedly crude summary of credit risk (as evidenced by the strong significance of leverage and

volatility in column (4)), they clearly have significant incremental explanatory power.

   But the results concerning the effect of liquid assets on spreads contradict the simple intuition

that firms with more liquid assets are “safer” and thus should have lower spreads. Both in univariate

regressions and in the presence of standard credit risk controls, the correlation between credit spreads

and liquidity is positive and strongly statistically significant, typically at the 1% level. The implied

economic effect is also considerable: In columns (1)–(3), a one standard deviation increase in the

cash-to-asset ratio corresponds to an increase in the bond spread of about 16 basis points. The

positive relationship between credit spreads and liquidity proxies persists even after controlling

for the credit rating. Moreover, in untabulated tests, we estimate specification (3) separately for

different ratings groups, and find that the coefficient for cash is increasing monotonically as the

rating deteriorates (see Figure 1).

   These results are robust in the data and insensitive to the way the control variables are con-

structed. They are nearly identical if cash is measured as a fraction of assets net of cash, rather

than total assets, or if, instead of the MKMV asset volatility estimate, we use equity volatility

or the proxy suggested by Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008). They are strengthened if we use book

instead of market leverage, or if, instead of monthly dummies, we use macro variables, such as

the risk-free rate (Duffee (1998)) or VIX (Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008)). One could hypothesize

that cash holdings are affected by covenants restricting liquidity levels, which in turn are correlated

with the underlying credit risk. However, such covenants are infrequent in practice (Dichev and

Skinner (2002)). Using data on bank loans from DealScan, we find that only 1.6% of our firms

have covenants specifying minimum liquidity ratios (current or quick ratio). In addition, for 2.9%

of firms covenants restrict capital expenditures, which also may affect cash reserves. Controlling for


                                                   21
                                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


the presence of such covenants has no impact on our results.12

                                               [TABLE 4 HERE]

Our model suggests that the positive correlation of spreads with liquid assets is due to the endoge-

nous nature of cash holdings in credit-risky firms. Thus, standard OLS regressions used in empirical

studies of spreads may be inadequate for studying the role of factors such as cash, which are subject

to endogenous corporate financing decisions. The model also predicts that exogenous variations in

cash (those not induced by differences in credit risk factors) should be negatively related to spreads.

       We test this prediction using instrumental variable regressions. Instruments are factors that

induce cross-sectional variation in cash holdings unrelated to the underlying credit risk. The model

suggests two potential instruments. First, more profitable future investment opportunities (growth

options) should result in the firm’s retaining more cash for the future, regardless of its level of credit

risk. Yet once the higher cash reserve is in place, it provides a safety cushion for creditors, decreasing

credit spreads. To proxy for growth options, we use the median ratio of R&D expenditures to sales

in the firm’s three-digit SIC industry in each calendar year.13

       Second, the model suggests the ratio of managerial private costs of financial distress to the

fraction of the firm’s equity that the manager owns as another instrument. The higher this fraction,

the higher is the manager’s incentive to hoard cash (above the level that maximizes the value of

equity) to avoid default and the associated private costs. We assume that the CEO’s salary and

bonus are at risk if the firm defaults. Accordingly, our agency term is the ratio of the CEO’s salary,

bonus, and other monetary compensation to the market value of her shares and options, estimated

using the ExecuComp database.14

       We employ these two instruments in IV of spreads that mirror the regressions of Table 4, with

the same proxies for liquid asset reserves and the same standard control variables. The results are

presented in Table 5. As expected, exogenous variations in liquid asset reserves are negatively and
  12
     The robustness tests are available on request.
  13
     We prefer R&D to the market-to-book ratio as a proxy for growth opportunities, because in addition to other well-
known problems with market-to-book (Erickson and Whited (2000)), in our setting, it is also mechanically correlated
with the market leverage ratio, which renders it unsuitable as a potential instrument. Graham (2000) employs the
ratio of R&D to sales at the level of a firm to proxy growth options. We adopt the industry counterpart to avoid
endogeneity concerns.
  14
     ExecuComp reports the Black-Scholes value of new option grants but not the current value of previously granted
options. We use the algorithm suggested by Himmelberg and Hubbard (2000) to estimate the total market value of
the CEO’s options.
                                                         22
                                   Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


significantly related to bond spreads. Thus, the simple intuition that higher cash holdings make firms

safer, implying a negative relationship between cash and spreads, is correct. However, to uncover

this intuitive result, the empiricist must overturn the effect of endogeneity of cash, which strongly

dominates in standard OLS regressions that are commonly used in empirical studies of credit risk.

These findings show that accounting for the fact that firms can choose their cash holdings optimally

is of first-order importance for understanding the role of liquid assets in credit risk.

                                         [TABLE 5 HERE]



5. Balance sheet liquidity and the probability of default

Most empirical default-predicting models include some proxies for balance sheet liquidity, treating

them as independent variables expected to reduce the probability of default. However, despite the

intuitive appeal and the widespread use of liquidity ratios in this context, Begley, Ming, and Watts

(1996), Shumway (2001), and Hillegeist et al. (2004), as well as Ohlson (1980) and Zmijewski (1984)

in their original work, find them unrelated or even positively associated with default. In this section,

we look at how the endogeneity of cash affects the correlation between liquid asset reserves and the

probability of default.

   The standard approach in the literature is to identify a set of factors expected to affect the

probability of default, and, taking them as given, estimate some variant of a hazard model of default

or bankruptcy. Logit models, equivalent to discrete-time hazard models (Shumway (2001)) are used

most frequently. We first estimate a set of logit regressions of default using different model over

the three-year horizon. Using the definition of default adopted by rating agencies, default events

include missed bond payments, bankruptcy filings, and distressed bond renegotiations. (Similar

results obtain when firm failures are restricted to bankruptcies.) The results are presented in

Table 6. Column (1) uses the variables that enter Altman’s (1968) z-score model as predictors of

default. While the effect of most variables conforms to expectations, the ratio of working capital to

total assets, which is Altman’s proxy for liquidity, is positively correlated with the 3-year default

probability, and is highly statistically significant. Column (2) employs predictors used by Zmijewski

(1984), and also finds a positive coefficient for liquidity, measured by the current ratio. Regression

(3) uses another proxy for liquidity, the quick ratio (Davydenko (2010)), and controls for other credit
                                                  23
                                     Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


risk factors by including the Expected Default Frequency (EDF) from Moody’s/KMV, variations of

which have been frequently used in recent empirical studies (e.g., Bharath and Shumway (2008)).

Once again, liquidity is positively correlated with the probability of default. Columns (4)–(6) show

that this basic result persists after the EDF is added to the models of Altman (1968) and Zmijewski

(1984), and even when all the control variables are included simultaneously.

                                          [TABLE 6 HERE]

According to our model, the correlation between liquidity and the probability of default is driven by

the firm’s incentive to conserve cash to survive a liquidity shortfall in the short run, which reduces

investment and results in lower expected cash flows in the long run. Thus, we expect the correlation

to be negative over short horizons, but positive over long horizons.

    To test this hypothesis, we re-estimate the same predictive models for different horizons, one

quarter, one year, and three years. We also use the instrumental variables previously employed in

regressions of spreads (Section 4) to isolate the effect of exogenous increases in cash holdings on

long-term default probabilities. The results of these tests are reported in Table 7.

    The regressions in column (1) are for the short-term probability of default, so that the dependent

variable is 1 if the firm defaults within the next fiscal quarter, and 0 otherwise. As expected, proxies

for balance sheet liquidity are negatively correlated with the short-term probability of default in all

three models. This result is consistent with Davydenko (2010), who finds that firms with restricted

access to external financing are more likely to default over the next quarter when their liquid assets

fall short of current liabilities.

    In contrast to the short-term results, columns (2) and (4) show that liquidity is positively related

to the probability of default at the one and three year horizons, which are typical in empirical default-

predicting studies. This result is illustrated in Figure 2, which shows the sign reversal for CA/CL

in the Zmijweski model as the horizon increases from one quarter to one year and beyond.

    At the same time, instrumental-variable logit regressions in columns (3) and (5) suggest that the

relationship between cash and the long-term probability of default is negative when the endogeneity

of cash is controlled for, and that it becomes stronger as the prediction horizon increases: The

liquidity coefficient is negative but insignificant in 2 of the 3 one-year regressions in column (3), but

it is negative and strongly significant in all 3 models for the three-year prediction in column (5).
                                                   24
                                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


      Overall, these tests suggest that the effect of balance sheet liquidity on the probability of default

for horizons longer than a few months cannot be captured adequately by a standard approach that

treats liquid assets as given. We thus once again emphasize the importance of recognizing that firms

can choose their cash policy endogenously, depending in particular on the firm’s credit risk.

                                               [TABLE 7 HERE]



6. Concluding remarks

In this paper, we document a robust positive correlation of corporate liquidity with credit spreads

and with the long-term probability of default. This finding runs contrary to the simple intuition

that higher cash reserves make corporate debt safer. We argue that it arises because of endogenous

adjustments in cash holdings by firms that worry about the possibility of a liquidity shortage, which

can trigger costly default in the presence of restrictions on external financing. Our model shows how

such effects can arise when future cash flows are only partially pledgeable and when default is costly.

At the same time, exogenous variations in the firm’s cash holdings that are unrelated to credit risk

factors are negatively correlated with spreads. The simple intuition that predicts that firms with

high cash holdings should be safer can account only for the direct effect of cash on spreads; it misses

the indirect effect due to the endogeneity of cash, which, as our evidence suggests, dominates in

practice. One immediate implication is that recognizing that balance sheet liquidity is endogenous

is important in credit risk studies.

      The severe credit crisis caused by the subprime debacle highlights the relation between cash

policy and corporate debt pricing. The subsequent recession implies lower future expected cash

flows. At the same time, the unwillingness of banks to extend credit means that firms cannot rely

on external sources of financing should a liquidity crisis occur. Both factors increase the value of

a marginal dollar of cash and elevate the importance of cash management policies to a new level.

The perception of market practitioners becomes that “In a period in which credit is being rationed,

the price of leveraged assets declines and cash is king.”15 Disentangling the various effects that

such shocks in the economic environment have on cash policy and credit risk provides an important

avenue for further research.

 15
      See “Corporate America sits on its cash,” Financial Times, 2008/09/24.
                                                         25
                                           Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


Appendix A: The first-order condition and proofs of Propositions
Investment first-order condition. Managers maximize the value of equity by choosing the appropriate
level of investment I. From Equation (3), equityholders’ optimization problem yields the following first order
condition:16
                     Z ∞
               ∂E                                                                       dψB
                  =      [−1 + f 0 (I)]g(ψ)dδ1 − [−I + (c0 + δ + ψB − B) + f (I)]g(ψB )     = 0.          (A1)
               ∂I     ψB                                                                 dI

Substituting the expression for ψB from Equation (2) and rearranging, we can rewrite this first-order condition
as
                                                  1 + (1 − τ )f (I)h(ψB )
                                       f 0 (I) =                           .                              (A2)
                                                 1 + τ (1 − τ )f (I)h(ψB )

     In the first-best case of unrestricted investment, the standard maximization solution would yield f 0 (I) = 1.
In our model, the right-hand side in Equation (A2) is greater than 1 as long as there are financing frictions (i.e.,
τ < 1) and the firm’s ability to repay the debt at the chosen investment level is uncertain (i.e., g(ψB ) > 0).
It follows that the firm’s optimal investment in our model, I ∗ , is lower than the first-best level.17
    To understand the intuition behind the optimal investment and cash policies, note that we can re-write
the first-order condition as follows:

                             (f 0 (I) − 1) × (1 − G(ψB )) dI = (1 − τ )f (I) × g(ψB )dψB .                               (A3)

The left-hand side in Equation (A3) is the net value gain from increasing investment by dI, equal to (f 0 (I) −
1)dI, conditional on survival in the interim period, the probability of which is 1 − G(ψB ). The right-hand side
gives shareholders’ expected marginal loss from default, equal to the value of equity at the default boundary
(1 − τ )f (I) multiplied by g(ψB )dψB , which is the marginal increase in the probability of default due to the
shift in the default boundary by dψB .
     Proof of Proposition 1. Define function m(I ∗ , δ), where I ∗ is the optimal investment level from the
first-order condition (A2), as

                                                                 1 + (1 − τ )f (I ∗ )h(ψB )
                                    m(I ∗ , δ) = f 0 (I ∗ ) −                                .                           (A4)
                                                                1 + τ (1 − τ )f (I ∗ )h(ψB )

    Part 1. Because c∗ = c0 − I ∗ ,

                                                                                    ∂m
                                             dc∗ ∂c∗    ∂I ∗   
                                                                                    ∂δ
                                                                                           
                                                     =−      =− −                   ∂m
                                                                                               .                         (A5)
                                             dδ ∂δ      ∂δ                          ∂I ∗

                                                                             ∂m
    The second-order condition of optimization implies that                  ∂I ∗   ≤ 0. To see it, re-write it as

                      ∂m                   (1 − τ )2 (f 0 (I ∗ )h(ψB ) + f (I ∗ )h0 (ψB )(1 − τ f 0 (I ∗ )))
                         ∗
                           = f 00 (I ∗ ) −                                                                   ,           (A6)
                      ∂I                                   (1 + τ (1 − τ )f (I ∗ )h(ψB ))2
which is non-positive because f 00 < 0, h0 > 0, and f 0 (I ∗ ) <         1
                                                                         τ    (the latter holds from the first-order condition
(A2)). Also,
  16
     It is easy to show that the second-order condition for maximization is satisfied. We also assume that initial cash
holdings are high enough for the first-order condition to yield an interior solution, i.e. c0 > I ∗ .
  17
     The economic mechanism that generates this under-investment is very different from that in the standard debt
overhang problem in Myers (1977), which, in contrast to our assumptions, essentially requires debt to be long term
and investment to be short term. One of the solutions suggested to the debt overhang problem is to use debt of shorter
maturity. In our case, however, it may only worsen the outcome.


                                                                26
                                                 Cash Holdings and Credit Risk



                                             ∂m     (1 − τ )2 f (I ∗ )h0 (ψB ) ∂ψB
                                                                                ∂δ
                                                =−                       ∗
                                                                                   > 0,                                                          (A7)
                                             ∂δ    (1 + τ (1 − τ )f (I )h(ψB ))2
          ∂ψB                             ∂c∗
because    ∂δ   = −1. Therefore,          ∂δ    ≤ 0.
   Part 2. From definitions of D and s (Equations (5) and (6)), it follows that

                                        ∂s   B ∂D    B
                                           =− 2   = − 2 (G(ψB ) + g(ψB )τ f (I ∗ )),                                                             (A8)
                                        ∂δ   D ∂δ    D

   and

                      ∂s     B ∂D    B
                          = − 2 ∗ = − 2 (G(ψB ) + g(ψB )τ f (I ∗ ) − τ 2 f (I ∗ )f 0 (I ∗ )g(ψB )).                                              (A9)
                      ∂c∗    D ∂c    D

   Therefore,


    ds   ∂s  ∂s ∂c∗    B                             ∂c∗   B                               ∂c∗
       =    + ∗     = − 2 G(ψB ) + g(ψB )τ f (I ∗ ) 1 +       + 2 τ 2 f (I ∗ )f 0 (I ∗ )g(ψB )     .                                            (A10)
    dδ   ∂δ ∂c ∂δ      D                                ∂δ     D                               ∂δ

                 ∗
                                                                                                                                     ∂c∗
   Because ∂c
            ∂δ ≤ 0, for this quantity to be negative, it is sufficient to establish that                                             ∂δ    > −1. From
Equation (A5)
                                                                                              ∂ψB
                                                                    (1−τ )2 f (I ∗ )h0 (ψ )
                                                                                       B
                                   ∂c∗                           − (1+τ (1−τ )f (I ∗ )h(ψ  ∂δ
                                                                                          B ))
                                                                                               2
                                       =−                   (1−τ )2 (f 0 (I ∗ )h(ψB )+f (I ∗ )h0 (ψB )(1−τ f 0 (I ∗ )))
                                                                                                                          .                     (A11)
                                   ∂δ     f 00 (I ∗ ) −                    (1+τ (1−τ )f (I ∗ )h(ψB ))2


   The right-hand of this equation is greater than −1 if and only if

                                                                                2
                         Z(τ ) ≡ f 00 (I ∗ ) − f 0 (I ∗ ) (1 − τ f 0 (I ∗ )) (h(ψB ) − τ f (I ∗ )h0 (ψB )) < 0.                                 (A12)

   Note that when τ = 0,


                                                 Z(0) = f 00 (I ∗ ) − f 0 (I ∗ )h(ψB ) < 0.                                                     (A13)

   Because Z(τ ) is continuous in τ , there exist such τ̄ > 0 that for all τ < τ̄ , the condition (A12) is satisfied. 2

                                                       ∂s
   Proof of Proposition 2. Because                     ∂x   = 0, it follows that

                                                                  ds   ∂s ∂c
                                                                     =       .                                                                  (A14)
                                                                  dx   ∂c ∂x

   In the proof of Proposition 1, we showed that

                              ∂s     B ∂D    B                                            
                                ∗
                                  = − 2 ∗ = − 2 (G(ψB ) + g(ψB )τ f (I ∗ ) 1 − τ f 0 (I ∗ ) .                                                   (A15)
                              ∂c     D ∂c    D

   Since f 0 (I ∗ ) < τ1 ,   ∂s
                             ∂c∗   < 0. Therefore, the sign of             ds
                                                                           dx   is the opposite of the sign of                ∂c
                                                                                                                              ∂x .   2


   Proof of Proposition 3 is provided in the main text. 2


                                                                         27
                                           Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


Appendix B: Growth options and managerial losses
For simplicity, in our discussion in this subsection, we will assume that no part of time 2 cash flow is pledgeable
at t = 1, so that τ = 0.
   Proposition B1. The equilibrium level of cash holdings c∗ is positively related to the growth option z.
Credit spread s is negatively related to the growth option z only through the change in optimal cash balance.
    Proof of Proposition B1. With growth option z, the first-order condition that determines the firm’s
investment policy takes the following form:

                                                      1 + [(1 − τ )f (I) + z] h(ψB )
                                         f 0 (I) =                                    .                                  (B1)
                                                     1 + τ [(1 − τ )f (I) + z] h(ψB )

     Similar to the proof of Proposition 1, define m(I ∗ , z) as

                                                             1 + [(1 − τ )f (I) + z] h(ψB )
                                   m(I ∗ , z) = f 0 (I) −                                    .
                                                            1 + τ [(1 − τ )f (I) + z] h(ψB )

                                                                                                  ∂m
     It is easy to show (as in Proposition 1) that the second-order condition implies             ∂I ∗   < 0. Now,

                              ∂m                     1
                                 =−                                     h2 (ψB )(1 − τ ) < 0,                            (B2)
                              ∂z    (1 + τ [(1 − τ )f (I) + z] h(ψB ))2
               ∂c                                                                 ∂s                             ∂s
and therefore, ∂z  > 0. The result on credit spread follows because               ∂z   = 0 by assumption, and    ∂c   < 0 (for
the reasons established in (A8)). 2


    Proposition B2. The equilibrium level of cash holdings c∗ is positively related to the agency parameter
γ
θ.  Credit spread s is negatively related to the agency parameter γθ only through the change in optimal cash
balance.
    Proof of Proposition B2. The first-order condition of the manager’s objective function (9) can be
written as


             Z   ∞
     ∂M                                                                                    ∂ψB           ∂ψB
        =θ           [−1 + f 0 (I)]g(ψ)dδ1 − [−I + (c0 + δ + ψB − B) + f (I)]g(ψB )            − γg(ψB )     = 0,        (B3)
     ∂I       ψB                                                                            ∂I            ∂I
                                                                                γ
which results in a condition identical to (B1), with z replaced by              θ.   The result then follows from applying
the proof of Proposition B1.2




                                                                28
                                    Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


References
Acharya, Viral V., Jing-zhi Huang, Marti G. Subrahmanyam, and Rangarajan K. Sundaram,
2006, When does strategic debt-service matter? Economic Theory 29, 363-378.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The cash flow sensitivity of
cash, Journal of Finance, 59, 1777–1804.
Altman, Edward I., 1968, Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy,
Journal of Finance, 23, 589-609.
Altman, Edward I., R. Haldeman, and P. Narayanan, 1977, ZETA analysis: A new model to identify
bankruptcy risk of corporations, Journal of Banking and Finance, 1, 29–54.
Anderson, Ronald W., and Andrew Carverhill, 2007, Liquidity and capital structure, Centre for
Economic Policy Research Working paper No. 6044.
Asvanunt, Attakrit, Mark Broadie, and Suresh Sundaresan, 2010, Managing corporate liquidity:
Strategies and pricing implications, Working paper, Columbia University.
Bagnoli, Mark, and Ted Bergstrom, 2005, Log-concave probability and its applications, Economic
Theory 25, 445–469.
Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M. Kahle, and René M. Stulz, 2009, Why do U.S. firms hold so much
more cash than they used to? Journal of Finance 64, 1985–2021.
Begley, Joy, Jin Ming, and Susan Watts, 1996, Bankruptcy classification errors in the 1980s: An
empirical analysis of Altman’s and Ohlson’s models, Review of Accounting Studies, 1, 267–284.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting default with the Merton Distance to
Default model, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339–1369.
Black, Fischer, and John C. Cox, 1976, Valuing corporate securities: Some effects of bond indenture
provisions, Journal of Finance 31, 351–367.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1973, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities, Journal of
Political Economy 81, 637–654.
Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal of
Finance 63, 2899–2939.
Chava, Sudheer, and Robert A. Jarrow, 2004, Bankruptcy prediction with industry effects, Review of
Finance 8, 537–569.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2001, Do credit spreads reflect stationary leverage
ratios? Journal of Finance 56, 1929–1957.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, The determinants
of credit spread changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177–2207.
Crosbie, Peter J., and Jeffrey R. Bohn, 2001, Modeling default risk, KMV LLC.
Davydenko, Sergei A., 2010, What triggers default? A Study of the default boundary, Working paper,
University of Toronto.
Davydenko, Sergei A., and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2007, Strategic actions and credit spreads: An em-
pirical investigation, Journal of Finance, 62, 2633–2671.
Dichev, Ilia D., and Douglas J. Skinner, 2002, Large-sample evidence on the debt covenant hypothesis,
Journal of Accounting Research 40, 1091–1123.
Dittmar, Amy, and Jan Mahrt-Smith, 2007, Corporate governance and the value of cash, Journal of
Financial Economics 83, 599–634.

                                                    29
                                    Cash Holdings and Credit Risk


Duffee, Gregorie R., 1998, The relation between Treasury yields and corporate bond yield spreads,
Journal of Finance 53, 2225–2241.
Erickson, Timothy, and Toni M. Whited, 2000, Measurement rrror and the relationship between
investment and q, Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1027-1057.
Fudeberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole, 1991, Game theory, MIT Press.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and
corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988:1, 141–206.
Gamba, Andrea, and Alexander Triantis, 2008, The value of financial flexibility, Journal of Finance,
63, 2263–2296.
Gilson, Stuart, 1989, Management turnover and financial distress, Journal of Financial Economics, 25,
241–262.
Graham, John, 2000, How big are the tax benefits of debt?, Journal of Finance, 55, 1901–1941.
Gryglewicz, Sebastian, 2011, A theory of corporate financial decisions with liquidity and solvency con-
cerns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 365–384.
Hillegeist, Stephen A., Elizabeth K. Keating, Donald P. Cram, and Kyle G. Lundstedt, 2004,
Assessing the probability of bankruptcy, Review of Accounting Studies, 9, 5–34.
Himmelberg, Charles P., and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2000, Incentive pay and the market for CEOs: An
analysis of pay-for-performance sensitivity, Working Paper, Columbia University.
Kim, Chang-Jin, David C. Mauer, and Ann E. Sherman, 1998, The determinants of corporate liquidity:
Theory and evidence, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 335-359.
Leland, Hayne E., 1994, Corporate debt value, bond covenants, and optimal capital structure, Journal of
Finance 49, 1213–1252.
Leland, Hayne E., and Claus Bjerre Toft, 1996, Optimal capital structure, endogenous bankruptcy,
and the term structure of credit spreads, Journal of Finance 51, 987–1019.
Longstaff, Francis A., and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 1995, A simple approach to valuing risky fixed
and floating rate debt, Journal of Finance 50, 789–819.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates, Journal
of Finance 29, 449–470.
Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics, 5,147-
175.
Myers, Stewart C., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1998, The paradox of liquidity, Quarterly Journal
Economics, 113, 733-771.
Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy, Journal of Ac-
counting Research, 18, 109–31.
Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 1999, The determinants and
implications of corporate cash holdings, Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 3–46.
Roberts, Michael R., and Toni M. Whited, 2011, Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate Finance, Work-
ing paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Schaefer, Stephen M., and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2008, Structural models of credit risk are useful:
Evidence from hedge ratios on corporate bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 90, 1–19.
Shumway, Tyler, 2001, Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model, Journal of
Business, 74, 101–24.
Strebulaev, Ilya A., and Baozhong Yang, 2006, The mystery of zero-leverage firms, Working paper,
Stanford University.
Zmijewski, Mark E., 1984, Methodological issues related to the sstimation of financial distress prediction
models, Journal of Accounting Research (Supplement), 59–86.
                                                   30
                             Cash Holdings and Credit Risk

                                        Table 1
                          Sample size and industry composition

This table shows the number of unique firms, as well as spreads (bond-months), firm-
months, and firm-quarters in the sample, by rating and by broad industry group. For
firms whose rating changes during the sample period, the ‘Firms’ column of Panel A
reports the senior unsecured rating as of the first date the firm appears in the data set.
For other columns, ratings are as of the observation date. The bond sample consists of
straight fixed-coupon bonds without embedded optionalities, with remaining maturity
between one and thirty years, issued by non-financial U.S. firms and included in the
Merrill Lynch U.S. Investment Grade Index or High Yield Master II Index between
December 1996 and December 2003.

                                Firms      Spreads       Firm-months       Firm-quarters
                             Panel A: Observations by rating

AAA                                 7        1,224            447                155
AA                                 38        6,090           1,622               559
A                                 164       30,627           8,075              2,780
BBB                               191       33,281          10,420              3,600
BB                                 60       8,364           2,842               1,007
B                                  24       2,444             942                343
CCC and below                       1         646             148                 60

                          Panel B: Observations by industry

Consumer goods                    66        14,167           3,686              1,284
Manufacturing                     92        12,505           4,515              1,565
High Tech & Telecoms              49         8,884           2,347               819
Wholesale and retail trade        61        12,478           3,521              1,218
Oil & Chemicals                   56         9,324           3,220              1,108
Utilities & Transportation        80        14,439           3,942              1,368
Other industries                  81        10,879           3,265              1,142

Total                             485       82,676          24,496              8,504




                                           31
                          Cash Holdings and Credit Risk

                                        Table 2
                       Statistics on spreads and liquidity ratios

This table reports summary statistics on credit spreads and measures of balance
sheet liquidity, by firm-month observation. Panel A reports the annualized bond
spread in basis points, averaged over all outstanding straight bonds for each firm-
month, for all firms and separately by senior unsecured rating. The benchmark
risk-free yield is the yield on a cash flow-matched portfolio of STRIPS. STRIPS
yields are observed as of the observation date and are linearly approximated for
dates between the maturity dates of two STRIPS. Panel B reports liquidity ratios
for the sample of firm-months, as of the end of the previous fiscal quarter. TA is the
total book assets of the issuing firm. Cash is cash and marketable securities; WC is
working capital, CA is current assets, QA is current assets less inventories, and CL
is current liabilities.

                              Mean    Median       25%       75%     St. dev.     N
                              Panel A: Credit spreads

 All                          191.5     135.2      87.5     214.8     178.4     24,496

 AAA                           80.0      74.2      57.7      95.8      26.8      447
 AA                            78.7      69.3      54.0      94.0      36.3     1,622
 A                            114.9     100.7      72.9     142.3      60.0     8,075
 BBB                          180.5     152.5     104.0     210.3     119.5     10,420
 BB                           371.7     321.7     220.7     452.5     227.1     2,842
 B                            583.8     512.6     349.5     759.6     287.2      942
 CCC and below                757.6     740.8     470.0    1,139.6    322.4      148

                              Panel B: Liquidity ratios

 Cash/TA                      0.039     0.020      0.009    0.048     0.049     24,258
 WC/TA                        0.073     0.056     -0.012    0.146     0.123     22,741
 CA/CL (current ratio)        1.342     1.252      0.935    1.637     0.579     22,741
 QA/CL (quick ratio)          0.745     0.687     0.497     0.925     0.383     22,424




                                          32
                        Cash Holdings and Credit Risk

                                      Table 3
                          Statistics on control variables

This table reports summary statistics on control variables used in regressions
of spreads and default. Total assets is the total book assets of the issuing firm
in billions of dollars. Cash/Assets is cash and near-cash divided by total book
assets. Cash/Net assets is cash and near-cash divided by total book assets
minus cash. Leverage is the book value of total debt divided by the sum of
the book value of debt and the market value of equity. Asset volatility is the
annualized standard deviation of asset returns estimated by Moody’s/KMV.
Bond maturity is the remaining bond maturity in years on the observation date
averaged over all bonds with available spreads for each firm-month observation
in the sample. TA is the book value of total assets, RE is retained earnings,
ME is the market value of equity, TL is the book value of total liabilities, S is
sales, NI is net income, and EDF is the Expected Default Frequency provided
by Moody’s/KMV.

                         Mean    Median       25%      75%     St. dev.     N

 Total assets, $Bn       13.37      6.46      2.95    16.47     20.04     24,315
 Leverage                0.325     0.298     0.164     0.461    0.196     23,021
 Asset volatility        0.187     0.179     0.146     0.217    0.060     21,962
 Bond maturity           8.979     7.250     4.549    12.145    6.009     24,496
 RE/TA                   0.218     0.207     0.084    0.345     0.227     22,738
 EBIT/TA                 0.023     0.022     0.012    0.034     0.022     21,473
 ME/TL                   1.796     1.161     0.629     2.198    1.917     23,770
 S/TA                    0.256     0.218     0.137    0.314     0.180     24,252
 NI/TA                   0.010     0.011     0.004    0.019     0.018     24,258
 TL/TA                   0.682     0.671     0.592    0.760     0.139     24,294
 EDF, %                  0.712     0.200     0.069    0.578     1.661     21,962




                                       33
                                Cash Holdings and Credit Risk




                                            Table 4
                                 OLS regressions of bond spreads


The dependent variable is the annualized yield spread in basis points relative to a cash flow-matched
portfolio of STRIPS, averaged over all outstanding bonds for each firm-month observation in the sample.
TA is the book value of total assets, WC is working capital, CA is current assets, and CL is current
liabilities. Leverage is the book value of total debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and
the market value of equity. Asset volatility is the volatility of assets as estimated by Moody’s/KMV.
Maturity is the weighted-average remaining bond maturity in years for all bonds with available spreads
for each firm-month observation in the sample. The values of t-statistics adjusted for clustering at the
firm level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients marked ***, **, and * are significant at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% significance levels, respectively.

                      (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)

Cash/TA             3.26***    3.12***    3.25***       1.25*
                     (2.64)     (3.48)     (3.83)       (1.73)
WC/TA                                                              0.93**    0.96***
                                                                   (2.09)     (3.36)
CA/CL                                                                                   0.23***   0.15***
(current ratio)                                                                          (2.67)    (2.71)

Leverage                       6.45***   5.72***        2.92***               3.04***             3.02***
                                (18.6)    (16.1)         (9.63)                (9.52)              (9.45)
Asset volatility               12.5***   9.19***        4.06***               3.97***             4.12***
                                (14.3)    (9.09)         (5.53)                (5.50)              (5.68)
Log(TA)                       -0.12***   -0.25***      -0.15***              -0.12***             -0.13***
                               (-3.22)    (-5.88)       (-4.55)               (-3.60)              (-3.68)
Maturity                       0.0021     0.0048       0.015***              0.015***             0.014***
                                (0.35)    (0.80)         (3.60)                (3.45)              (3.35)
Rating dummies                                            Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Monthly dummies                             Yes           Yes                   Yes                  Yes

Const.              1.79***   -1.59***     -0.16         0.30      1.84***    0.075     1.59***    -0.0035
                     (27.5)    (-3.72)    (-0.33)       (0.71)      (27.7)    (0.17)     (12.0)   (-0.0077)

N                    24,258    21,110     21,110        21,110     22,741     20,178    22,741     20,178
Adj. R2               0.8%     49.2%      54.8%         67.7%       0.4%      68.5%      0.6%      68.4%




                                                  34
                                 Cash Holdings and Credit Risk




                                             Table 5
                         Instrumental variable regressions of credit spreads


The dependent variable is the annualized yield spread in basis points relative to a cash flow-matched
portfolio of STRIPS, averaged over all outstanding bonds for each firm-month observation in the sample.
The proxies for balance sheet liquidity (Cash/TA, WC/TA, and CA/CL) are instrumented with the
R&D/Sales ratio of the median firm in the same three-digit SIC industry each year and with the Agency
term, defined as the ratio of the CEO’s salary and bonus to the value of her equity holdings and options
in the firm. TA is the book value of total assets, WC is working capital, CA is current assets, and CL is
current liabilities. Leverage is the book value of total debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt
and the market value of equity. Asset volatility is the volatility of assets as estimated by Moody’s/KMV.
Maturity is the weighted-average remaining bond maturity in years for all bonds with available spreads
for each firm-month observation in the sample. The values of t-statistics adjusted for clustering at the
firm level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients marked ***, **, and * are significant at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% significance levels, respectively.

                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)

Cash/TA             -6.46***    -4.42**     -2.64*     -4.57***
                     (-3.11)    (-2.31)     (-1.71)     (-2.63)
WC/TA                                                               -5.06***   -4.51**
                                                                     (-2.76)   (-2.12)
CA/CL                                                                                     -1.28**   -1.18*
(current ratio)                                                                           (-2.39)   (-1.71)

Leverage                        5.84***    4.98***      2.71***                 2.79***             2.93***
                                 (14.2)     (12.1)       (8.06)                  (6.01)              (5.96)
Asset volatility                13.8***    9.40***      5.85***                 7.75***             8.37***
                                 (12.1)     (7.51)       (6.00)                  (4.26)              (3.28)
Log(TA)                         -0.072*    -0.21***    -0.12***                -0.26***             -0.31***
                                (-1.89)     (-4.93)     (-3.52)                 (-3.61)              (-2.85)
Maturity                         0.0076     0.011*     0.015***                0.020***             0.025***
                                 (1.19)     (1.79)       (3.81)                  (2.88)              (2.82)
Rating dummies                                            Yes                     Yes                  Yes
Monthly dummies                               Yes         Yes                     Yes                  Yes

Const.               1.96***   -1.91***      -0.12        0.39      2.15***     1.45*     3.49***    2.95*
                      (19.2)    (-4.46)     (-0.24)      (0.92)      (11.9)     (1.88)     (4.65)    (1.79)

N                    17,703     16,497      16,497      16,497       16,839     15,864    16,839     15,864
Adj. R2                .%       41.6%       50.3%       63.5%          .%       53.3%       .%       49.3%




                                                 35
                                  Cash Holdings and Credit Risk




                                              Table 6
                       Liquid assets in long-term default-predicting models

This table reports quarterly logit regressions of public bond defaults over the 3-year horizon.
The dependent variable equals 1 if the firm defaults within 3 years from the observation date,
and 0 otherwise. WC is working capital, TA is the book value of total assets, CA is current
assets, CL is current liabilities, QA is current assets less inventories, RE is retained earnings,
ME is the market value of equity, TL is the book value of total liabilities, S is sales, NI is net
income, and EDF is the Expected Default Frequency provided by Moody’s/KMV. Absolute
values of z-statistics adjusted for clustering at the firm level are reported in parentheses.
Coefficients marked ***, **, and * are significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels,
respectively.

                          (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)       (6)

   WC/TA               1.72***                              2.08***
                        (3.13)                               (3.29)
   CA/CL                             0.33***                             0.43***
   (current ratio)                    (4.81)                              (5.39)
   QA/CL                                        0.10**                                0.09**
   (quick ratio)                                (2.17)                                (2.07)

   RE/TA               -1.32***                                 0.16         0.30       0.13
                         (5.63)                               (0.39)       (0.73)      (0.33)
   EBIT/TA            -14.74***                            -13.53***    -14.48***   -13.66***
                        (11.12)                               (4.55)       (4.73)      (4.63)
   ME/TL               -0.56***                                -0.10        -0.13       -0.09
                         (3.00)                               (1.05)       (1.38)      (0.90)
   S/TA                   -0.98                                -1.12        -0.54       -0.41
                         (1.63)                               (1.43)       (0.75)      (0.58)
   NI/TA                            -16.03***                   0.19         1.44       0.78
                                     (13.30)                  (0.07)       (0.51)      (0.29)
   TL/TA                             2.42***                  1.20*       1.50**         0.82
                                      (7.07)                  (1.77)       (2.23)      (1.20)
   EDF                                          0.19***     0.14***      0.14***      0.15***
                                                 (20.04)     (12.08)      (11.83)     (12.25)
   const.              -1.80***     -5.00***    -3.52***    -3.83***     -4.65***    -3.63***
                        (9.14)       (15.68)     (28.65)      (7.29)       (8.13)      (6.98)

   N                    17,925       21,625     16,944       14,966       14,965      14,777
   R2                   15.9%        13.3%      24.0%        26.5%        27.5%       26.4%




                                                36
                                             Table 7
                  Liquid assets and the probability of default at different horizons

This table reports quarterly logit regressions (columns (1), (2), and (4)) and instrumental-
variable logit regressions (columns (3) and (5)) of public bond defaults at different prediction
horizons. In regression (1), the dependent variable equals 1 if the firm defaults within the
following fiscal quarter, and 0 otherwise. In regressions (3) and (4), the dependent variable
equals 1 if the firm defaults between 9 to 12 months from the observation date, and 0 otherwise.
In regressions (5) and (6), the dependent variable equals 1 if the firm defaults between 33 to
36 months from the observation date, and 0 otherwise. WC is working capital, TA is the book
value of total assets, CA is current assets, CL is current liabilities, QA is current assets less
inventories, RE is retained earnings, ME is the market value of equity, TL is the book value
of total liabilities, S is sales, NI is net income, and EDF is the Expected Default Frequency
provided by Moody’s/KMV. Absolute values of z-statistics adjusted for clustering at the firm
level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients marked ***, **, and * are significant at the 1%,
5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.
                             1 quarter               1 year                   3 years
                                Logit          Logit           IV      Logit            IV
                                  (1)            (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)
                                        Altman’s (1968) z-score
         WC/TA                -1.05***       2.28***          1.82    2.92*** -73.09***
                                (2.62)         (4.24)       (0.35)     (3.70)        (3.40)
         RE/TA                   -0.16       -0.79***       -0.92*   -0.82***          2.48
                                (0.96)         (3.14)       (1.74)     (3.40)        (1.41)
         EBIT/TA                 -0.83      -11.50***      -9.50**    -5.07** -40.07***
                                (1.23)         (6.59)       (2.18)     (2.09)        (2.76)
         ME/TL               -11.08***        -0.92**      -1.59**      -0.29         -0.10
                               (10.28)         (2.36)       (2.04)     (1.55)        (0.13)
         S/TA                     0.28        -1.53**        -1.00      -1.09     16.48***
                                (0.58)         (2.33)       (0.72)     (1.21)        (3.07)
         const.               -1.94***       -4.00***     -3.58***   -5.01*** -3.81***
                                (9.78)        (13.60)       (6.09)    (19.18)        (5.10)
         N                      17,922         17,922       8,363      17,922        8,363
                                       Zmijewski’s (1984) model
         CA/CL                 -0.35**       0.27***         -1.53    0.42*** -11.45***
         (current ratio)        (2.46)         (4.09)       (1.05)     (4.91)        (3.83)
         NI/TA               -18.10***      -11.99*** -16.96***      -5.20*** -26.70***
                               (12.36)         (9.48)       (4.28)     (2.77)        (2.89)
         TL/TA                 2.77***       1.87***          0.32    1.90*** -14.61***
                                (7.22)         (5.64)       (0.14)     (4.98)        (2.78)
         const.               -7.12***       -6.91***        -3.38   -7.60*** 20.77***
                               (18.70)        (23.27)       (0.93)    (20.52)        (2.66)
         N                      21,625         21,625       9,826      21,625        9,826
                                           EDF-based model
         QA/CL                -0.73***       0.26***         -0.82    0.43***      -5.72***
         (quick ratio)          (2.75)         (2.89)       (0.58)     (4.06)        (3.41)
         EDF                   0.31***       0.17***      0.21***     0.07***       0.13***
                               (12.58)        (17.25)      (11.19)     (5.00)        (3.69)
         const.               -7.57***       -6.21***     -5.54***   -6.11***         -1.31
                               (14.21)        (35.11)       (4.60)    (31.55)        (0.94)
         N                      16,944         16,944       9,139      16,944        9,139
