                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ILLIQUID BANKS, FINANCIAL STABILITY, AND INTEREST RATE POLICY

                                      Douglas W. Diamond
                                        Raghuram Rajan

                                      Working Paper 16994
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w16994


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2011




We thank the National Science Foundation and the Center for Research on Securities Prices at
Chicago Booth for research support. Rajan also thanks the Initiative on Global Markets at
Chicago Booth for research support. We benefited from comments from Guido Lorenzoni,
Monika Piazzesi (the editor), Tano Santos, José Scheinkman, the referees, and seminar
participants at the Harvard University , Princeton University, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
Stanford University, the University of Chicago, the American Economic Association meetings at
San Francisco in 2009, and the February 2009 Federal Reserve Bank New York conference on
Central Bank Liquidity Tools. An earlier version of this paper was titled “Illiquidity and Interest
Rate Policy.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate Policy
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 16994
April 2011, Revised June 2020
JEL No. E4,E5,G2

                                           ABSTRACT

Banks finance illiquid assets with demandable deposits, which discipline bankers but expose
them to damaging runs. Authorities may not want to stand by and watch banks collapse.
However, unconstrained direct bailouts undermine the disciplinary role of deposits. Moreover,
competition forces banks to promise depositors more, increasing intervention and making the
system worse off. By contrast, constrained central bank intervention to lower rates maintains
private discipline, while offsetting contractual rigidity. It may still lead banks to make excessive
liquidity promises. Anticipating this, central banks should raise rates in normal times to offset
distortions from reducing rates in adverse times.


Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu

Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
        Should central banks alter interest rates to deal with episodes of illiquidity and financial fragility?

For instance, Greenspan (2002) has argued that while the Federal Reserve cannot recognize or prevent

asset price booms, it can “mitigate the fallout when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next

expansion.” Others have responded that by following an asymmetric interest rate policy – colloquially

known as the Greenspan put -- a central bank can engender the kind of behavior that makes booms and

busts more likely. In this paper, we ask why episodes of systemic financial sector illiquidity arise, why

private arrangements may be insufficient to alleviate them, how central bank intervention to alleviate

financial stress by lending to markets to reduce the short term real interest rate may be better than other

forms of intervention, and how even such intervention can create the potential for greater instability.


        This paper takes as given a central bank that has developed the credibility to maintain price

stability, and therefore believes it has the room to stabilize (and enhance) real activity. We show that a

willingness to recapitalize banks directly at times of stress, will undermine the discipline induced by rigid

private capital structures – it is not just that what is ex post optimal is not ex ante optimal (e.g., Kydland

and Prescott (1977)), but worse, intervention can undermine private commitment and make the system

worse off. In this sense, undirected interest rate intervention, where the central bank lends to any solvent

bank that needs funds may be better, because it preserves the commitment induced by private contracts,

even while restoring flexibility to the system by bringing down rates in a way that private contracts

cannot achieve. Interest rate intervention to relieve stress may be better than the alternatives!


        However, the central bank’s willingness to intervene when liquidity needs are high by pushing

down interest rates ex post does not just affect expectations of the real interest rate, but also encourages

banks to make commitments that increase the need for intervention – because banks and depositors do not

internalize the costs of interest rate intervention. Expectations of low real interest rates (colloquially the

belief the central bank will stay “low for long”) can increase the future need for low rates. To mitigate

this, the central bank may have to commit to push the interest rate above the natural equilibrium rate in


                                                                                                                 3
states where liquidity needs are low to offset the incentives created by its lowering them when needs are

high. Central banks may need credibility in a new direction. Let us elaborate.


        Our paper studies the effects of policy interventions to alter interest rates in an economy where

short-term debt finances long term illiquid projects. Banks themselves borrow from risk-averse

households, who receive endowments every period. Households deposit their initial endowment in banks

in return for demandable deposit claims (throughout the paper, we focus on demand deposits, though any

form of overnight unsecured debt could be a close substitute). Competition for funds induces banks to

offer deposit contracts that maximize ex ante household utility. There is no uncertainty about the average

quality of a bank’s projects in our model. However, there is uncertainty about future household

endowments. This, coupled with the mismatch between the long gestation period for the projects and the

demandable nature of deposits, is the source of banking sector difficulties.


        Once households have deposited their initial endowment, and projects have been started, some

households may have an unexpectedly high need to withdraw deposits. One possibility is that they suffer

an adverse shock to current endowment that causes them to want to run down financial assets to consume.

But another is that they anticipate significantly higher income or endowments in the future and want to

smooth consumption. Thus current adversity, as well as anticipated prosperity, can increase current

household demand for consumption goods substantially, a source of financial sector stress when

household claims on liquidity exceed available liquidity.


        As households withdraw deposits to satisfy consumption needs, banks will have to call in loans to

long gestation projects in order to generate the resources to pay them. The real interest rate will rise to

equate the household demand for consumption goods and the supply of these goods from terminated

projects. Thus greater consumption demand will lead to higher real rates and more projects being

terminated. It also leads to lower bank net worth because the bank’s loans pay off only in the long run,

and thus fall in value as real interest rates rise, while the bank’s liabilities, that is demandable deposits, do

                                                                                                                4
not fall in value. Eventually, if the rate rises enough, the bank may have negative net worth and

experience runs, which are destructive of value because all manner of projects, including those viable at

prevailing interest rates, are terminated.


         The fundamental problem is that demandable deposits are non-contingent promises of liquidity,

which are costly to service when the aggregate demand for liquidity is high. We show in section III that

these contacts are constrained efficient given the frictions described there. A key friction is the banker’s

inability to commit his human capital, an agency problem that explains why bank contracts must be

demandable at all times so that the banker does not renegotiate households down (see Diamond and Rajan

(2001)). A second friction that interacts with the first is that it takes time to observe, verify, and

implement contractual contingencies flowing from the aggregate state. If demandable contracts are to be

state contingent, however, their terms will need to be adjusted instantaneously whenever the state

becomes known to significant segments of the depositors, for a delay will cause informed depositors to

run whenever they anticipate a reduction in face value. Frequent changes in state and delays in contractual

adjustments can explain why we do not see state-contingent demandable claims. 2


         Even if a social planner cannot overcome the frictions which lead to the use of deposit contracts,

there may be room for improvement if the planner can use government powers that are not available to

the private sector to restore useful state contingency. The planner could, for example, expropriate

household endowments at date 1 through a uniform (across households) tax after seeing the state, and

transfer the proceeds to the bank. This would make the bank’s resources state-contingent, which would

help it avoid sub-optimal bank runs and liquidation.


         Unconstrained bank bailouts, however, undermines the discipline induced by private contracts.

Banker rent extraction is usually limited by the banker’s fear that he will precipitate runs if he takes too

2
  Relatively quick changes in the face value of claims may be possible for financial institutions such as mutual funds
that hold only traded assets and offer quick but not immediate liquidity, but these will be harder for institutions that
hold illiquid non-traded loans and offer promises of immediate liquidity.

                                                                                                                       5
much. When the authorities are willing to intervene to prevent runs, they exacerbate ex post bank rent

extraction. Ex ante, competitive banks will compensate by making even larger promises to households,

making the system even more rigid, and sometimes even exceeding the authorities’ ability to save the

system. We show unconstrained intervention will make the system worse off.


        However, undirected lending at market interest rates by the central bank to any solvent bank

(funded by possibly forced borrowing from households) may help. Such “liquidity” intervention is still a

bailout -- the private banking sector is insolvent at rates that would prevail absent intervention, and it is

the central bank’s ability to lower overall market rates through its lending that allows it to “bail out” the

banking system (a related point is stressed in Goodfriend and King (1988)). Also, the central bank’s

willingness to lend could leave it a hostage to market expectations – expectations that it will intervene

substantially and push rates down very low could force it to intervene more. Nevertheless, the prohibition

on direct support to insolvent banks prevents it from subsidizing banks even more, and undermining the

disciplinary effect of deposits. Moreover, we show that small non-pecuniary costs associated with

borrowing from the central bank will result in unique interest rate equilibria that minimize ex post central

bank intervention. This form of interest rate intervention by the central bank dominates unconstrained

bailouts.


        As in Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Holmström and Tirole (1998), the

planner/government/central bank’s ability to partially access household endowments allows it to do more

than the private sector. But the authorities’ coercive power is essential. Intervention, even if restricted to

borrowing and lending at market rates, which is seemingly respectful of household property rights, has

real effects only by forcibly changing household consumption opportunities and thus influencing real

liquidation and investment decisions. For instance, interest rate intervention effectively forces some

households to lend at rates they would not choose to voluntarily. If it prevents runs, though, everyone

may be better off ex post.


                                                                                                                6
        Even interest rate intervention is not without problems, however. A lower ex-post interest rate

imposes a lower penalty on banks for having high leverage and reduces the value of maintaining liquidity.

If the central bank is expected to reduce interest rates at times of financial stress, banks will take on more

short-term leverage or make more illiquid loans, thus bringing about the very need for intervention.

While the authorities may want to counter these incentives through ex ante regulations such as minimum

capital requirements, regulations are easily evaded.


        It may be better then for the central bank to change bank incentives by altering its interest setting

behavior. Knowing that it will be politically as well as economically undesirable to allow high rates in

times of financial stress, the central bank may want to indicate it will raise interest rates in normal times

above the market-determined level in order to preserve bank incentives to maintain low leverage and high

liquidity. Stability-focused central banks should also be reluctant to create expectations that real rates will

be low for an extended period for fear that bank responses will make the system more fragile, and force

the central bank to continue keeping rates low (which could work against its goal of price stability).


        In sum then, even while central banks have become more credible on fighting inflation by binding

themselves with inflation targets, they have created more room for themselves to vary real interest rates

so as to affect real activity across periods (see, for example, Borio and Lowe (2002, 2004)). Central

banks may now have to build credibility in a new direction so as to enhance financial stability.


        The rest of the paper is as follows. In section I, we lay out the basic model, in section II, we solve

it, and in section III describe the frictions that make demand deposits part of an optimal mechanism. In

section IV, we consider macroeconomic intervention on interest rates and its effect on ex ante choice of

deposit level and asset liquidity. We then conclude.




                                                                                                                7
                                                   I. The Framework


1.1. Agents, Endowments, Technology, Preferences.


        Consider an economy with risk-neutral entrepreneurs and bankers, and risk-averse households,

over three dates, 0, 1, and 2. Each household is initially endowed with a unit of good at date 0.

Households can invest their initial endowment in banks, which will lend the resources to entrepreneurs.

At date 1, households will get endowment e1 . They also learn their date-2 endowment. Some households

will get a high endowment, e2H at date 2 while the rest will get a low endowment e2L . Let the state at date


1 be indexed by s, with s ∈ { s , s + 1, s + 2,..., s } . States differ in the fraction of households θ that
                                                                                                       S




expect a high endowment in that state, with θ            > θ s . Higher states thus reflect a higher degree of
                                                  s +1



optimism about the economy. State s occurs with probability p s . The state of nature and household types

are not verifiable and in addition, household types are private information.

        Each entrepreneur has a project, which requires the investment of a unit of goods at date 0. The

project produces an uncertain amount Y2 in goods at date 2 if it is not liquidated, with the realization

becoming known at date 1. Y2 is distributed uniformly over the range 0,Y2  . The project produces X 1

at (or after) date 1 if the project is liquidated, where X 1 is greater than the return on storage. Storage is a

one period constant returns to scale investment available to entrepreneurs and bankers each period.

Entrepreneurs have no goods to begin with, and the demand from entrepreneurs looking for funds at date

0 is greater than household supply. Households maximize their expected utility of consumption,

E (log C1 + log C2 ) . Risk neutral entrepreneurs and bankers maximize E (C1 + C2 ) .




                                                                                                                 8
1.2. Financing Entrepreneurs

         Since entrepreneurs have no endowments, they need to borrow to invest. Each entrepreneur can

borrow from a banker who has, or can acquire during the course of lending, knowledge about an

alternative, but less effective, way to run the project. The banker’s specific knowledge allows him to

generate γ Y2 from a project that has just matured, with γ ≤ 1 . Once a banker has lent, no one else

(including other bankers) can learn this alternative way to run the project.

         Because there are more entrepreneurs than households, not all projects are funded. Banks will

lend only if entrepreneurs promise to repay the maximum possible for a loan, Y2 , on demand. If the

entrepreneur fails to pay on demand, he can make a counter-offer to the bank. If that offer is rejected, the

bank takes over the project and either harvests the date-2 cash flow γ Y2 or liquidates the project. 3 All

financial contracts are in real terms – we assume the central bank has achieved a credible commitment to

price level stability.

1.3. Financing Banks

         Since bankers have no resources initially, they have to raise them from households. But

households have no collection skills, so how do banks commit to repaying households? By issuing

deposits of face value D, repayable on demand. In our previous work (Diamond and Rajan (2001)), we

argued that the demandable nature of deposit contracts introduces a collective action problem for

depositors that makes them run to demand repayment whenever they anticipate the banker cannot, or will

not, pay the promised amount. Because bankers will lose all rents when their bank is run, they will repay

the promised amount on deposits whenever they can. Later, we will detail plausible frictions that explain

why demandable deposits are the optimal contract.




3
  For a relaxation of these assumptions, see Diamond and Rajan (2001). In a more detailed model, we could think of
the cash flows being generated over time, with the banker having a sufficient threat each period from his ability to
seize assets and redeploy them that the entrepreneur will pay out some fraction of the cash flows that are generated.

                                                                                                                   9
        Deposit financing introduces rigidity into the bank’s required repayments. Ex ante, this enables

the banker to commit to repay if he can (that is, avoid strategic defaults by passing through whatever he

collects to depositors), but it exposes the bank to destructive runs if he truly cannot pay (it makes

insolvency more costly): when depositors demand repayment before projects have matured and the bank

does not have the means of payment, it will be forced to liquidate projects to get X 1 immediately instead

of allowing them to mature and generate γ Y2 .

        We assume that each bank lends to enough entrepreneurs that the distribution of Y2 among the

entrepreneurs it finances matches the aggregate distribution of entrepreneurs and there is no aggregate

uncertainty about projects. Because the date-0 endowment is scarce relative to projects, banks will

compete to offer the most attractive promised deposit payment D to households per unit of endowment

deposited (henceforth, all values will be per unit of endowment). Since this is the face value repaid on a

unit of good deposited, it is also the date-0 gross promised deposit interest rate.

Timeline

        |--------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|

    Date 0                                       Date 1                                         Date 2
Banks offer deposit terms and             Uncertainty over states,                    Projects mature, loans repaid,
entrepreneurs offer loan                  household date-2 endowments,                and deposits fully withdrawn
repayment terms.                          and project outcomes revealed.              from banks. All agents consume.
Households get initial                    Households get date-1
endowment and deposit in banks.           endowment, decide withdrawals,
Banks lend to entrepreneurs.              and consumption. Banks decide
                                          what projects to liquidate.


                                                II. Solving the basic model

        In what follows, we will start by solving the bank’s decision vis a vis entrepreneurs at date 1, then

the households’ consumption and withdrawal decisions, and finally, the bank’s date 0 decision on what

level of deposit repayment D to offer to maximize household willingness to deposit.

2.1. Bank decisions vis a vis entrepreneurs

                                                                                                                   10
        Let us start our analysis at date 1, once uncertainty is revealed. Let the gross interest rate (total

promised return on date 2 for a unit deposit on date 1) households demand in state s for re-depositing

between dates 1 and 2 be r12s . Through much of the paper, we will focus on the situation where the date-1

interest rate exceeds the return on storage, but storage is easily handled. The bank can get X 1 at date 1 if

the project is liquidated. The maximum it can collect from an entrepreneur with project realization Y2 is

γ Y2 at date 2, and this determines how much the entrepreneur can commit to pay at date 1. So the bank

                                   γ Y2                                 s r12s X 1
liquidates projects with X 1 >           , that is projects with Y  < Y   =        and continues projects with
                                    r12s
                                                                  2    2
                                                                              γ

Y2 ≥ Y2s in return for a promised payment of γ Y2 . Liquidated entrepreneurs get nothing, while

entrepreneurs who are continued retain (1 − γ )Y2 . The present value of the bank’s assets at date 1 (before

                     Y2s               Y
                1                  1 2 γY
withdrawals) is
                Y2   ∫0
                           X 1dY2 + ∫ s 2 dY2 , which is easily shown to fall in r12s .
                                   Y2 Y s r12
                                       2



2.2. Household decisions

        Once uncertainty is revealed at date 1, households decide how much they want to withdraw and

consume so as to maximize their expected utility of consumption. If they anticipate the bank will not be

able to meet its obligations, they will collectively run on the bank, in which case all projects will be

liquidated to pay households. We assume initially that households can coordinate on a Pareto preferred

Nash equilibrium and thus rule out other, panic-based, runs (it will turn out that interest rate policy can

help eliminate panics). We start by considering situations where the bank will meet its obligations.

        When a household does not withdraw all its deposit, its utility is maximized when the marginal

rate of substitution between consumption at dates 1 and 2 is equal to the prevailing deposit rate, r12S , that

           U ′(C1 ) C2
is, when        = = r12S . If household H (with high date-2 endowment) withdraws amount w1H , s at
           U ′(C2 ) C1


                                                                                                                 11
              C2 H , s e2H + ( D − w1H , s )r12s
date 1 then           =                          . A similar expression can be derived for household L with low
              C1H , s       e1 + w1H , s

date-2 endowment. For both households to have an equal marginal rate of substitution (and deposit at a

common rate r12s ), it must be that H households withdraw more so that w1H , s > w1L , s .

                       e2H
Lemma 1: If r12s ≥          , both households leave all their money in the bank at date 1. If
                     e1 − D
  e2H            eH
       > r12s > 2 , neither household withdraws fully from the banking system, but the H household
e1 − D         e1 + D
                                                  e2H            eL
withdraws more than the L household. If                ≥ r12s > 2 , the H household withdraws fully, while
                                                e1 + D         e1 + D
                                                         e2L
the L household maintains some deposits. If                   ≥ r12s , both households withdraw fully.
                                                       e1 + D
2.3. Equilibrium

        Assume first that the bank can repay depositors without failing. In equilibrium, markets for goods

at date 1 and date 2 have to clear. At date 1, goods are produced when banks liquidate projects. Because

                                                                                         r12S X 1s
all banks have the same distribution of projects and will liquidate projects with Y2 < Y = , date-1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                         γ

                              Y2s
                                             r12s ( X 1 )
                                                         2
                         1
liquidation proceeds are
                         Y2    ∫
                               0
                                    X 1dY2 =
                                                  γ Y2
                                                          . Because this should equal the goods consumed by


withdrawing households, it must be that

                                                                         rs ( X )
                                                                                    2

                                         θ w
                                           s   H ,s
                                                      + (1 − θ ) w
                                                              s   L,s
                                                                        =12 1                                 (1)
                                               1                  1
                                                                            γ Y2

where θ is the fraction of H households in state s . An equilibrium at date 1 in state s is an interest rate
         s



r12s and withdrawals by the H and L households, w1H , s , w1L , s such that the date 1 supply of goods equals the

date 1 consumption, banks liquidate enough projects to meet withdrawals, and households do not want to,

or cannot, withdraw more.

Theorem 1:
                                                                                                                  12
(i)           If it exists, the equilibrium is unique.

                                                                                    e2H        s          e2L
(ii)          If there is a set    {r12s , w1H , s , w1L , s } that solves            H ,s
                                                                                           = r   ,          L,s
                                                                                                                 = r12s , and (1),
                                                                             e1 + 2 w1 − D         e1 + 2 w1 − D
                                                                                              12




              with r12s > return on storage, w1H , s ∈ [0, D ),              w1L , s < D , then that is the equilibrium, else if there are

                                                                    e2L
              r12s , w1H , s = D and w1L , s that solve               L,s
                                                                           = r12s , and (1), with r12s > return on storage and
                                                             e1 + 2 w1 − D

                                                                                         γ DY2
              w1L , s ∈ [0, D) , then {r12s , D, w1L , s } is the equilibrium, else {             , D, D} is the equilibrium. 4
                                                                                         ( X1 )
                                                                                                2




       Proof: See appendix.

       Corollary 1:

       (i)        The interest rate r12s , total withdrawals, θ s w1H , s + (1 − θ s ) w1L , s , and the fraction of projects

                  liquidated all (weakly) increase in the fraction θ of high endowment households and in the face
                                                                                    s



                  value of deposits, D.

                  The net worth of banks (date 1 value of assets less deposits) decreases in the fraction θ of high
                                                                                                                                  s
       (ii)

                  endowment households and in the face value of deposits, D.

       Proof: See appendix.

                  Since H households have more date-2 endowment than L households, at any given interest rate

       they will consume (weakly) more at date 1, and hence will withdraw more. This means total withdrawals

       will (weakly) increase in the fraction θ of high endowment households, which means the interest rate
                                                            s



       and liquidation will have to increase to equilibrate the market. Because the present value of the bank’s

       assets decrease with r12s while the value of its deposit liabilities do not, its net worth decreases with θ .
                                                                                                                                      s




       4
         Note that we have assumed the household marginal rates of substitution are not so low that they would be below
       the return on storage. Were that to be the case, we would have to examine the storage return as a candidate, with any
       excess deposits being stored by the bank. The three equations would now solve for the withdrawal by high
       households, the withdrawal by low households, and the amount invested by banks in the storage technology..

                                                                                                                                          13
Note that all these implications would also hold if households differed, not in their date-2 endowments,

but in their date-1 endowments, with H households receiving a lower date 1 endowment (facing poor

current conditions) and, again, expecting higher growth in marginal utility. Much of past analysis has

followed Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and focused on adverse liquidity shocks that are tantamount to

poor current conditions, but it is useful to remember that because consumption and interest rates depend

on anticipated consumption growth, exuberant views of the future could be equally problematic from the

perspective of demands for liquidity. We will focus on this latter aspect through the paper.

2.4. Bank Fragility and the Ex Ante Choice of Deposit Rate

        Let us now examine each bank’s choice at date 0 of the promised payment D to offer for a

deposit of a unit of good. Since the market is competitive and household endowment is scarce relative to

entrepreneurs’ projects, price-taking banks will have to offer a D that maximizes household utility, given

the properly anticipated future interest rates and actions of households, banks and entrepreneurs.

        So long as the bank is not run in any state, a higher D makes households wealthier and better off.

But the bank’s net worth also falls by Corollary 1, and for a given D, is lower in a state with higher θ .
                                                                                                            s



When D is high enough that the bank’s net worth is completely eroded in a state, the bank is run in that

state – which means all projects are liquidated to generate funds to pay depositors, even though at the

prevailing interest rate, some deserve to be continued. Runs are costly precisely because depositors

withdraw money independent of consumption needs or the prevailing rate. Because a depositor’s place in

                                                                     X1                           X
line is random, each running household gets D with probability          and 0 with probability 1 − 1 .
                                                                     D                            D

        Let D Max ( s ) be the promised payment above which a run will be precipitated in state s. From our

                      Max
discussion above, D         falls in s. If deposit repayments could be state contingent, then at date 0, the bank

would offer to pay D Max ( s ) in state s at date 1. But if state-contingent demandable deposit contracts are

not possible (for reasons explained in section III), promised payments will have to be fixed at date 0.


                                                                                                                14
           At date 0, the bank will choose the fixed promised payment to be amongst the set of D Max ( s )

where s ∈ { s ,..., s } . 5 If the promised payment is optimally set at D Max ( s* ) , it will be because the bank


sees a net loss in household expected utility from having a run in state s (in addition to the run in all
                                                                                     *



states s > s ) by setting the promised payment higher
                                                   =  at D D Max ( s* − 1) , even though expected
               *




payments to households will be higher in all states s < s . This then is the basic trade-off banks face in
                                                                     *



setting D higher – commit to paying more in the less optimistic, lower-aggregate-consumption-growth

states but have costly runs in more optimistic states. The higher the probability of state s , and the more

costly the run, the less the desire to push D higher from D Max ( s ) to D Max ( s − 1) . By contrast, the higher

                                               s −1
the probability of less optimistic states,     ∑p
                                               s =1
                                                       s   , and the higher the increase in payout in those states,


D Max ( s − 1) - D Max ( s ) , the greater the incentive to push D higher. Let D Max ( s* ) be the promised deposit

payout that maximizes ex ante household utility. We have

Lemma 2: Consider an increase in the probability of state s + k accompanied by an equal decrease in
                                                                         *



the probability of state s* − j + k , where j and k are both positive integers and j > k – that is , a

rightward shift in probabilities from a state less optimistic than s to one more optimistic. Expected
                                                                              *




                                                                     {                           }
household utility from lower promised deposit payments D Max ( s* + 1)..., D Max ( s ) increases relative to


expected utility from the old optimal D Max ( s* ) , while expected utility from higher promised deposit

              {                                        }
payments, D Max ( s* + k − j )..., D Max ( s* − 1) , decreases. If the probability of states




5
    Suppose not and the bank set the deposit rate at   D̂ where D Max ( s + 1) < Dˆ < D Max ( s ) for two adjacent states.
By increasing D̂ to D Max ( s ) , the bank will not increase the probability of runs, but will pay households more.
Clearly, D ( s ) dominates D̂ . D
          Max                          Max
                                           (1) will always be preferred to Dˆ > D Max (1) .
                                                                                                                         15
{ s ,..., s* + k − j − 1} is small, the new bank-determined optimal promised payment will (weakly)

decrease. Similarly, a leftward shift in probabilities will lead promises to (weakly) increase.

Proof: See appendix.

        The lemma suggests higher probability weights on high consumption growth states, where

liquidity is expected to be tight and interest rates high, will tend to push optimal promised payments

lower. The implication is that in the absence of intervention by the authorities, banks will be more

cautious about promising to supply liquidity when liquidity is scarce and the interest rate is likely to

increase. Promised deposit payments are not pro-cyclical because competition forces banks to internalize

the cost of runs to their depositors.

2.5. Example with Comparative Statics

        Consider an economy with two future states, low ( s ) and high ( s ). Let e1 = 0.65 , e2L = 0.8 ,

e2H =2.5, X 1 =0.95, Y2 =0.0 , Y2 =3.5, γ =0.9, θ = 0.6 , θ =0.3. Let D be set at the maximum deposit
                                                 s         s




face value with no run in either state, D Max ( s ) , which is 1.039. In the s state, the interest rate r12s is

2.15, H households withdraw 0.77, while L households withdraw 0.38. In the s state, the interest rate

r12s is 1.89, the H households withdraw 0.85, while L households withdraw 0.41. Now set D higher at

D Max ( s ) =1.088. The bank is run in the s state, while in the s state, the interest rate is 1.94, the H

households withdraws 0.86 while the L households withdraw 0.43 .

        In Figure 1, we plot the optimal ex ante choice of D (dashed line) for different ex ante

probabilities p s . In this “no-intervention” case, the bank will set D high at 1.088 until the probability of

the high state s exceeds 0.14, at which point households are better off having safe banks with D set lower

at 1.039. Note from Figure 3 that the expected utility of producers (the banks and entrepreneurs) shifts up

substantially when the bank moves to setting a lower safe face value of deposits: The banker gets no rents

when promised deposit payments are set at D Max ( s ) , and many projects are liquidated at the high

                                                                                                                  16
prevailing interest rate reducing the residual value the entrepreneurs expect. But banker cum entrepreneur

expected utility jumps up when the promised payment is set lower at D Max ( s ) , both because the banker is

not forced to pay everything he collects in the s state, and because interest rates are lower so fewer

projects are liquidated. Expected producer rents then decline as the probability of state s increases.

        In sum then, in a competitive environment, the banking system can lever up to the point where it

will fail with some probability when a significant fraction of households become exuberant about the

future (or pessimistic about the present). Exuberance creates more pressure for current consumption,

which the economy may be too illiquid to provide. Consequently, real interest rates rise to restore

equilibrium, and projects are curtailed. The more levered the banking system is to begin with, the more

projects are liquidated, and higher the likelihood of systemic bank failures.

                                          III. Optimal Contracts


        Our analysis thus far can be viewed as a positive theory of the effects of interest rate policy when

demand deposit contracts are taken as given. Demand deposits allow depositors a choice of state

contingent amounts to withdraw, but in a way that could exacerbate banking system stress – deposits are

firm promises of liquidity that are extremely costly to deliver when the overall demand for liquidity is

high. Could the bank (or any other institution in the economy) offer contracts with better properties than

deposit contracts? This section lists a set of frictions where demand deposit contracts are part of an

optimal mechanism to implement constrained optimal allocations – the bank cannot do any better.


        We begin with an environment with very few frictions, which is equivalent to an Arrow-Debreu

complete markets allocation. The optimal full-information and full-commitment state- and household-

type contingent contract would equate the marginal utilities of the households at each date, and equate

their marginal rates of substitution to the marginal rate of transformation between date-1 goods and date-2

goods. We would obtain a “first best” allocation (apart from the distortions cause by the entrepreneur’s

inability to fully pledge his output). However, as we show in detail in the appendix, three key frictions --

                                                                                                          17
that bankers need to commit to collect loan payments, that it is impossible to make the face value of

demand deposits state contingent, and that trade between depositors or between depositors and other

banks cannot be restricted -- ensure there are no feasible contracts with better outcomes than the

demandable deposit contract.


         Specifically, following Diamond and Rajan (2001) and the logic in Hart and Moore (1994),

consider what happens if the banker borrows long term debt (or any other contract which can be

renegotiated) rather than demand deposits. Following these papers, assume the banker can make a

credible threat to not collect the loans unless every lender to the bank makes concessions. Any longer

term debt contract will be negotiated down to the debt holders’ outside option – in this case, the

liquidation value of project loans X 1 . This limits how much the banker can commit to pay, making it

impossible for him to borrow more than liquidation (collateral) value of loans. However, when the banker

has issued demandable claims and then tries to renegotiate depositors down, because deposit claims are

paid first-come-first-served, each depositor sees their outside option as running to get the face value of

their claim whenever other depositors accept a reduced payment and do not run. Any attempt by the

banker to renegotiate deposits will set off a run, lead to full liquidation of loans, and destroy the banker’s

residual claim. Demandable deposits thus allow the banker to pledge his collection skills to unskilled

depositors, commiting him to pay out D, which is more than the underlying collateral value of the claim

X1 .6


         Interestingly, demandability by itself does not constrain the set of feasible allocations – all that is

required for the first best allocation for each household to be renegotiation proof is that at date 1, the

6
 We could also think of an alternative model where the banker can undertake actions that put assets or cash flows
outside the reach of depositors, as in Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond (2004). The need to stop “crimes in
progress” then forces deposits to be short term. Demandability and the first-come, first-served constraint gives
depositors added incentive to monitor the bank. The key difference between Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and
Diamond and Rajan (2001) is that the latter require demandability as a way to limit strategic default (also see Bolton
and Scharfstein ( 1996)), which enhances the bank’s ability to borrow beyond the underlying collateral value of
assets.

                                                                                                                   18
present value of the optimal allocation should be equal the state-contingent demandable claim for that

household type. The household can then achieve its optimal allocation by withdrawing what it needs for

consumption at date 1 and the remainder at date 2 (Hellwig (1994) has a related result).


         Demandability, however, can prevent the value of deposits from being state contingent. Deposit

claims have to be demandable at every instant after contracting; otherwise households can be renegotiated

down. Therefore, the initial promised payment on the deposit has to be a state-independent value, set ex

ante at a level that makes households indifferent between taking out the deposit immediately (and

potentially re-depositing elsewhere) and waiting for the realization of the state to redefine their face value.

This means the face value will sometimes have to be reduced given the state.7 In such states, the bank and

the authorities enforcing claims would have to see the state and adjust the face value down before the

households can withdraw, otherwise each household, anticipating a reduction with certainty, has an

incentive to withdraw before it happens and collect the higher initial face value. If it takes a small amount

of time to alter D , and a significant number of depositors can react faster than that, state-contingent

deposits will precipitate the very runs they seek to avoid. We assume that the speed of face value

adjustment is sufficiently slow that any state-contingency in the face value of deposits is undesirable


         Could household claims be directly contingent on household type? Again, not if the type is

private information and unverifiable, as we assume. The bank can offer households a menu of date 1 and

date 2 payments to try to get them to self select. However, because we assume that each household has

access to the capital market (they can trade deposits with each other, as in Jacklin (1987), or trade with

other banks, and this trade cannot be excluded by contract), all they care about when choosing a stream of


7
  If the deposit face value is set at the lowest possible desired future state-contingent present value, all revaluations
would be up. But in that case, the banker would be able to negotiate depositors down to a state-contingent contract
that promises a utility equivalent to the utility depositors get from the lowest state-contingent face value. To
promise utility higher than this, the banker would have to set the initial face value higher than the lowest future
state-contingent value (the state-contingent contract is renegotiation proof only if the utility the depositor obtains
from withdrawing immediately equals the expected utility from the state-contingent payments). The face value will
therefore have to be reduced in some situations.

                                                                                                                       19
payments is the present value of the claims they are offered, discounted at the market interest rate. Given

a choice, households will pick the highest present value claim and transform it to their preferred payment

stream. This makes it impossible to use their (possibly) different marginal rates of substitution to get them

to self-select streams with different present values.


          In sum then, the limited commitment by the banker, slow adjustment to the state, and the

unverifiability of household types, all imply that the demand deposit contract is the constrained optimal

contract in the absence of intervention by a social planner with powers not possessed by the private

sector.


                                   IV. Macroeconomic Intervention


          We have just seen that demand deposits entailing runs are the constrained efficient contract. We

now examine how a government or planner that has the ability to tax household endowments can help (or

hurt), taking as given the form of the deposit contract, though allowing the bank to change its promised

payments in anticipation of intervention.


4.1. The Purpose of Intervention

          Assume initially that the planner (perhaps elected by households) wants to maximize expected

household utility, subject to meeting a minimum threshold utility for the producers (the banks and

entrepreneurs). If that threshold is low, the planner can be termed household friendly, which is the case

we will focus on in much of this section – the detailed planner problem is laid out in the appendix. Later,

we will examine what happens when the planner might become producer friendly – when she maximizes

the expected utility of producers subject to a low minimum threshold utility for households. In either case,

we will assume the planner wants to avoid the indiscriminate liquidation of entrepreneurs             -- the

characteristic of a run -- and therefore always wants to prevent runs ex post.




                                                                                                          20
            The bank “works” thus far because the rigidity of demand deposits commits the banker ex ante to

pay out. However, if a social planner intervenes in a specific bank when depositors run because the bank

is insolvent, she will be unable to commit to not intervene when they run because the banker is being

opportunistic. Indeed, the banker is disciplined by the collective action problem inherent in demand

deposits (that is, no depositor internalizes the destruction in value, hence the threat of a run is credible),

which will be undone because the social planner will internalize the externalities that depositors ignore.

The bank will no longer be able to promise more than the collateral value of its assets, and the banker will

collect rents ex post. In addition, ex ante, the banker will be pressured by competition to offset the effects

of the anticipated ex post intervention. He will increase the bank’s commitments by promising to pay

depositors even more, making everyone worse off.


            This is why it is helpful to constrain the extent to which the planner can intervene ex post, for

example by limiting him to making loans only to solvent banks. Indeed, to limit intervention to the

minimum needed, this constraint will need to be accompanied by small (non-pecuniary) penalties

imposed on borrowings by banks from the planner. We now elaborate.


4.2. Bailouts by the social planner without commitment.


            We assume the following:


    (i)         The planner knows the date-1 state of the world (perhaps after the passage of time) and can

                alter its actions accordingly. The planner cannot bind himself to a state contingent plan,

                however, and thus has no advantage in this respect over private contracts.


    (ii)        The planner has no ability to collect cash flow from the entrepreneurs or distinguish between

                high Y and low Y entrepreneurs. She cannot observe household types and cannot tax them

                differentially based on their realized endowments.


    (iii)       The planner has no resources other than what can be obtained from households or banks.
                                                                                                                 21
    (iv)       Households and banks anticipate the actions of the planner and act accordingly. 8


Knowing only what is public information, the planner can levy a tax τ ts on household endowments at date

t in state s , where τ 1s ≤ e1 and τ 2s ≤ e 2L , and transfer these resources to the bank. Such a direct bailout

would bolster the bank’s net worth and could prevent a run. Unfortunately, though, the social planner

cannot commit to intervene only in the states where the bank is actually insolvent given prevailing interest

rates. Anticipating the willingness of the social planner to prevent runs, the banker could also threaten to

not collect on loans even when the bank is solvent (a strategic default) unless the planner infuses funds

into the bank. Demand deposits no longer serve to discipline the banker, for knowing that the social

planner will do anything to prevent runs, depositors will not run – the planner can be relied on to

internalize the externality depositors ignored. This means, however, that households will be taxed to pay

for what the banker extracts.


           How much will the banker extract? First consider only date-1 taxes. The social planner will

internalize not just the utility loss to depositors from a run but the entire loss in value of projects that

should be continued at the prevailing interest rate. If the value of saving them is high, as we have

assumed, the banker can extract everything the social planner can obtain in taxes from households. The

banker will demand and obtain e1 at date 1. 9 In states where the bank is insolvent without intervention,

some of that e1 will go to depositors. In states where the bank is solvent, all the e1 will go to the banker.




8
  The planner’s taxation authority plays a similar role in our model as the deposit insurance in Diamond and Dybvig
(1983 ) and the government in Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) by making available for contracting household
endowments that are inaccessible to the banking sector. However, our focus is very different from these models
where the government provides new sources of collateral or explicit transfers of value. While the planner can alter
household consumption decisions and influence interest rates in our model, it can also undo ex post private
commitment, and thereby alter ex ante decisions.
9
  One can consider cases where the banker’s threat is less potent, and he extracts less than the taxation capacity of
the social planner. This will require additional assumptions on relative bargaining power and outside options, and
we do not pursue it further in this paper.

                                                                                                                   22
         Knowing that he will get a direct additional rent in the future, each banker will promise it away in

the ex ante competition for deposits. If D is the optimal level of deposits when there is no expectation of

                I
intervention, D = D + e1 is the optimal level of deposits once the social planner is expected to intervene

– the banker pays for the rents he expects to get by increasing the face value of promises to depositors. As

a result, outcomes with lump sum taxes are exactly the same with intervention as without – indeed, now

ex ante promised payments are so high that even after the maximum intervention, the social planner

cannot save the banks. The bank is run in the same states as it was without intervention; the social planner

taxes households and transfers to banks but the households withdraw an equivalent additional amount

from their higher deposit holdings, so net withdrawals from the bank in each state do not change, and nor

does household consumption. 10


         If the banker can extract more from the planner in high θ states than in low θ states, then his

post-intervention net worth is more positively correlated with optimistic states than his net worth in the

absence of intervention. Households are better off because the banker will promise them more ex ante

(net of taxes) and/or fail in fewer states. The reverse is true if the banker can extract less in high θ states

than in low θ states.


         This suggests what happens when the planner can tax household endowments at both date 1 and

date 2. She can give the bank e1 at date 1 and guarantee the bank e 2L at date 2 (a guaranteed capital

injection). The date-2 guaranteed inflow, however, has a present value that falls in high θ states where

the market clearing r12s is higher. The cum-transfer net worth of the bank relative to the no-intervention



10
   If the social planner cannot save a bank because its liabilities are too great given the planner’s ability to tax and
transfer, she will not have an ex-post incentive to intervene. Intervention will not change the expected net flows that
go to households. However, the distribution of run proceeds to households will be affected. If the authorities do
intervene in a run (by providing all of e1 to banks) but cannot prevent it, households who do not succeed in
withdrawing during the run will be left with zero consumption at date 1. This is a terrible outcome when households
have log utility (or any preferences where the marginal utility of zero consumption is infinite) .

                                                                                                                     23
case now falls with θ . So households are worse off because they are either promised less (net of taxes)

than in the no-intervention case and/or the bank defaults more.


Theorem 2: If the social planner can tax households and transfer to banks, limited only by the extent of

the L household’s endowments, households will be worse off than without intervention.


        If the social planner is anticipated to intervene maximally ex post, ex ante promises by the banker

do not affect the degree of intervention. A cap on D would then only preserve rents for bankers and make

households worse off. Even if the social planner were to set D, anticipating her own intervention ex post

she would favor the higher D.


4.3. Arm’s Length Central Bank Lending to Banks


        Could constraints on the social planner’s ability to intervene ex post improve matters? One

alternative is to allow the social planner to only make loans with tax proceeds, not grants, and only at a

market interest rate (the equilibrium deposit rate) to banks that will be solvent at those rates. This could

be accomplished by requiring that lending be contingent on simultaneous voluntary lending by

households. We will see that small direct loans may be ineffective, but that larger loans can lower

economy-wide interest rates and effectively bring insolvent (at the higher no-intervention rate) banks

back to solvency. However, while arm’s length lending can eliminate direct hold up by banks, banks can

still obtain rents if the planner is anticipated to intervene heavily, so we may need to constrain the planner

even more.


        Specifically, suppose now the planner, henceforth called the central bank, borrows b1s (possibly

forcibly) from household endowments at date 1 and lends the proceeds directly to the bank. It coerces

repayment from the banker at date 2 and gives it to the households (or equivalently, distributes demand

claims on banks of face value r12s b1s back to households at date 1). It is easily shown that a small

intervention may have no effect on interest rates or bank solvency when neither household has fully
                                                                                                               24
withdrawn its deposits at date 1. Intuitively, because household wealth remains unchanged, households

have no reason to change their consumption if they can withdraw an additional amount equivalent to the

amount they are forced to lend out of endowment today. With unchanged consumption, the interest rate

does not change, nor does the amount the bank has to liquidate since the additional loan it receives from

the central bank is completely exhausted by additional withdrawals. In short, because households have

access to the capital market (through their deposits), household choices perfectly offset central bank

actions, a form of Ricardian equivalence (see Barro (1974)).


         Central bank lending need not be neutral. Suppose that H households withdraw their entire

deposit at date 1 even if their endowment is not taxed, or suppose the central bank taxes a larger amount

so that even if H households withdraw their deposits fully, they cannot compensate for the lost date-1

endowment. In either case, b1s > D − w1H , S . This means H households’ date 1 consumption will fall by

b1s − ( D − w1H , S ) relative to the no-intervention case, and their marginal rate of substitution will go up.

But these households are on a corner: they no longer choose to hold deposits in the banking system and

cannot borrow against their future endowment, so their marginal rate of substitution has no effect on the

interest rate. The L households do hold deposits and affect the interest rate. To clear the market, their

date-1 consumption will have to go up to absorb some of the consumption given up by the H households.

In the new equilibrium, their marginal rate of substitution falls, the interest rate falls, and L households do

not make up entirely for the fall in consumption of H households. 11 Overall date-1 consumption falls, and

the required liquidation to meet consumption needs falls, and bank net worth rises.

Lemma 3: (i) If the prevailing no-intervention equilibrium has w1H , S < D , then a loan to the bank,

raised from households, of b1s ≤ D − w1H , S has no effect on the interest rate, on consumption, or bank net


11
  There are limits to how much effect planner lending can have. First, the planner cannot forcibly borrow more than
the endowment, e1 . Second, once it pushes gross interest rates down to the storage return, it cannot push them down
any further since the banks will simply store any funds they obtain, and not pass on lower rates to borrowers.

                                                                                                                  25
worth. (ii) A loan to the bank of b1s > D − w1H , S , raised by taxing households, will reduce the interest

rate the bank faces, increasing bank net worth and reducing project liquidation.

        The central bank in our model affects equilibrium rates, and hence bank solvency, because some

of the participants who are taxed and forced to lend would not choose to lend in the capital market at

market interest rates. Indeed, H households would like to withdraw more to offset the tax at prevailing

interest rates, but they cannot once they have withdrawn their entire deposit. Compensation at market

interest rates at date-2 does not fully make up their loss (because their marginal rate of substitution is

higher). L households that still participate in the market find an altered investment opportunity set –lower

consumption by H households implies projects with lower rates of return can be continued. A lower

putative interest rate (than the earlier no-intervention equilibrium) gives L households the incentive to

consume more, reduces their marginal rate of substitution, and allows the new equilibrium to establish at

a lower interest rate than before. In a richer model where there are a continuum of types, the effects of

intervention will typically be smoother, with a set of types on a corner and not lending voluntarily at

market rates, and policies to affect real rates always having traction.

        Intervention to lower rates makes all households worse off, unless the intervention is necessary to

stop a run; H households (who have withdrawn all deposits in the range where the central bank can affect

interest rates) are forced to consume less at date 1. Even though they are compensated for this at date 2, it

is at an interest rate that is even lower than their already high marginal rate of substitution, so they are

worse off on net. L households use the financial system to save. For them, a reduction in interest rates

reduces their investment opportunity set, making them worse off. Indeed it is easy to show


Lemma 4: Households are better off in state s if the deposit level is set at D Max ( s ) and the central bank

does not intervene than if it is set above D Max ( s ) and the central bank reduces rates to restore solvency.


Proof: See appendix.


                                                                                                                26
4.4. Interest Rate Equilibria and Interest Rate Intervention


           Unfortunately, even under arm’s length lending, the household friendly central bank may be

coerced by market expectations to lower the interest rate below the level that makes the banks just

solvent, leaving rents for the banker at the expense of households. This is because interest rates are

endogenous and depend on the extent to which the central bank is anticipated to intervene. Specifically,

suppose all believe that the central bank will tax and lend the entire date-1 household endowment even if

this is more than needed to restore solvency. The deposit market will then clear at interest rates that are

the lowest feasible given anticipated central bank intervention, and the central bank will have to fulfill

expectations or see banks run. Each banker will enjoy rents (because the bank is more than solvent at that

low rate).


           Put differently, if excess intervention is anticipated (multiple equilibria are now possible based on

the extent to which intervention is anticipated), households will lend at a commensurate low rate so long

as the central bank is expected to lend the necessary quantity to make that rate the equilibrium. Each

banker has an implicit threat to suffer a run by not attracting sufficient deposits to meet withdrawals if the

central bank does not come through. 12 The central bank’s rule that it lends only at the market rate to

solvent banks will not suffice to commit it to be household friendly. The banker gets a rent which rises as

the equilibrium interest rate falls, even though bankers, who are price takers in the deposit market, make

no explicit threats.


12
     Since b1s ≤ e1 , the lowest feasible interest rate is the maximum of the storage rate and the interest that would
prevail without such a floor and with b1s = e1 . The latter interest rate is obtained by solving

e 2L + b1s r12S ,i + ( D − w1L , s ,i )r12S ,i                                            r12s ,i ( X 1 )
                                                                                                         2
                                                   S ,i
                                               = r      and θ S
                                                                D + (1 − θ S
                                                                             =
                                                                             ) w L , s ,i
                                                                                                          + b1s for {r12s ,i , w1L , s ,i } if there is a
          e1 − b1s + w1L , s ,i                                                                  γ Y2
                                                  12                            1


                                                r12s ,i ( X 1 )
                                                                    2

solution with w     L , s ,i
                                       =
                               < D or solving D                 + b1s for r12s ,i if there is not. In the first case, the social
                    1
                                                       γ Y2
planner’s intervention does not force the interest rate so low that the L household withdraws totally from the system,
in the latter case, it does.

                                                                                                                                                      27
         If, however, the central bank introduces a small non-pecuniary cost, δ , of borrowing every

additional dollar from it, over and above the market-established deposit rate, the unique ex post

equilibrium will be the rate preferred by the household friendly central bank. 13 Here is why.


         Banks are price takers in the deposit market, and given the discrete additional non-pecuniary cost

of borrowing from the central bank, will always prefer to exhaust the deposit market before turning to the

central bank. So if banks are solvent without intervention, the equilibrium interest rate bid for deposits

will be the no-intervention market clearing rate, and no banks will borrow from the central bank.

Intuitively, if the equilibrium deposit rate were any lower, thus requiring some borrowing from the central

bank, a banker would have the incentive to deviate and bid the deposit rate up rather than pay the higher

all-in cost for central bank loans.


         Following similar logic, the equilibrium deposit rate when banks are insolvent in the absence of

intervention is the rate at which they are just solvent, and each bank will borrow just enough from the

central bank to bridge the gap in its funding needs. Even though banks have to borrow from the central

bank and incur the non-pecuniary cost, no bank can substitute for central bank funds by raising the rate it

pays depositors for it will become insolvent and not attract any deposits.


Lemma 5: Let solvent banks be able to borrow from the central bank, with bankers paying a non-

pecuniary markup δ to the private market deposit rate. If banks are solvent at the no-intervention rate,

the interest rate that will be bid on deposits will be the no-intervention equilibrium interest rate and no

funds will be borrowed from the central bank. If banks are insolvent at the no-intervention rate and the

central bank can borrow and lend endowments to lower interest rates enough to rescue them, the interest

rate that will be bid on deposits will be the maximum rate that renders banks just solvent, and bankers

will enjoy no rents.

13
  Central banks typically frown upon bankers who borrow from its various facilities. The cost     δ could be thought
of as a loss of banker reputation or an impairment to the banker’s future career opportunities.

                                                                                                                   28
4.5. Discussion of Ex Post Intervention


         We saw that the key to intervening without undoing the private commitment inherent in demand

deposits is to require that the central bank only make arm’s length loans, not grants, to solvent banks. This

however, can result in a multiplicity of equilibria, some of which result in excess intervention and

additional rents for the banks. The central bank can, however, eliminate multiplicity and ensure that the

unique equilibrium is the household friendly one where it lowers rates only if the banks are insolvent, and

even so, only to the point at which banks are just solvent. It does this by creating a small additional non-

pecuniary cost for bankers of borrowing every additional dollar from the central bank. This ensures that

banks exhaust the private deposit market before they turn to the central bank.


         Bagehot’s dictum to central banks, to lend freely but at a penal rate – which presumably means

lending at a pecuniary markup to the market rate -- achieves only some of what our non-pecuniary penalty

achieves. If the system is solvent without central bank intervention, banks will indeed bid the deposit rate

up to the no-intervention equilibrium rate, for the reasons described above. However, if the system is

insolvent without intervention, there will be no equilibrium in which the central bank can restore

solvency. Here is why: Suppose there is one. This will entail some bank borrowing from the central bank.

But any bank will have an incentive to deviate, pay a little more in the deposit market, and substitute

entirely for central bank borrowing. This means the deposit rate will be driven up to the point where a

bank will be just solvent if it can get sufficient funds from the deposit market at that rate to meet its needs.

But if this is the equilibrium deposit rate, there will be insufficient funds in the private deposit market at

that rate for all banks, so banks will have to borrow some funds from the central bank at the penal rate.

This, however, will render them insolvent. 14



14
  Intuitively, the wedge between the central bank lending rate and the deposit market rate creates the incentive and
ability for a bank to deviate from any equilibrium interest rate (where it is just solvent borrowing a blend of funds
from the central bank and the deposit market) and still remain solvent. When the penalty from central bank
borrowing is non-pecuniary, however, there is no wedge between the central bank rate and the deposit market rate,

                                                                                                                    29
          Arm’s length lending by the central bank with a non-pecuniary penalty results in effective

interest rate intervention, allowing it to implement the ex post socially optimal household friendly policy.


4.6. Ex Ante Promises


         Let us turn finally to how anticipation of interest rate intervention will affect date-0 promises. If

the banker knows that the central bank will drive rates lower, he has an incentive to set promised

payments higher to attract depositors. There is an externality here. Each banker sets deposit rates

considering only the benefits their depositors will get from higher promised payments – equally, in

choosing a higher offered payment, depositors ignore the effect of the increased promise on the loans

they, as taxpayers, will have to provide to the bank in the future, because loans to a specific bank are

small when averaged across all taxpayers. Of course, when every bank does this, the cost to the taxpayer,

aggregated across all banks, is high.


         Let D Max I ( s ) be the maximum deposit promises the bank can service at date 1 without a run in

state s if the central bank is anticipated to reduce the rate to the lowest possible level. Clearly

D Max I ( s ) ≥ D Max ( s ) . The promised deposit payment depends on how the central bank determines date-1

rates. One possibility is the central bank sees every bank as too important to fail. If so, the unique

equilibrium is that every bank will choose the same D Max I ( s* ) ∈ {D Max I ( s ),..., D Max I ( s )} to maximize

expected household utility, taking equilibrium central bank intervention as given. The central bank will

not be able to prevent runs for s > s , the central bank will intervene maximally to just keep the system
                                        *



solvent if s = s , while it will intervene less to keep the system solvent (or not intervene at all if the
                 *



system is solvent) if s < s .
                             *




and no bank has an incentive to deviate (by paying a higher deposit rate) from an equilibrium where it is just solvent
borrowing a blend of funds, because by doing so, it will render itself insolvent and attract no deposits. We
conjecture that richer models of monopolistic competition for deposits can produce equilibria with Bagehot-like
pecuniary penalties, though this is left for future research.

                                                                                                                      30
        Another possibility is that the central bank will intervene to lower rates only if sufficient banks

pick deposit levels that would render them insolvent if interest rates are not reduced (a too many to fail, or

strategic complementarity response). In that case, multiple equilibria are possible for promised deposit

payments, one of which is the too important to fail level. This possibility is also emphasized in both

Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007) and Farhi and Tirlole (2012).


        In contrast to the situation with ex post bailouts, the ex ante socially optimal promised deposit

payment, anticipating interest rate intervention, is (weakly) lower than what would be set by banks if they

know they are too important to fail. The central bank not only internalizes the cost to households of ex

post intervention, but also because the extent of the intervention varies with the promised deposit

payment, it would set deposit promises lower than would the market. Indeed, following corollary 4, the

central bank would never set promised payments outside the interval [ D Max ( s ), D Max ( s )] , though

because runs are averted, it would set it (weakly) higher than the no-intervention level.


4.7. Example (continued)


        First, consider the effects of central bank arm’s length lending with no penalty (this case is

termed “unconstrained lending” in the figures). Market expectations can now drive outcomes. If the

central bank is expected to borrow e1 and lend to the maximum extent possible to banks, competitive

banks will promise even more at date 0. If the probability of state s is below 0.017 (see the solid line in

Figure 1) banks choose D = D Max I ( s ) =1.16, which ensures that even the authorities cannot tax and lend

enough to save the banking system in the state s . Clearly, as Figure 2 suggests, the households are

worse off (than with no intervention) under these circumstances because not only is the system not safer

than without intervention, H households lend against their wishes in state s . As the probability of state

s increases, banks offer the lower D Max I ( s ) = 1.155 and can be rescued in both states. Household

expected utility now improves relative to the no-intervention case as the probability of the s state

                                                                                                              31
increases, because the bank would have been run in that state under no intervention. Finally, when the

probability of state s is high, households are again better off with no intervention (following lemma 4)

because the banker sets deposit rates at D Max ( s ) =1.039 if he anticipates no intervention.


        Now consider what happens under the more limited interest rate intervention. Banks will choose

between D Max I ( s ) = 1.155 and D Max I ( s ) = 1.16. When D=1.155 and s = s , the central banker pushes

down rates only to restore bank solvency, and does not tax away the entire household endowment – this is

the benefit of more limited intervention with the additional penalty to central bank borrowing. So

household utility will be higher when D=1.155 under interest rate intervention. In fact, it is high enough

that the banker never chooses to set D=1.16, a level that would prompt a bank run in state s even with

maximal intervention. As discussed above, without the penalty, the banker would choose to set D=1.16

when the probability of the state s is low. So the more limited ex post central bank intervention when it

has to impose an additional non-pecuniary penalty reduces bank incentives to set deposit levels very high.


        In Figures 1 to 3, we plot the promised deposit payments, household utility, and producer utility

under interest rate intervention when the central bank rather than the banker sets promised deposit

payments up front. Deposit promises are (weakly) higher than with no intervention, but lower than with

unconstrained lending. Because payouts are effectively more state contingent than with no intervention,

household expected utility goes up (see Figure 2). Finally, because interest rate intervention allows better

state contingency and higher ex ante promises, producer rents are typically lower than with no interest

rate intervention (see Figure 3).


4.8. Producer Friendly Central Bank


        Thus far, we have assumed the central bank is household friendly – it maximizes household

utility provided a (low) minimum threshold utility is met for producers. What if the central bank could

become producer friendly at date 1 – for example, if it is leaned on by producer-friendly politicians?

                                                                                                           32
         The producer friendly central bank will want to deliver the lowest date-1 rate possible, which

both banks and entrepreneurs prefer. However, if restricted to lending with non-pecuniary penalties, it

will be unable to guide the market rate lower than what a household friendly central bank would achieve.

Thus when the central bank is constrained to lend only when the market will, and with penalties, the

lowest rate it achieves does not depend on its preferences. If, however, it is not required to impose the

non-pecuniary penalty while lending, it will intervene to push down the interest rate to the maximum

extent possible, and this will be the unique equilibrium rate.


         Ex ante though, a permanently producer friendly central bank, unlike the household friendly

central bank in similar circumstances, will want to curb ex ante bank liquidity promises drastically, since

it recognizes that higher promises result in higher date-1 liquidation and higher rates that entrepreneurs

and banks dislike. 15 Thus it might try to reduce deposit promises through some kind of ex ante leverage

limit, or equivalently, a capital requirement. In our model, such regulations could hurt households.

However, there are many ways banks can hide liquidity promises – raising funding through off-balance

sheet vehicles that come back on balance sheet in times of stress, for example. If the extent of ex ante

promises are hard to observe, ex ante regulation may not be effective. We now describe one more way ex

ante liquidity promises may be hard to regulate before suggesting a potential resolution.


                                            V. Improving Ex Ante Incentives.


5.1. Ex Ante Liquidity Choice


         Regulating bank liabilities alone may be ineffective because banks may react to expectations of

low rates by reducing the liquidity of their assets. To see this, consider an extension of the model focusing

on the liquidity of the bank’s portfolio.



15
   A planner that was household friendly at date 0, and expects a high probability that a future planner would be
producer friendly, would instead choose high leverage, D.

                                                                                                                    33
                                                                                                              Y2
         Let the liquidity of a project portfolio be given by a factor Z≥1 , whereby portfolios pay               in
                                                                                                               Z

goods at date 2 if the project is not liquidated, and ZX 1 at (or after) date 1 if the project is liquidated. 16

Thus more liquid portfolios have a greater liquidation value, while sacrificing long run returns. Suppose

that the bank has a choice between two assets with liquidity Z1 and Z 2 respectively, with Z1 < Z 2 .

Suppose that the liquid asset is preferred by households as of date 0. This will be true if the unconditional

probability of being a high type is large and e 2H is large (implying a high value of consumption on date

1). Given D, how do date-1 rates affect liquidity choice?


         A banker will choose the liquidity of his portfolio, taking future state contingent interest rates as

given, to maximize his residual claim. The total value (at date 1) of the bank’s assets in state s is

Z  2 12                      
         s
     Y (r )           Y2
                γ                                                      ∂V
    ∫ X 1dY2 + s ∫ Y2 dY2  ≡ V1 (r12s , Z ) . It is easily seen that S 1 > 0 , that is, a higher
Y2  0         Zr12 Y ( r s )                                       ∂r12 ∂Z
                    2 12




prospective date-1 interest rate makes it more valuable to have a more liquid project portfolio.


         After refinancing deposits and meeting withdrawals at date 1, the date 2 value of the banker’s

                    {                         }
claim is E  Max r12S (V1 (r12S , Z ) − D ), 0  and the banker chooses Z to maximize it. It is easily shown
             
                                 IC
that there is an interest rate r12 whereby the banker prefers, ex-post, the portfolio with asset liquidity Z1

                 S     IC                                                                               IC
in state s iff r12 < r12 . As a result, anticipated rate reductions which reduce interest rates below r12 in

a sufficient number of states will cause banks to choose the more illiquid portfolio with Z = Z1 .



16
   The effect of the price of liquidity on the incentive of banks to hold liquid assets was first studied by Bhattacharya
and Gale (1987), for banks with access to interbank markets for liquidity. Important work in this area includes
Allen, Carletti and Gale (2009), Diamond (1997), Freixas, Martin, and Skeie (2011), Jacklin (1987) and Lorenzoni
(2001). These papers focus on the choice of the fraction of liquid asset holdings, such as cash.



                                                                                                                       34
        Even interventions that merely reduce interest rates to prevent bank insolvency can cause banks

to prefer to be illiquid. The intuition is as follows. As we have seen, intervention causes banks to set D

higher. A higher D reduces the maximum interest rate at which the bank is solvent. By reducing interest

rates in high θ states to make the bank just solvent (zero equity value), the authorities make the value of

the banker’s claim depend only on the low interest rates states where the bank’s residual value is

substantial. The banker chooses ex-ante liquidity to maximize value only conditional on the low θ states

                                                                     S     IC
where his stake is in the money, and if this occurs primarily when r12 < r12 , the banker will choose lower

liquidity than if there was no intervention and, in anticipation, D was set lower.


        The broader point is that more illiquid assets effectively increase a bank’s claim on date-1

liquidity, much as deposit promises do. We have already argued that deposit promises may be hard to

regulate. The liquidity of assets may be even harder to regulate (the fraction of liquid cash on a bank’s

balance sheet is easy to monitor but it is only a small part of its overall liquidity position). This then

suggests that concerned central banks should focus on altering bank incentives through ex post actions.

Fortunately, they have an additional tool: raising rates.


5.2. Intervention to Raise Rates


    The central bank can raise rates by essentially reversing the earlier mechanism to reduce rates; if (i) it

can sell claims against date-2 taxes (i.e., sell government bonds) and transfer the receipts to households at

date1 (ii) it taxes household endowments at date 2 to repay bonds (iii) the no-intervention date-1

equilibrium interest rate is low enough (and date-2 endowments different enough) that at least the H

household withdraws its deposits entirely from the banking system in the absence of intervention.


    This intervention works as follows. Because the marginal rate of substitution of the H household,

prior to intervention, is higher than the pre-intervention market interest rate (which is why H households

withdraw all deposits), H households would fully consume any additional date-1 resources they are given.

                                                                                                             35
By contrast, L households would not change consumption if the interest rate did not change. But this

would mean overall consumption would be higher than without intervention, which would require a

higher market interest rate to clear the date-1 goods market and draw forth the necessary amount of

liquidation. So it must be that in the new post-intervention equilibrium, the interest rate is higher, L

households consume less at date 1 than in the no-intervention equilibrium (so that their new marginal rate

of substitution equals the higher interest rate), while H households consume more.


Lemma 6: If the prevailing no-intervention equilibrium has w1H , s = D , then the central bank selling

bonds to the bank (or L households) and paying the collected resources to households (with date-2

repayment of bonds financed by date-2 taxes on households) will increase the interest rate, decrease bank

net worth and increase project liquidation.


      Households are better off when rates that can be increased are indeed increased, because it both

improves the payoff to depositing as well as narrows the gap between marginal rates of substitution across

households, thus making the interest rate a better measure of the representative household’s marginal rate

of substitution. Ex post, only a household friendly central bank can be relied upon to raise rates when

feasible (the producer friendly central bank will not do so). Ex ante, if the household friendly central bank

is expected to raise rates sometimes when the system is solvent, the banking system will make lower

promises of liquidity, holding more liquid assets or reducing the promises it makes to depositors. This

will move the system towards the central bank’s social optimum.


5.3. Discussion


        Summarizing our analysis, a central bank that promises to cut interest rates conditional on stress,

or that is biased towards low interest rates favoring entrepreneurs and banks, will induce banks to promise

higher payouts or take more illiquid projects. This in turn can make the illiquidity crisis more severe and




                                                                                                           36
require a greater degree of intervention, a view reminiscent of the Austrian theory of cycles. According to

this theory (Rothbard (2008, p11)) the conditions for a crisis are put in place because


“businessmen were misled by bank credit inflation to invest too much in higher-order capital goods [i.e.,
illiquid investment projects that take a long time to mature] …Businessmen were led to this error by the
credit expansion and its tampering with the free-market rate of interest.”

Bank credit inflation is, in turn, caused by an extremely accommodative central bank. The immediate

trigger for the crisis is that (Rothbard (2008, p11))


“new money percolates downwards from the business borrowers to the factors of production in wages,
rents, and interest…people will rush to spend the higher incomes …and demand will shift from the higher
to the lower orders [i.e., from long dated capital projects to consumption goods]. Capital goods industries
will find that their investments have been in error…Higher orders of production have turned out to be
wasteful, and the malinvestment must be liquidated.”

        While the Austrian view seems to rely on banks that are excessively optimistic, our model can

produce crises with rational optimizing banks. The point we make is quite general and transcends the

specifics of the model. Private sector actions, such as financing with ex-ante fragile demandable debt,

have a purpose. The prospect of government intervention to prevent great societal losses can not only

influence those actions – a point that is well understood in the literature – but also undermine their

purpose. In order to prevent an escalating, and ultimately unproductive, sequence of anticipated

intervention and response, authorities may want to commit to much more constrained intervention that

respects the private sector purpose – for instance, undirected interest rate intervention may dominate more

direct recapitalizations or lender-of-last-resort loans to banks.


        However, even with undirected interest rate intervention, competitive banks may have an

incentive to make excessive promises of liquidity – either by promising depositors too much or by

lending to excessively illiquid projects – because they do not internalize the costs of the intervention to

taxpayers. Ex ante regulation to prevent such promises may not be effective. This is why central banks

may want to offset the incentive effects of their inevitable and politically irresistible need to reduce rates

when the banking system is in trouble (a form of time inconsistency identified by Bagehot (1873)) by

                                                                                                              37
raising rates more quickly when they have the economic and political space to do so in normal times.

Indeed, a central bank that is constituted to be household friendly in the context of our model will have

the incentive to do so. Developing such credibility may require shielding the central bank from producer

influences.


5.4. Generalizations and Possible Extensions


        The specifics of our model can be generalized. The authorities need not force households to lend

their endowment; any tax that households cannot avoid will do. For instance, expansionary interest rate

policy by the central bank could be thought of as a combination of a seigniorage tax and lending to banks

(offset eventually by contractionary policy). Alternatively, the authorities could simply cut back public

spending temporarily (which effectively reduces household endowments) to generate the resources to lend

to banks, and these cut backs could be reversed in the future when banks repay loans. Similarly, policies

to raise rates could involve additional spending at date 1, financed by government bond issuances, and

cutbacks in the future. All these interventions are a combination of what is traditionally monetary and

fiscal policy, because we focus not just on central bank actions but also where they get real resources

from.


        Also, the nature of bank moral hazard can be altered (see Diamond (2004)). Instead of

renegotiating down debt claims by threatening to withdraw its human capital, the bank can threaten to

take, or actually take, actions that undermine the ability of investors to collect from it – for instance, by

choosing low portfolio liquidity. The model can then be interpreted as including the shadow financial

system (not just banks), where illiquid assets are funded by short-term debt other than demand deposits.


        We could also ask why the government does not simply hand over claims at date 0 on taxable

household endowments to the households, so that they can trade and write contingent contracts, so as to

replicate some version of optimal interest rate policy with full commitment. One reason is that the

government needs to retain future taxation authority to stop very bad things from happening – for
                                                                                                                38
instance, to stop panics or finance military defense to deter invasions. In the current model, the central

bank’s ability to conduct interest rate policy eliminates the possibility of sunspot-based panic runs. This is

much like deposit insurance in the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model with no uncertainty, where

taxation is off the equilibrium path, and the state usually retains some unused taxation authority so that it

can prevent runs. Also, taxing all future endowment all of the time would lead to unneeded distortions,

and would also give households the incentive to hide endowments from the government. Finally, fixed

costs of intervention would again suggest intervening only when the benefits are high rather than all the

time.


        We have assumed throughout the paper that household endowments are independent of lending

activity. An important extension would be to relate future endowments to the fraction of long dated

projects that are allowed to continue, as in Diamond and Rajan (2005). On the one hand, project

liquidation would reduce future household endowments and thus moderate the immediate demand for

consumption . On the other hand, to the extent that liquidation set off financial panics as in Diamond and

Dybvig (1983), it could create its own momentum for liquidity.


5.5. The Financial Crisis of 2008-2009


        Ours is not intended as a model of the world financial crisis of 2008-2009 (see Diamond and

Rajan (2005, 2009) for more direct analysis). However, the perverse effects of anticipated low interest

rates that we focus on do help us understand the build-up of illiquidity and leverage that contributed to the

2008-2009 crisis. Indeed, there has been empirical work discussing the responsibility of low short-term

interest rates in the United States from 2003 to 2006 (which were persistently below the level suggested

by some versions of the Taylor rule), as well as the “Greenspan Put” (which we interpret as promising to

maintain the low interest rates if the financial system comes under ex-post stress) for the crisis (see

Ioannidou, Ongena and Peydró (2009), and Maddaloni and Peydro (2010)).



                                                                                                             39
                                            VI.      Conclusion


        Our analysis shows why the structure of banks may necessitate ex post interest rate intervention,

which may be better than the alternatives, but anticipation of persistently low short-term interest rates can

lead to socially excessive short-term leverage and incentives to hold excessively illiquid assets relative to

social optima. Even if regulatory liquidity and capital requirements constrain bank actions ex ante,

unregulated parts of the financial system could benefit by setting up special vehicles that replicated bank

structures. Rather than relying on ex ante regulation of banks, central banks may want to improve

financial sector incentives to curtail promises of liquidity by raising interest rates in normal times more

than strictly warranted by market conditions – central banks may need an additional form of credibility

than just being averse to inflation. While our entire model is couched in terms of real goods, we hope in

future work to describe monetary implications, as well as explore the dynamic implications.




                                                                                                              40
                                                                      Appendix

A.1. Why demand deposits are the constrained optimal contract.


Under what circumstances are demand deposits an optimal financing contract for the bank? Before we

impose the constraints which imply their optimality, we begin by imposing only the resource constraints,

the constraint that all contracts (including deposits) are voluntary, and the constraint that a central

planner, like the bank, can only force each entrepreneur to pay a fraction γ of his realized value of Y2 at

date 2. The planner maximizes household utility, taking as given the need to give producers (bank plus

firms) a minimum utility level Λ . By altering this minimum utility level, we can trace out the Pareto

frontier. Start first with a contract that requires household H to receive (or pay if negative) Vt H , s at date t

in state s and similarly for the L household. The planner will never liquidate a project with higher

realization of Y2 before liquidating one with a lower realization, so the socially optimal liquidation policy

is to choose a value Y s such that all projects with realization less than or equal to Y s are liquidated in

                                                           (Y ) 2 − (Y s )2 
                                       Ys              s                     be the value of projects that
state s , with total liquidation value    X 1 . Let ϒ(Y ) =
                                       Y                          2Y        
                                                                            

are not liquidated (the precise functional form is not important, so we write it more generally below). The

unconstrained planner’s problem is:



           Max
 V1H ,s ,V2H ,s ,V1L ,s ,V2L ,s ,Y s
                                       E{θ s [U(e1 + V1H , s ) + U(e 2H + V2H , s )] + (1 − θ s ) [U(e1 + V1L , s ) + U(e 2L + V2L , s )]}


                Subject to :

θs V2L , s + (1 − θs )V2H , s ≤ γϒ (Y s )               (solvency constraint; resources at date 2)




                                                                                                                                       41
                                    Ys
θ s V1H , s + (1 − θ s )V1L , s ≤      X1         (liquidity constraint; resources at date 1)
                                    Y
                                                 Ys                                       
 E{ϒ ( Y s ) – θ s V2H , s − (1 − θ s )V2L , s +    X 1 − θ s V1H , s − (1 − θ s )V1L , s } ≥ Λ   (floor on producer
                                                 Y                                        
                                                                                                    utility level)

V1L , s ≥ −e1 , V1H , s ≥ −e1 , V2L , s ≥ −e 2L , V2H , s ≥ −e 2H   (feasibility constraints: household cannot pay more
                                                                                                    than its endowment)

Y s ∈ [0, Y ] (Feasible liquidation choices)

This is a standard problem equivalent to optimal competitive consumption, production and risk sharing

with complete markets (subject to the ability to commit to make payments). It is easily shown that the

solution to this maximization problem is to equate the marginal utilities of each type of household in each

state. Thus V1H , s =V1L , s and V2H , s = V2L , s − (e 2H − e 2L ) . So we achieve perfect risk sharing. Also it is

optimal to choose Y s such that the marginal rate of transformation of date 2 consumption to date 1

                                              γY s
consumption goods, which equals                      , is equated to the common marginal rate of substitution of the
                                               X1

households. We refer to the solution as the first-best allocation.

We impose a number of additional constraints which prevent the planner from achieving this outcome. To

see how these will work, we add constraints in sequence.


(A1) Assume, as in Diamond and Rajan (2001), that only the bank can collect the loan, and the

banker can threaten credibly at any point in time to not collect the loans he has made unless the

households agree to a lower value of payments.


Given (A1), the only way for households to force the banker to repay them more than the liquidation

value, X 1 , when the banker can make a credible threat not to collect more than this (unless they make

concessions) is to commit themselves to reject offers which are in their collective interest to accept. If



                                                                                                                         42
they choose demand deposits with face value D, they will reject any offer of less than D in favor of

running and forcing liquidation.

We show that the first-best allocation can still generally be achieved with type- and state-contingent

demand deposits. The demandable claim D H , s for the H household (or D L , s for the low type) puts a

lower bound on the present value of what that household type will accept. These claims will be

renegotiation proof because each household can withdraw its entire claim, consume a portion and reinvest

in some other bank at r12s (or trade with other households at this interest rate), which will be the marginal

rate of transformation from the first-best allocation. 17 Let V1H , s , V2H , s be the renegotiation-proof

payments the planner is trying to achieve with a demandable claim for the H household of D H , s . It must

be that for each type τ ∈ {H , L} :

             U(e1 + V1τ ,s ) + U(eτ2 + V2τ ,s ) ≥ max
                                                   τ ,s
                                                        U(e1 + w1τ ,s ) + U(eτ2 + ( Dτ ,s − w1τ ,s ) r12s ) .
                                                     w1


Also, the banker has no incentive to pay more than he is forced to by the deposit claim, so

               max
                τ ,s
                     U(e1 + w1τ ,s ) + U(eτ2 + ( Dτ ,s − w1τ ,s ) r12s ) ≥ U(e1 + V1τ ,s ) + U(eτ2 + V2τ ,s )
                w1


Thus the two weak inequalities imply equality, and the demandable claim determines the present value of

what depositors get. Also feasibility requires w1H , s ≥ −e1 ,w1L , s ≥ −e1 . It is clear then that with a state-

contingent date-0 deposit contract that results in date-1 household-type-specific state-contingent deposit

              H ,s     H ,s     V2H , s      L,s L,s V2L , s
contracts D          =V       +         and D =V1 +          , the first-best allocation can be attained, even
                                 r12s                 r12s
                      1



with limited banker commitment.

Here is why: Each household with deposit claims will maximize utility when it withdraws enough that its

marginal rate of substitution is equal to the marginal rate of transformation r12s in that state. But a

17
  If depositors could not trade with other banks or households, then the bank could force a depositor to take only
date-1 consumption if the depositor withdrew all of his deposit at date 1. Allowing trade improves the depositors’
outside option but does not prevent type and state contingent deposits from implementing the first-best.

                                                                                                                     43
withdrawal by the H household of w1H , s = V1H , s will achieve precisely the required marginal rate of

substitution (since its date-2 demandable claim will then be              (D   H ,s
                                                                                      − w1H , s ) r12s which equals V2H , s by

construction, and payments of V1H , s , V2H , s achieve the required marginal rate of substitution).18 Therefore,

if we have demandable state- and type- contingent deposits, we can address the banker’s inability to

commit to a stream of payments and still achieve the first best. Note that the demandable deposits, by

allowing flexibility in withdrawals, offer a certain amount of type and state contingency.

(A2) There is a time delay between the arrival of information to households about the state and the

quickest possible adjustment in the state-contingent value of claims held by households.

Given (A2), we show that demandable deposit claim cannot be state contingent:

  H ,s
D
=      DH , D
            = L,s
                  DL          ∀s . Here is the rationale: Deposit claims have to be demandable at every

instant after contracting, otherwise households can be renegotiated down. Therefore, the initial promised

payment on the deposit has to be a state-independent value, set ex ante at a level that makes households

indifferent between withdrawing the deposit immediately (and potentially re-depositing elsewhere) and

waiting for the state to redefine their face value. First, we show that there can never be a state-contingent

reduction in face value below the initial value (or any subsequent state-contingent value). The bank and

the legal authorities enforcing deposit claims can see the state and adjust the face value down more slowly

than the households can withdraw. If the households know that a reduction is forthcoming, each

household has an incentive to withdraw before it happens, to collect the higher initial face value. In other

words, to avoid setting off a run, not only do the bank and the authorities have to learn the state before

households can react, they have to also reflect it in the face values. Because it takes a given amount of

time to alter D , and a significant number of depositors can react faster than that, any state-contingent




18
   This is similar to the use of state-contingent deposit contracts in the Hellwig (1994) analysis of interest rate
uncertainty in the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) model.

                                                                                                                           44
reduction in face value will precipitate the very run it seeks to avoid. Therefore, any state contingent

changes in face value would need to specify only state-contingent increases in value.

        Any contract which specifies only state-contingent increases in face value will be renegotiated.

Suppose that the bank set a deposit face which specifies a state-contingent increase above an initial value

λ . After receiving funding, the banker will be able to negotiate depositors down to a contract that
promises a utility equivalent to the utility depositors get from withdrawing    λ immediately. If the banker
renegotiates and offers a contract with a fixed value of   λ in all states, the depositors are as well of
accepting as they are withdrawing and therefore will accept and not start a run. Demand deposit

contracts cannot specify exclusively state-contingent increases.

        A contract which cannot have an increase or decrease in face value is not state contingent. The

time needed to adjust face values to the state of nature also rules out the possibility of making the value of

demand deposits depend on the subsequently realized state contingent interest rate, because the interest

rate would need to be set in the market before any withdrawal is possible. For all these reasons, the first-

best state-contingent demandable deposits are not feasible. Fixed face value demand deposits are

constrained efficient, and will therefore entail runs unless the level of deposits is set a very low level.

(A3) Household type is private information (the bank or planner cannot distinguish H-type

households from L-type households). In addition, trade between households is not observable.

Given that either household type has access to the capital market (they can trade with each other, as in

Jacklin (1987), or trade with other banks), all they care about when choosing an interior amount to

withdraw from a menu of choices is the present value of the claims they are offered, discounted at market

interest rates – given a choice, households will pick the highest present value and transform it to their

preferred payment stream. This makes it impossible for the bank to get them to self-select the maximum

amount that they are allowed to withdraw at date 1 based on their different marginal rates of substitution.

So D=
    H D=
       L D . Not only are state-contingent contracts ruled out, but the possibility of trade in (A3)

rules out type-contingent deposit face values.
                                                                                                              45
Imposing all of these constraints implies that the demand deposit contract implements the constrained
optimal allocations.
A.2. Proof of Theorems and Lemmas

Proof of Theorem 1:

(i).The right hand side of (1) is strictly increasing in r12S . The left hand side is weakly decreasing --

withdrawals decrease in the interest rate, but when D is withdrawn, the household cannot withdraw more.

Thus there is a unique interest rate and withdrawals at which the supply of goods at date 1 equals demand,

and the depositors do not want to, or cannot, withdraw more.

Suppose not. Can there, for instance, be another equilibrium with the same interest rate and different

withdrawal levels? If the households are on their first order conditions at the equilibrium interest rate,

there is a unique withdrawal level consistent with the interest rate. If they are off their first order

condition, they have to withdraw D. So there cannot be another equilibrium with the same interest rate

and different withdrawal levels. Can there be another equilibrium with a higher interest rate? No, because

withdrawals would be (weakly) lower while liquidation would be strictly higher, so (1) would not hold.

Similarly for a lower interest rate.

(ii).Follows by construction.

Proof of Corollary 1:

When both households are on their first order condition, the H household withdraws more than the L

Household. The H household withdraws D fully before the L household withdraws. Hence it (weakly)

withdraws more and w1H , S ≥ w1L , S .

(i).Totally differentiating (1) with respect to θ , we get
                                                       S



                               dw1H , S          S dw1
                                                      L,S
                                                            X 12 dr12S
 (w H ,S
    1      − w1L , S ) + θ S
                                dθ S
                                        + (1 − θ  )       −
                                                    dθ S γ (Y2 ) dθ S
                                                                       =
                                                                       0




                                                                                                             46
          dw1H , S ∂w1H , S dr12S       ∂w1H , S                                                     dw1L , S
  Now             =               where          ≤ 0 from the expressions for w H ,S
                                                                                     . Similarly for          . Thus
           dθ S     ∂r12S dθ S           ∂r12S
                                                                               1
                                                                                                      dθ S
  dr12S                   (w   H ,S
                               1      − w1L , S )
                                                                         ≥ 0 because w1H , S ≥ w1L , S .
  dθ S        X 12       ∂wH , S          ∂wL , S
                    − θ S 1 S − (1 − θ S ) 1S
            γ (Y2 )       ∂r12             ∂r12

             dr12S
  Because          ≥ 0 , it must be that the right hand side of (1) increases in θ S , so the left hand side must
             dθ S
  also increase. Hence θ S w1H , S + (1 − θ S ) w1L , S increases in θ . Finally, the fraction liquidated increases in
                                                                                            S


  r12S , hence it must increase in θ .
                                    S



  Turning to the effect of D, we have on totally differentiating (1):
    dw1H , S             L,S
                     S dw1     X 12 dr12S                dw1•, S
  θ S
             + (1 − θ )      −            =
                                          0 . Now either         =1 if the household is off its first order
     dD                 dD γ (Y2 ) dD                     dD

                                                           1                 S 
                                                                           2
                                                                  •  1  dr12
  condition and has withdrawn everything, or it is given by 1 − e2  S         . Substituting and
                                                           2        r12  dD 
                                                                               
                           dr12S
  simplifying, we get            ≥ 0 . Given r12S increases in D, the other comparative statics follow for the same
                           dD
  reasons as above.

                                                                 Y2 ( r12S )                        Y
                                           1                                            1 2 γ Y2
  (iii).The date-1 asset value of banks is
                                           Y2                       Y2
                                                                       ∫       X 1dY2 +
                                                                                        Y2 Y (∫r S ) r12S
                                                                                                          dY2 while the liabilities are D. The
                                                                                                2       12


  asset value falls in r , so it falls in θ and D. The liabilities increase in D. Hence the net worth (=assets-
                           S                                 S
                          12

  liabilities) falls in θ and D.
                          S




  Proof of Lemma 2.
                      s
  Let U ( p, D ) = ∑ p sU s ( D ) where U s ( D) is the utility of households in state s. Then
                      s

                          s*                                       s
            Max
U ( p, D ( s ))
=                 *
                          ∑pU
                          s
                                  s     s
                                            (D   Max
                                                       ( s )) + ∑ p sU s , Run ( D Max ( s* )) where U s , Run ( D) is the utility of
                                                         *

                                                                  s*

  households in state s when their bank is run and they hold deposits D. Now consider a state t > s . We
                                                                                                                                       *

  have


                                                                                                                                                 47
                                                   s*                                                            t
U ( p, D         Max
                       ( s )) − U ( p, D =
                         *                  Max
                                         (t ))    ∑ p s U s ( D Max (s* )) − U s ( D Max (t ))  + ∑ p s U s,Run ( D Max (s* )) − U s ( D Max (t ) 
                                                    s                                                           s* +1
                                                        s
                                                  + ∑ p s U s , Run ( D Max ( s* )) − U s ( D Max (t ) 
                                                     t +1



Now consider a decrease ∆ in probability in one of the states s* + k − j to the left of s (that is, where
                                                                                                                              *


 j > k ) and a commensurate increase in probability in one of the states s* + k to the right of s* . Then
when s + k ≤ t , the change in U ( p, D Max ( s* )) − U ( p, D Max (t )) is
             *



−∆ U s + k − j ( D Max ( s* )) − U s + k − j ( D Max (t ))  + ∆ U s + k , Run ( D Max ( s* )) − U s + k ( D Max (t ))  . The first term
             *                                *                          *                                  *

                                                                                                                      
                                                                                      s* + k − j
is square brackets is positive because D Max ( s* ) > D Max (t ) so U                              ( D Max ( s* )) > U s + k − j ( D Max (t )) .
                                                                                                                          *



The second term in square brackets is negative because runs are costly and
U s + k , Run ( D Max ( s* )) < U s + k ( D Max (t )) . When s* + k > t , the change in
   *                                    *




U ( p, D Max ( s* )) − U ( p, D Max (t )) is
−∆ U s + k − j ( D Max ( s* )) − U s + k − j ( D Max (t ))  + ∆ U s + k , Run ( D Max ( s* )) − U s + k , Run ( D Max (t ))  . The first
             *                                *                          *                                  *

                                                                                                                            
term is square brackets is positive as before. The second term in square brackets is negative because runs
produce lower household utility when promised deposits are higher, and D Max ( s* ) > D Max (t ) .


Therefore the change in probabilities makes the previous optimal deposit promise, D Max ( s* ) , less
attractive compared to any lower deposit promise, D Max (t ) where t > s . It is also straightforward to
                                                                                                      *


show following a similar logic that any higher deposit promise D Max (t ) where s* + k − j ≤ t < s*
becomes less attractive compared to D Max ( s* ) . What is harder to sign is the change in attractiveness of
deposit promises D Max (t ) where t < s* + k − j . If, however, the probability weight on these states is
small (and assuming finite values), they will not affect the calculations of optimality, and the banker-
chosen optimal will (weakly) move to lower promised deposit payments.

Proof of Lemma 4:

First, it is clear that both types of households are better off in state s if promised deposits are raised
without precipitating a run, i.e., to D Max ( s ) . We then have
                                                                        S
                                                               L , s dr12
dU     L,s
        1      dw        r       LS
                                        dw  12r S
                                                     + ( D
                                                         S − w1     ) dD
                                                                             L,s
    =              −             1
                                            +         12                   1

 dD e1 + w1  dD  e2 + ( D − w1 ).r12  dD  e2 + ( D − w1 )r12S
          L,s          L       L,s   S              L            L,s




                                                                                                                                                   48
                    1                 r12S
    Because                 −                           =
                                                        0 , the first two terms are zero. The last term is positive. So
                e1 + w1L , s e2L + ( D − w1L , s ).r12S
     dU L , s                                                                                  dU H , s
              > 0 . Similarly, if H households are on their first order condition, we can show          > 0 . If
      dD                                                                                        dD
    they are not – either they withdraw everything or leave everything in the bank – their utility clearly
    increases in D.

    Suppose now that we increase D from D Max ( s ) while lowering r12s to keep the bank solvent.
                         L,s
    Post intervention, U =   log(e1 + w1L , s − t ) + log(e2L + ( D − w1L , s + t ).r12S ) such that V (r12S ) = D where V
    is the value of the bank at date 1 (before withdrawals). We then have
                                                                                       dr12S
dU        L,s
          1      dw   dt         L,s
                                    r              dw        r
                                                         dt  12
                                                              S
                                                                S
                                                                  + ( D − w1
                                                                            L,s
                                                                                 +
                                                                                L,st ) dD .
=                   −    − L
                                   1
                                                S 
                                                       −    + L
                                                             12                 1

 dD e1 + w1 − t  dD dD  e2 + ( D − w1 + t ).r12  dD dD  e2 + ( D − w1 + t ).r12S
           L,s                        L,s                                    L,s


    Because the L households are on their FOC, the first two terms sum to zero again. We also have from the
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                1  ( X1 )
                                                                                                           2
                                 dr12S   −1                                  dV                                Y 2γ 
    requirement of solvency that       =                             =
                                              . Simple algebra suggests that                                 −
                                 dD dV
                                            S
                                                                             dr12S             (Y2 )  2γ 2 ( r12S )2 
                                         dr12
        −1
    =        ( Present Value of Bank (after withdrawals) ) . This then means that
        r12S
                  
                r 1 −
                  S         ( D − w1L , s + t )    
                                                   
     dU L , s      Present value of bank 
                 12
                                                   < 0 because if the bank is just solvent after withdrawals, the
      dD            e2L + ( D − w1L , s + t ).r12S
    present value of the bank = (1 − θ )( D − w1L , s ) + t < D − w1L , s + t . What about the H household? With
    lower D, and compensation for taxes at a rate that is less than its marginal rate of substitution, it is worse
    off. So households are worse off if D is set above D Max ( s ) and the planner intervenes to restore
    solvency.




                                                                                                                          49
        References

Acharya, Viral and Tanjul Yorulmazer 2007. “Too many to fail: An analysis of time-inconsistency in

    bank closure policies.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 16 (1): 1-31.

Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Shin 2008. “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability, and Monetary

    Policy.” Proceedings of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Symposium at Jackson Hole.

Allen, Franklin and Elena Carletti and Douglas Gale 2009. “Interbank market liquidity and central bank

    intervention,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (July): 639-652,

Bagehot, Walter 1873. Lombard Street: a Description of the Money Market. London: H. S. King.

Barro, Robert 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy vol. LXXXII

    (1974): 109-175.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto and Douglas Gale 1987. “Preference Shocks, Liquidity and Central Bank Policy.”

    New Approaches to Monetary Economics edited by W. Barnett and K. Singleton, Cambridge:

    Cambridge University Press.

Bolton, Patrick and David S. Scharfstein 1996. “Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors.”

    Journal of Political Economy Vol. 104, No. 1 (Feb.): 1-25.

Borio, C. and P. Lowe 2002. “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus.”

    Working Paper no. 114 (July), BIS.

Borio, C. and P. Lowe 2004. “Securing sustainable price stability. Should credit come back from the

    wilderness?” Working Paper no. 157, BIS.

Diamond, Douglas W. 2004. “Presidential Address, Committing to Commit: Short-Term Debt When

    Enforcement Is Costly.” Journal of Finance Vol. 59, No. 4 (Aug., 2004): 1447-1479.

Diamond, Douglas W. 1997. “Liquidity, Banks, and Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 105 (5):

    928-956.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.”

    Journal of Political Economy 91: 401-419.

                                                                                                       50
Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram Rajan 2001. “Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial

    fragility: A theory of banking.” Journal of Political Economy 109: 287-327.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram Rajan 2005. “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises.” Journal of

    Finance (April 2005): 615-647.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram Rajan 2009. “The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and

    Remedies.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings: 99: 606-10.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole 2012. “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and Systemic

    Bailouts.” American Economic Review 102: 60–93.

Freixas, Xavier and Antoine Martin and David Skeie 2011. “Bank Liquidity, Interbank Markets, and

    Monetary Policy.” Review of Financial Studies 24: 2656-2692.

Goodfriend M. and R. King 1988. “Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy and Central

    Banking.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review 74: 3-22.

Greenspan, Alan 2002. Opening Remarks, Jackson Hole Symposium organized by the Kansas City

    Federal Reserve Bank.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore 1994. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital.”

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 n4 (November 1994): pp. 841-79.

Hayek, Friederich 1935. Prices and Production. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.

Hellwig, Martin 1994. “Liquidity Provision, banking and the allocation of interest rate risk.” European

    Economic Review 38 (7): 1363-89.

Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole 1998. “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.” Journal of Political

    Economy 106 (1): 1-40.

Ioannidou, V. and S. Ongena and J. Peydró 2009. “Monetary policy and subprime lending: a tall tale of

    low federal funds rates, hazardous loan and reduced loans spreads.” European Banking Centre

    Discussion Paper no. 2009–04S.



                                                                                                          51
Jacklin, Charles 1987. “Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions, and Risk Sharing.” In Contractual

    Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, edited by Edward Prescott and Neil Wallace, University of

    Minnesota Press.

Kashyap, Anil K, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2008, “Rethinking Capital Regulation,” in

    Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 431-

    471.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, 1977. "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of

    Optimal Plans." Journal of Political Economy 85 (3): 473–492.

Lorenzoni, Guido 2001. “Excess Interest Rate Volatility in an Intermediated Economy.” Economics

    Working Paper, MIT.

Maddaloni, A. and J. Peydró 2010. “Bank risk taking, securitization, supervision, and low interest rates:

    evidence from lending standards.” Working Paper no. 1248, ECB Series.

Rothbard, Murray 2008. America’s Great Depression. Ludwig von Mises Institute, Auburn, Alabama.




                                                                                                        52
                                      Figure 1: Deposit promises for different
                                                intervention regimes
                           1.18

                           1.16

                           1.14
Promised Deposit Payment




                                                                                      No intervention
                           1.12

                            1.1
                                                                                      Unconstrained lending
                           1.08

                           1.06                                                       Interest rate
                                                                                      intervention--planner-set
                                                                                      deposit levels
                           1.04

                           1.02
                                  0       0.2        0.4        0.6         0.8   1
                                                Probability of high state




                                                                                                                  53
                    1.25       Figure 2: Expected Household Utility for Different
                                             Intervention Regimes
                     1.2



                    1.15
Household Utility




                     1.1                                                        No intervention


                                                                                Unconstrained lending
                    1.05
                                                                                Interest rate intervention --
                                                                                planner-set deposit levels

                      1



                    0.95
                           0        0.2       0.4          0.6        0.8   1
                                          Probability of high state




                                                                                                            54
                          Figure 3: Expected Producer Utility for Different
                                       Intervention Regimes
                   0.25



                    0.2
Producer Utility




                   0.15                                                    No intervention


                                                                           Unconstrained lending
                    0.1
                                                                           Interest rate intervention --
                                                                           planner-set deposit level
                   0.05



                     0
                          0    0.2       0.4          0.6        0.8   1
                                     Probability of high state




                                                                                                       55
