                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOUSEHOLD DEBT AND SAVING DURING THE 2007 RECESSION

                                        Rajashri Chakrabarti
                                           Donghoon Lee
                                       Wilbert van der Klaauw
                                            Basit Zafar

                                        Working Paper 16999
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16999


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We have benefitted from helpful
comments from Andrew Haughwout, Meta Brown and Joseph Tracy. Maricar Mabutas provided excellent
research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Rajashri Chakrabarti, Donghoon Lee, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Debt and Saving During the 2007 Recession
Rajashri Chakrabarti, Donghoon Lee, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 16999
April 2011
JEL No. D12,D14,D91,G01

                                             ABSTRACT

Using administrative credit report records and data collected through several special household surveys
we analyze changes in household debt and savings during the 2007 recession. We find that while different
segments of the population were affected in distinct ways, depending on whether they owned a home,
whether they owned stocks and whether they had secure jobs, the crisis’ impact appears to have been
widespread, affecting large shares of households across all age, income and education groups. In response
to their deteriorated financial situation, households reduced their average spending and increased saving.
The latter increase – at least in 2009 – did not materialize itself through an increase in contributions
to retirement and savings accounts. If anything, such contributions actually declined on average during
that year. Instead, the higher saving rate appears to reflect a considerable decline in household debt,
with households paying down mortgage debt in particular. At the end of 2009 individuals expected
to continue to increase saving and pay down debt, which is consistent with what we have observed
so far in 2010. In contrast, consumers were pessimistic about the availability of credit, with credit
expected to become harder to obtain during 2010.


Rajashri Chakrabarti                                Wilbert van der Klaauw
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                    Research and Statistics
33 Liberty Street                                   Federal Reserve Bank of New York
New York, NY 10045                                  33 Liberty Street
Rajashri.Chakrabarti@ny.frb.org                     New York, NY 10045
                                                    Wilbert.vanderklaauw@ny.frb.org
Donghoon Lee
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                    Basit Zafar
33 Liberty Street                                   Federal Reserve Bank of New York
New York, NY 10045                                  basit.zafar@ny.frb.org
donghoon.lee@nyu.edu
1. Introduction

        During the 2007 recession many households saw their wealth decline sharply and
their income and employment opportunities deteriorate. In this paper we use
microeconomic data to analyze changes in household financial decisions during this
period and in particular changes in household saving and debt. More specifically, we
focus on the following three questions: What is the nature and prevalence of financial
distress and how does it vary across households? How have households responded to
these new economic conditions? What are consumers’ expectations about future
economic outcomes and their future financial behaviors?

        Our analysis in this paper is based on several unique data sources. First, the
FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel, which is based on credit report records, provides
detailed insights into developments at the liability side of household balance sheets since
1999. Second, we use information on household financial decisions and expectations,
such as on spending and saving, from several recent household surveys. We analyze
survey evidence collected between November 2008 and February 2009 by RAND to
assess the impact of the financial crisis. 2 In addition, and of particular importance for this
study, we analyze data we collected ourselves through a special survey on saving,
administered between the end of October 2009 and January 2010 as part of the
Household Inflation Expectations Project. 3 Both the RAND and NYFed surveys were
administered as part of the RAND American Life Panel (ALP), an internet-based survey.
Brief descriptions of the ALP and the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel are provided in the
Appendix. We also verified some of our findings using data from the Consumer Finance
Monthly (CFM), a monthly telephone survey conducted by Ohio State University since
2005.

        We begin in section 2 with an analysis of the extent and nature of the impact of
the financial and economic crisis on households. We focus on four main channels,
distinguishing between changes in the housing market, stock market, labor market and
credit market. In section 3 we evaluate the different ways in which households have
responded to these changes in their economic environment. We then assess individuals’
expectations regarding future conditions and behavior in section 4, and provide a brief
summary in section 5.

2
  The RAND survey module was designed by Mike Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. Detailed discussions of
related and additional findings from this survey, as well as a number of follow-up surveys, are provided in
Hurd and Rohwedder’s Effects of the Financial Crisis and Great Recession on American Households
(NBER working paper 16407, 2010).
3
  For further information about the Household Inflation Expectations Project, see Improving Survey
Measures of Household Inflation Expectations (Bruine de Bruin, Potter, Rich, Topa and Van der Klaauw,
2010, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol 16(7)).




                                                     1
2. The Nature and Prevalence of Financial Distress during the Recession

    a. The housing market

        Perhaps the most defining aspect of the 2007 recession, and by many considered
to be the origin of the financial crisis, has been the decline in the housing market. As
shown in Chart 1, since reaching a peak in April 2007, by the end of 2009 US house
prices as measured by the FHFA home price index had fallen 13% nationwide. 4 This
overall decrease masks considerable variation across states and metropolitan areas. For
example, average prices dropped by respectively 39% and 38% from their peaks in
California and Florida, while average home prices fell by 4% in Colorado and increased
by 1% in Texas.

         The large increase in home prices up to 2007 (an increase of 44% from 2002
levels) and the decline since then implies that home value losses experienced by
consumers depend greatly on when a home was purchased. Overall in nominal terms only
for those who bought their homes in 2005 or later is the average value of their home
currently lower than what they paid for it. As shown in chart 2, those who experienced
the greatest losses in nominal terms were those who bought their homes in 2007. The
average loss by the beginning of 2010 as measured by the FHFA home price index was a
little over 10% for this group. Interestingly, the average self-reported change in house
value for this group was only about 6% in the NYFed survey. This is consistent with
earlier findings in the literature suggesting that individual perceptions of home price
changes generally are more optimistic than suggested by official numbers. 5

        An important consequence of the initial increase and subsequent fall in average
house prices for households, not conveyed in Chart 2, is the dramatic fall in home equity.
As shown in Chart 3, with the rise in home prices total equity of homeowners rose.
However, it did so at a much lower rate with homeowner’s equity share in their homes
actually staying relatively constant until the end of 2006. On average for each 1%
increase in home prices, homeowners increased their mortgage debt by 1% (through
higher balances on first mortgages, cash-out refinances, second mortgages and home
equity lines of credit), so that proportionally their equity share in their homes actually
remained constant. When home prices began to fall in 2007, owners’ equity in household
real estate began to fall rapidly from almost $13.5 trillion in 1Q 2006 to a little under
$5.3 trillion in 1Q 2009, a decline in total home equity of over 60%. At the end of 2009
owner’s equity was estimated at $6.3 trillion, still more than 50% below its 2006 peak.

4
  Other indices, such as the CoreLogic HPI and S&P/Case-Shiller HPIs showed even larger average
declines of up to 30% during this period.
5
  Note that those individuals who bought their homes in 2009 perceived on average that their homes had
increased in value by 6.5% at the end of 2009 (although the median reported change was 0%).




                                                    2
        With the loss in home equity, a growing proportion of homeowners in fact lost all
equity in their homes, finding the mortgage debt on their property to exceed its current
market value. While the decline in house prices was accompanied by a small decline in
the overall home ownership rate 6, the “effective homeownership rate” as defined in
Haughwout et. al. (2010) as the proportion of individuals with a positive amount of home
equity fell since 2007 by more than 7 percentage points (Chart 4) 7.

        Exposure to declines in housing values varied not only geographically, but also
across different age and income groups. As shown in Table 1, ownership rates during the
survey period (November 2009-January 2010) varied from 58% for those under 40, to
78% among those aged 40 to 55, and 84% for those older than 55. 8 Homeownership rates
also increased monotonically with household income, with 50% of those with incomes
under $30K owning a home, while 91% did so among those earning more than $75K.
The home ownership rate among college graduates was 80%, while in what we refer to as
the “bubble states”, the five states that experienced the largest housing booms and/or
busts, the rate was 68%, slightly below the overall sample mean of 72%. 9

        As shown in Table 1, the average and median perceived price declines during the
year preceding the interview date varied little by age, education and income, but were
considerably larger in the bubble states, in which prices during the past year were
believed to have fallen on average by almost 10 percent. Similarly, the proportion of
people who perceived the current value of their home to be lower than what they paid for
it was 35% in the bubble states, whereas for the country as a whole it was 24%. The rate
was also higher among homeowners under age 40 and those with incomes under $30,000,
of whom a much higher proportion bought their homes after 2005.

       Reflecting a greater share of homeowners who have paid off their mortgages, the
proportion of owners who have an outstanding balance on their mortgage is much lower
amongst older individuals. Among homeowners with mortgages, at the end of 2009, 21%
reported to be “underwater” at the time of the survey, with the fraction being the highest


6
  After reaching a peak in 2004, by early 2010 the home ownership rate in the US had declined by almost 2
percentage points from around 69% to 67%. The decline was greatest among younger age groups, varying
from 3% for those younger than 35, 4% for those aged 35-45, 3% for those ages 45-55, and a little over 1%
for those over 65 (Census Bureau, Homeownership by age of householder, NSA).
7
  The Ownership Gap (Haughwout, Peach and Tracy, 2010, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol
16(5))
8
  All survey statistics (for NYFed and RAND samples) presented in this paper are calculated using sample
weights based on population statistics calculated from the 2009 CPS March Supplement survey (see
Appendix).
9
  The ‘bubble states’ include Arizona, California, Florida, Michigan and Nevada.




                                                    3
among those under age 40 (31%) and those living in the bubble states (29%). 10 As
shown in Table 2, these higher proportions of individuals who report to be under water on
their mortgages partly reflect a greater share of homeowners who bought their homes
after 2005. However, it also reflects how much equity was taken out by owners during
the housing boom, with the proportion with negative equity being much larger among
those with higher mortgage debt. Finally, the share of mortgage holders under water is
much higher among investors, defined here as those with three or more first mortgages.
This is consistent with ongoing research based on the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel,
showing that while historically lower, delinquency rates among this group has recently
been much higher than that for non-investors.

        In summary, the direct impact of the housing crisis has been confined to home
owners, who are on average somewhat older and have higher incomes than renters.
Among owners, many saw considerable gains in housing wealth evaporate during the
recession, with those who bought their homes after 2005 (on average younger and with
lower incomes) and those living in one of the bubble states experiencing the largest
nominal losses and most likely to currently be under water on their mortgage. Ultimately,
the impact of the decline in the housing market on a specific household’s financial
situation and behavior will depend on many factors, including where the house is located,
when the house was bought, how it was financed, how much equity was extracted during
the housing boom, the owner’s ability to make mortgage payments and on how long the
household plans to live in the home.


     b. The stock market

        In addition to significant losses in housing wealth during the 2007 recession,
many households experienced considerable losses in their stock market wealth following
the stock market crash in October 2008. As measured by the S&P 500 Index, after falling
more than 45% between the end of 2007 and the beginning of 2009, the stock market has
rebounded somewhat but stocks at the end of 2009 remained approximately 27% below
their peak values (Chart 5).

      Not all households were directly affected by this drop in stock values, with
exposure varying considerably across households. Based on the 2007 Survey of
Consumer Finances, stock market participation rates as measured by the proportion of

10
   A homeowner is defined to be underwater if they answered no to the question “If you sold your home
today, would the proceeds be sufficient to pay off all mortgage loans and any costs of completing the sale?”
The overall rate of 21% is comparable to that computed by First American CoreLogic, which reported that
more than 11.3 million, or 24 percent, of all residential properties with mortgages were in negative equity
at the end of the fourth quarter of 2009 (First American CoreLogic Q4 2009 Negative Equity Report,2010).




                                                     4
families holding stocks directly or indirectly (through mutual funds in pension accounts)
increases monotonically with income from less than 14% for those in the bottom income
quintile to 91% in the top decile (Table 3). A similar positive relationship with income is
found for the average and median stock value held by stock market participants. The
participation rate, as well as the median stock value held among participants has a bell-
shaped relationship with respect to the age of the household head. Reflecting a lower
average income, stock market exposure was also much lower on average for renters.

         The same patterns exhibited by the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances also show
up in responses to the 2008 RAND survey shown in Table 4. In November 2008, 58% of
households reported to directly or indirectly own stocks at a median value of $40,000.
Approximately 90% of stockholders reported a loss in the overall value of their stocks
since October 1, 2008, with 38% reporting losses over 30 percent. Both rates show very
little variation across demographic groups. During a period in which on average the S&P
500 index fell by 24 percent, those reporting positive stock holdings reported a median
25% decline in stock value between Oct 1 2008 and the interview date in November
2008, corresponding to a median loss in value of $12,000. 11 Some 38% of stockholders
reported losses of over 30 percent. While there was little variation in percentage losses
across demographic groups, a percentage loss of 25% translates into very different dollar
values, varying between $4,000 for stockholders under age 40 and those with lower
incomes (incomes under $30,000), and $25,000 for stockholders over 55 and with high
incomes (incomes over $75,000).

        The patterns for stock ownership found in the RAND survey are consistent with
those for pension plan participation in the NYFed survey. Older individuals and higher
income individuals are twice as likely (about 50% versus 25%) to report that they or their
spouse currently are, or ever have been enrolled in a Defined Benefit pension plan.
Similarly, 86 percent of individuals with household incomes over $75,000 report that
they or their spouse currently are or ever have been enrolled in a Defined Contribution
plan (such as a 401K, individual retirement account (IRA), tax deferred annuity or
403(b), 457 thrift savings plan), while only 38 percent reported so for individuals with
incomes under $30,000. Across age groups we find an inverted-U pattern, with 56% of
individuals under age 40 having such a pension plan, 78% of individuals between ages 40
and 55, and 65% of individuals older than 55 ever or currently participating in such a
plan. Thus the decline in the stock market is most likely to have affected middle and
older age individuals and those with higher household incomes.




11
  Averaged over all the daily closings during November 2008, the S&P500 had fallen on average by 24%
since October 1 2008.




                                                  5
     c. The labor market

       Since the recession began, the unemployment rate increased by more than 5
percentage points to 10% at the end of 2009, while the proportion of those marginally
attached to the labor force (which includes the unemployed as well as those involuntarily
working part-time) increased from about 8% in 2007 to 17% at the end of 2009. As
shown in Chart 6, during the past two years there also was a considerable fall in the
average weekly hours of work.

        Not surprisingly, these patterns are reflected in the trends for personal income,
calculated by the National Income and Product Accounts. As shown in Chart 7, between
the end of 2007 and the end of 2009 per-capita real personal income fell by 3.8% with
total compensation and wages falling respectively by 5.8% and 6.7% during this period.
However, as also shown in the chart, per-capita disposable income remained relatively
constant during this period, due to a drop in personal taxes.

        Not all households were equally affected by the decline in the labor market. As
shown in Table 5, unemployment rates as reported in the NYFed survey at the end of
2009 varied considerably by age and geography with younger individuals and those
living in the bubble states more likely to be unemployed at the time of the survey. 12 Not
surprisingly, unemployment was also more prevalent in (and a cause of) lower income
households. The same patterns are found for spousal unemployment -- 8% of respondents
report a job loss by a spouse during the past 12 months. During the survey period, in 14%
of households either the respondent was currently unemployed and/or had a spouse who
had been laid off during the past year. In addition to losing jobs, significant proportions
of respondents reported incurring a pay cut (15%), having to take unpaid furlough days
off (7%), losing 401K matching (8%) and reductions in health benefits (14%) during the
last 12 month. Home owners, individuals over age 55 and those with household incomes
over $75,000 were less likely to report pay cuts or reductions in health benefits.

        As reported in Table 5, the combined impact of employment losses and wage cuts
led to an overall average decrease in pre-tax household income of about 3.9% during
2009, with 19% of individuals reporting losses of 10% of income or higher. While all
demographic groups suffered income losses during the past year, the losses were greatest
among the 40-55 age group (average decline of 5.8%) and among individuals living in
bubble states (4.7%).


12
  The lower overall unemployment rate of 7% in the NYFed sample compared to a national rate closer to
10% at the end of 2009, may be due to a difference between what individuals believe constitutes being
unemployed and how unemployment is officially measured. It may also reflect a lower survey response rate
among the unemployed.




                                                   6
     d. Credit markets

        During a recession in which most interest rates on personal loans fell, the most
significant change in the credit markets was an overall decline in demand for and a
tightening in the supply of credit. 13 As shown in Chart 8, reflecting an overall sharp
decline in the average loan-to-value ratio of new mortgage loans, the proportion of all
mortgage originations with loan/price ratios over 90% dropped steadily from 31% in the
middle of 2007 to about 7% of new mortgages at the end of 2009. 14 At the same time the
proportion of refinances involving a cash-out dropped dramatically from over 70% of
refinances in early 2006 to 35% of refinances at the end of 2009. 15

        Another striking change during the past year has been a decline in the number of
loan accounts opened and a sharp increase in the number of accounts closed. As shown in
Chart 9, the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel indicates that about 319 million accounts
were closed during 2009, while just 166 million were opened. Credit cards have been the
primary source of these reductions: the number of open credit card accounts fell to 394
million by the end of December 2009, a decrease of 78 million (16.5%) from a year
earlier and 20.5% from the peak in 2008Q2.

       Additional insight into the apparent tightening of credit and closing of accounts is
provided in Table 6. During the survey period at the end of 2009, 57% of respondents
perceived that it had become more difficult to obtain credit compared to a year earlier,
while only 12% thought it had become easier. Little variation shows up in these
responses across age and income groups. While 36% of respondents reported to have
closed a credit card account during the past year at their own request, 13% reported to
have had one of their credit card accounts closed by the bank or credit card company,
with the proportion being highest among younger and lower-income respondents and
among those living in one of the bubble states. 16



13
   At the end of 2009, while average rates on credit cards were comparable to those at the end of 2007,
interest rates on fixed rate 30-yr mortgage loans, 48-month new car loans and 24-month personal loans on
average all had fallen by a little over one percentage point since the end of 2007.
14
   After a gradual increase in the average loan-to-value ratio on all mortgage loans which came to a halt at
the end of 2007, by the end of 2009 it had fallen back to 73.9%, a level not seen since early 2004 (FHFA).
15
   During the same period, total cash-out dollars as a proportion of aggregate refinanced originations
dropped from about 30% to 6% (FHFA).
16
   Additional survey data collected by the FRBNY between December 2009 and January 2010 indicated
that about twice as many credit card accounts were closed at the customer’s request than were closed at the
banks’ initiative. Of all cards closed (at own request or not), 43% had a zero balance at the time of closing.




                                                      7
        Finally, approximately equal proportions of respondents reported increases and
decreases in the combined total credit limit on their combined credit cards. Decreases
were more prevalent for the highest income group and those living in bubble states, while
they were less prevalent among the lowest income group (for whom credit limits are
likely to have been low to begin with). Increases in credit limits were instead more likely
to be reported by those under age 40 and with incomes in the $30,000-$75,000 range.


   e. Measures of Overall Distress

        The reported microeconomic evidence of considerable declines in housing and
stock market wealth is consistent with the large drop in per-capita net worth calculated by
the Flow of Funds Accounts and shown in Chart 10. Given the decline in net worth as
well as the weak labor market, it is not surprising that since the middle of 2008 a majority
of respondents in the Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumers considered
themselves to be worse off financially than a year earlier. During the past year only about
20% report that they (and their family) are better off financially than they were a year ago
(Chart 11). When differentiating by age (not shown), we find these trends to apply
equally to all age groups, except that overall ratings of changes in one’s personal
financial situation are persistently somewhat higher (less negative) for younger and lower
(more negative) for older individuals.

        As shown in Table 7, about 68% of consumers in the RAND survey reported in
November 2008 that they had been affected “somewhat” or “a lot” by the crisis. The
proportion of individuals who reported to have been affected a lot, was greatest among
the 40 to 55 age group and among individuals living in one of the housing crisis states. In
the November 2008 survey, a little under half of the respondents reported to be worse of
financially relative to a year ago, with older and lower-income individuals more likely to
report to be worse off than younger and higher income individuals.

        An alternative and arguably more objective measure of financial stress can be
derived based on some of the RAND survey findings discussed earlier. In November
2008, about one third of all individuals reported at least one of three indicators of
financial distress: self or spouse unemployed, have negative equity in their home, lost
more than 30% of their retirement savings. While unemployment and negative home
equity were more concentrated among younger individuals, large retirement savings
losses were more common among those 40 years of age or older, and especially among
the 40-55 age group. Comparing across income groups, we find that while unemployment
was more frequently experienced by individuals in low-income families, negative equity
and large retirement savings losses were instead much more common in higher-income
households. The same is true when comparing those with and without college degrees.




                                             8
Finally, while individuals living in the bubble states were equally likely to report large
retirement savings losses as those in other states, they were much more likely to be
unemployed and under water at the end of 2008.

        During the November 2009-January 2010 interview period, large proportions of
respondents in the NYFed survey continued to report deteriorating personal financial
conditions, with 36% reporting being worse off and only 13% reporting being better off
than a year earlier. As in the end-of-2008 RAND survey, a larger fraction of individuals
in the 40 to 55 age range reported worsening conditions. About a third of respondents
reported to have experienced one of three types of financial distress: currently
unemployed or have a spouse who lost his/her job during the past year, experienced a
drop in household income over 10% compared to the previous year, or currently being
underwater on their mortgage. The proportion reporting at least one of these types of
distress is somewhat higher among those younger than 40 (39%) and with incomes in the
$30,000 to $75,000 range (37%), and lowest among individuals over age 55 (23%) and
with incomes above $75,000 (28%).

        All in all, the survey evidence indicates that while different segments of the
population were affected in distinct ways, depending on whether they owned a home (and
when they bought it and where it was located), whether they owned stocks and whether
they had secure jobs, the crisis’ impact appears to have been widespread, affecting large
shares of households across all age, income and education groups.




3. How did households respond to the changes in economic conditions?

        After investigating the nature and prevalence of deteriorating economic
conditions during the 2007 recession, we focus next on how households responded to
these changing conditions in their financial decision making. We first discuss changes in
consumer spending behavior, followed by an analysis of changes in saving behavior. In
examining how, at the individual household level, saving behavior may have changed, we
consider the extent to which households changed their allocations to retirement accounts
and how much they added or withdrew funds from other savings accounts. We also
analyze in detail whether and how households reduced or increased their outstanding
mortgage and non-mortgage debt.


   a. Consumer Spending




                                              9
       After reaching a peak in the fourth quarter of 2007, ending a long period of steady
growth, real personal consumption expenditures were down 3.1% by the second quarter
of 2009 and remained 2.4% below the peak in the fourth quarter of 2009 (Chart 12).
Between the end of 2007 and the second quarter of 2009, real personal expenditures on
goods fell by 7.2% (with durable goods expenditures falling 9.9%), expenditures on
services fell by only 1.0%, and expenditures on food and beverages purchased for off-
premises consumption fell by 3.1%. 17

        Chart 13 provides additional information regarding the sharp drop in spending
that occurred during the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Daily
discretionary consumer spending as measured by the Gallup Daily poll dropped 40%
during this period. 18 While consumer spending rebounded somewhat after the first
quarter of 2009, at the end of 2009 it remained about 28% below 3Q 2008 levels. Over
the past two-year period the average percentage change in daily discretionary spending
has been very similar for lower and middle income individuals (defined by Gallup as
incomes below $90,000) and high income individuals (incomes above $90,000).

        Evidence from the RAND and NYFed surveys is consistent with these findings.
As shown in Table 8, as stock prices fell sharply, 75 percent of households reduced their
monthly spending between October 1st 2008 and the interview date in November 2008,
with a median cut reported of 20% or about $200. Spending cuts across demographic
groups were similar, except that among individuals 55 years of age or older a somewhat
smaller share reported reductions in spending, and on average reported smaller spending
cuts. Percentage wise, cuts fell with household income, with those with incomes below
$30,000 cutting spending by 25%, while those with incomes above $75,000 cutting
spending by 15%.

        At the time of the NYFed survey (fielded between November 2009 and January
2010) a slightly higher proportion of individuals reported their current spending to be
lower compared to a year ago (27%) than the proportion for whom it was higher (22%).
On average households reported spending to be 2.2% lower at the end of 2009 than it was
a year earlier, with those aged 40-55, with incomes under $30,000, and living in a bubble
state reporting larger percentage cuts, while older and higher income individuals making
smaller or no spending cuts (see Table 8). The median change in spending was 0%,
which is broadly consistent with the relatively flat trend in personal consumer


17
   Expenditures on goods, services and food at the end of 2009 remained, respectively 5.4%, 0.8% and
1.6% below their levels attained at the end of 2007 (Bureau of Economic Analysis, NIPA).
18
   Discretionary spending in the Gallup poll is defined as the money spent or charged during the previous
day on all types of purchases, such as at a store, restaurant, gas station, online or elsewhere, excluding
purchases of a home, motor vehicle, or normal household bills.




                                                     10
expenditures that followed the large drop in spending at the end of 2008 shown earlier in
Chart 12.

        Not surprisingly, spending cuts are strongly related to measures of financial
distress. As shown in Table 9, the large majority of those unemployed at the end of 2009
reported cuts in spending during the year, with spending falling on average by more than
18% for this group. Similarly, those who reported household income losses of over 10%
during 2009 and those who reported to be under water on their mortgage reported
spending approximately 10% and 6% less on average compared to a year earlier, cuts
much higher than the 2.2% average decline in spending during this period in our sample.



       b. Saving

        The relatively stable level of per-capita disposable income shown earlier in Chart
7 combined with what appears to be a persistent drop in personal consumption
expenditures has resulted in a significant and widely reported increase in personal saving
and in the personal saving rate. As shown in Chart 14, the National Income and Products
Accounts (NIPA) Personal Saving Rate as computed by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis increased from historically low levels of around 1 percent in the first quarter of
2008 to recent levels over 6 percent. While the personal saving rate does not directly map
into actual household saving 19, at the microeconomic level, an increase in household
saving could manifest itself as an increase in allocations to retirement and savings
accounts. Alternatively, it could exhibit itself as an increase in allocations used to reduce
or pay off debt, where this could be mortgage debt or debt on other consumer loans, such
as auto, student and credit card loans. In what follows we first present survey evidence on
recent changes in allocations to retirement and other savings accounts. This is followed
by an analysis of survey and administrative data on changes in consumer debt.


           b1. Consumer Allocations to Retirement and Other Savings Accounts

        In the NYFed survey conducted during the November 2009-January 2010 period,
we asked individuals whether they had made any changes to their retirement account
contributions over the past year. As reported in Table 10, while 11% of all individuals
increased their contributions and 3% started contributing to a retirement account
(including Defined Contribution accounts and IRAs) for the first time, 12% decreased
their contributions, 16% stopped contributing all together and 11% prematurely withdrew

19
     For example, the NIPA measure includes income and outlays of non-profit organizations.




                                                     11
funds from their accounts. Those who increased their allocations did so by a median
amount of $100 per month, while those who decreased their allocations did so by a
median amount of $150 per month. 20

        Not only did more individuals report reducing their contributions to retirement
accounts than increasing their contributions, more individuals also report having
withdrawn funds from other savings accounts (including checking, savings and money
market accounts) than having added funds to them. The proportions of individuals who
reported that they on net withdrew funds during the past year from their checking,
savings and money market accounts exceeded the proportions of respondents who
reported that on net they had added funds to each of these accounts. In contrast
approximately equal proportions reported that they on net had added funds to their stock
market accounts, as had withdrawn funds from stock market accounts. All together 25%
of individuals said they had added more than they used up of their total other (non-
retirement) savings during the past year, with a median net annual increase of $5,000.
However, 38% reported that they actually used up more than they added, with a median
reduction of $3,500. Our survey evidence therefore provides little support for the
conjecture that households increased their saving by contributing more to their retirement
and savings accounts.

        Some of the observed changes in allocations to retirement and savings accounts
undoubtedly reflect normal life cycle patterns in saving behavior, with retired individuals
stopping to contribute and beginning to draw down their savings and younger individuals
starting to save or to increase their saving as they advance in their careers. Some of the
differences in reported behaviors across age groups in Table 10 indeed seem to reflect
such life cycle effects. However the changes reported in Table 10, and especially the
large proportions of respondents who stopped contributing or who prematurely withdrew
funds during 2009 are much higher than one would expect to see in a more typical year.

         The impact of the crisis is clearly reflected in the much higher proportion of
lower-income households who stopped contributing or prematurely withdrew funds from
their retirement accounts and the much lower proportion of households that increased
contributions. These households were also much more likely to have used up more than
they added to their other savings accounts. A higher proportion of higher-income

20
  We also asked individuals for the overall percentage change in the total amount of money in their
retirement and other savings accounts over the past year, after including all contributions and withdrawals
during the year as well as changes in the value of funds already in their accounts. Overall respondents
reported an average 3.2% decline in their total retirement account balances and an average 5.1% decline in
balances of their other savings accounts. Given the slight increase in average stock and bond values during
the period considered, this is consistent with an overall net withdrawal of funds from those accounts.




                                                    12
households instead increased their contributions to their retirement account and reported
net additions to their other savings account.


        More insight into this issue is provided in Table 11, which shows changes in
allocations to retirement and other savings accounts for those unemployed at the end of
2009 and for those who experienced income losses over 10% during the past year.
Between 90% and 100% of individuals belonging to these groups report decreasing or
stopping their contributions or report prematurely withdrawing funds from their
retirement account. A much higher share of these groups than in the rest of the sample
also report to have used up funds from their other savings accounts.

        Among reasons provided, many respondents mentioned job, salary and household
income changes as playing a role in their decisions to increase or decrease their net
contributions to their retirement and other savings accounts (Table 12). Perhaps not
surprisingly, among the reasons for increasing allocations, a desire to increase savings for
retirement was the most important factor, with “good time to invest” also often listed as
motivation. Precautionary savings motives were listed as significant factors as well, while
bequest motives and a desire to make up losses in home and stock values were less
frequently mentioned. Among those who decreased net contributions to their retirement
accounts or who used up funds from other savings accounts, a need or desire to pay for
general living expenses, pay bills and reduce debt were most frequently reported as
motivations.

        In our survey we also asked respondents to rate the importance to their household
of a set of alternative reasons for savings in general. The findings, reported in Table 13,
show saving for retirement, precautionary savings motives and saving to pay for a child
or grandchild’s education as the reasons most frequently listed as “very important”.
Saving for retirement is more frequently mentioned by those in the middle and older age
groups and those with household incomes over $75,000. Precautionary savings motives
are generally more frequently mentioned by the 40-55 age groups and those with
household incomes under $30,000. Saving to pay for the education of children or grand
children or to buy a house or car is more frequently mentioned as an important reason for
saving by younger individuals.

        Finally, in addition to measuring changes in net contributions, it is interesting to
analyze whether individuals made changes to how new funds or existing funds in their
retirement and savings accounts were allocated. As shown in Table 14, while
approximately equal proportions increased and decreased the amount of new allocations
used to buy stocks, a larger proportion of respondents rebalanced their stockholding by
reducing their exposure to stocks in the first two months immediately following the stock




                                             13
market crash in October 2008, with about 3% pulling all funds out of the stock market.
Similarly, 18% of respondents in the end-of-2009 survey indicated that they moved some
of their retirement savings to less risky investments. This survey evidence suggests that a
non-negligible number of households appear to have shifted their allocations away from
stocks, implying that not all consumers may have fully benefited from the recent rebound
in the stock market.



         b2. Recent Changes in Consumer Debt

         Before discussing our survey-based evidence on changes in consumer debt, we
first describe recent findings based the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel, a unique and
comprehensive administrative database of credit report records for a large random sample
of US individuals and households. As shown in Chart 15, after reaching a peak at the end
of the third quarter of 2008, overall household debt has fallen steadily, declining by about
$567 billion (4.5%) up to the end of December 2009.

        In order to relate the observed change in total consumer debt to the NIPA measure
of savings, we first distinguish between mortgage debt (on first mortgages, second
mortgages and home equity lines of credit (HELOCs)) and non-mortgage debt (on credit
card loans, auto loans, student loans and other personal loans). Second, we exclude from
the observed quarter-to-quarter changes in overall mortgage debt all changes in debt
associated with home transactions. Third, in computing changes in mortgage and non-
mortgage debt, we exclude amounts charged-off by banks. The resulting measure
describes how much individuals on average are paying down or adding to their debts. 21

        The trends in net changes in mortgage and non-mortgage debt, shown in Chart 16,
reveal that until 2008 net pay-down on mortgage debt was actually negative: the
increases in debt associated with cash-out refinances, second mortgages and HELOCs
exceeded the total mortgage payments consumers were making to reduce mortgage
principals. Since then, consumers have accelerated paying down mortgage debt and, in
2009, mortgage debt was reduced by 140 billion dollars. Similarly, in 2009 consumers on
average started paying down their outstanding non-mortgage debt, even though by a
much smaller amount. Differentiating by loan type, we find that while consumers were
paying down auto loan debt, student loan debt instead has been growing rapidly.



21
  For further explanation and details of this analysis see The financial Crisis at the Kitchen Table: Trends
in Household Debt and Credit (Brown, Haughwout, Lee and van der Klaauw, 2010, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Staff Report, no. 480, December 2010).




                                                     14
       The evidence from the NYFed survey shown in Table 15 is broadly consistent
with recent trends in the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel. A considerably larger
proportion of respondents report decreasing rather than increasing their mortgage debt,
with declines in mortgage debt reported most frequently among the 40-55 age and high-
income groups. While most individuals who reduced mortgage debt reported doing so by
making their scheduled mortgage payments, about 17% mentioned doing so in part by
prepaying principal and 11% did so in part through a refinance. Prepaying and
refinancing were more frequently reported by higher-income individuals and college
graduates. These findings suggest that at least a substantial share of households who
reduced their outstanding mortgage debt did so voluntarily.

        Interestingly, our survey results provide little evidence that households also
reduced non-mortgage debt during the past year. While overall a slightly larger share of
households reduced than increased such debt, on average debt increased by about $400
during the past year. Declines in non-mortgage debt were more likely to be reported by
older individuals and those with household incomes above $75,000. The latter group of
respondents actually reported reducing their non-mortgage debt on average by $2,000
during the past year. Overall this survey evidence is consistent with the findings
presented earlier in Chart 16 of households paying down mortgage debt, but with little if
any reductions in outstanding non-mortgage debt.

        Not surprisingly, individuals who were unemployed at the end of 2009 were less
likely to report reductions in their mortgage debt and more likely to report increases
(Table 16). They were also more likely to report increases in their non-mortgage debt, but
a greater share of such individuals also reported decreases in non-mortgage debt. 22
Overall unemployed individuals reported adding to their non-mortgage debt by $2,300 on
average. Similarly, respondents from households which experienced an income drop of
more than 10% during the year, also were more likely to report increases in their
mortgage and non-mortgage debt.


        b3. Responses in Spending and Savings to Hypothetical Income Shocks

        To get an alternative view of household preferences and intentions for saving and
spending, we asked respondents about their intended responses to a positive shock in
their year-ahead income as well as a negative income shock, to account for a possible
asymmetry in intended response behavior. Responses to both questions are shown in
Table 17. Overall 99% of respondents say they would at least use part of the extra income

22
  Unfortunately, we cannot evaluate with our data the extent to which the observed declines in mortgage
and non-mortgage debt of individuals were due to lenders tightening standards and reducing limits on
revolving credit lines during this period.




                                                   15
to save, invest or pay down debt, with 61% of all respondents saying that they would in
fact use all the extra income for saving and/or for paying down debt. Only 1% of
individuals say that they will spend or donate it all, with another 39% saying they would
spend only some of the extra income. Aggregated across all individuals, on average 41%
of the extra income would be used for saving/investing, 44% for debt payoff and only
15% for spending. Comparing across demographic groups, we find surprisingly little
differences in the expected shares of income to be used for consumption.

       Faced with an unexpected income drop, respondents instead expect to respond
mainly by reducing their spending. Overall, 53% of respondents expect to reduce
spending by the full amount of the shortfall. Only 13% expect to take on some more debt
to cover the shortfall while 41% expect to use some of their savings to cover the lost
income. On average, individuals expect to cover about 74% of the income loss by cutting
spending, 20% by using some of their savings, and 6% by borrowing.

        Care must be taken in interpreting stated intentions as actual future behavioral
responses to realized income surprises. However, the findings appear to suggest that
consumers will be unlikely to increase spending by much if their incomes were to
increase by more than expected, while on the other hand they seem likely to cut spending
quite drastically in response to an unexpected future income shortfall.



4. Households Expectations of Future Conditions and Behaviors

       In this section we analyze what households are expecting for the future. In the
NYFed survey we asked a number of questions eliciting individuals’ expectations
regarding a variety of outcomes and decisions, including their household’s income,
spending, saving behavior and retirement plans.

        We first discuss individuals’ expectations reported at the end of 2009 about
overall economic conditions during the following 12 months. As shown in Table 18,
more respondents expect to see increases than decreases in the unemployment, loan
interest and mortgage rate. However, a slightly higher share expect an increase rather
than a decrease in the average house price at the national level, but on average expecting
an increase of only 0.5% during 2010. Perhaps not surprisingly, expectations about
overall economic conditions vary with experiences of financial distress. As shown in
Table 19, those who are under water are more likely to expect higher unemployment,
interest and mortgage rates. Expectations for those who are unemployed or those who
reported household income losses of over 10% during 2009 do not depict the same
pessimistic picture. In fact, expectations for this group tend to be more optimistic relative




                                             16
to our sample. It is also notable that those who report to be underwater are more likely to
expect home prices to rise in the future, and to expect a higher mean increase in home
prices relative to the entire sample.

        Tables 20 and 21 report expectations about a number of personal outcomes and
decisions. Considering first year-ahead expectations of household incomes, while there
exists considerable heterogeneity in expectations across individuals, overall respondents
are reasonably optimistic, expecting an average increase of 4.1% in their household
income over the next 12 months. Expected increases are higher on average among
younger and lower-income respondents, while older and higher-income respondents
instead on average expect a small decline in their household incomes. 23 Expected
increases are highest on average for financially distressed respondents, i.e., those who
report to be unemployed at the end of 2009 and those who report to have lost over 10% of
household income in 2009 (Table 21). This is consistent with them anticipating finding a
job or experiencing an income rebound in the next 12 months. A similar pattern is found
for wage expectations (asked of those who were employed at the time of the survey at the
end of 2009), with workers expecting an average 3.4% increase in their wages.

        When asked whether they expect to make any changes to their retirement
contributions over the next year, 13% report that they expect to increase their
contributions, 4% expect to decrease contributions and the remainder expect to keep them
unchanged. Older individuals, those with low incomes and those currently under water
are less likely to expect to increase their retirement account allocations. About 29%
expect to add more or to use up less of their other savings accounts during the next year,
while 24% instead expect to add less or use up more of their other savings. Overall older
and lower-income households plan to add less or use more of their other savings than
their younger and more affluent counterparts.

        While over 80% of homeowners with a mortgage expect to pay down some of the
principal on their mortgage loans, some 24% expect to pre-pay some of the principal.
Low income individuals and those unemployed at the end of 2009 are least likely to
expect to pay down some of the principle (64%) and least likely to expect to pre-pay
some of the principal (15%). On the other hand, 6% of homeowners with mortgages
expect to miss payments during the next year, with the rate being as much as 22% for
those with incomes under $30,000 and 30% for those unemployed. Interestingly, the
share of households expecting to miss a mortgage payment during the next year is
actually smaller (1%) in the bubble states than in the nation as a whole. Finally, another



23
  Clearly some of these responses reflect expectations of non-labor income, life cycle behavior (expected
retirement) and rebounds in income by the unemployed expecting to find work.




                                                    17
6% of homeowners with mortgages are expecting to add an additional mortgage or a
home equity line of credit.

        Considering non-mortgage debt we find that 66% of respondents expect to
decrease their combined debt on credit cards, auto loans and student loans and only 4%
expect to increase it. Plans to reduce such debt are slightly more prevalent among
younger individuals and higher-income individuals, and are the highest amongst
individuals who report to be under water on their mortgage.

       A greater share of households expect to increase their monthly spending over the
next 12 months than to decrease it. On average household spending is expected to
increase by 1.7%. Given an average expected increase in pre-tax household income of
4.1%, and assuming a similar increase in disposable income, this implies an average
expected increase of 2.4% in saving or debt reduction. Closely tracking their expectations
of household income increases, younger individuals, those with incomes under $30,000
and those who are under water expect the greatest increases in spending over the next 12
months.

        We also elicited expectations about future retirement, bequests and personal year-
ahead overall financial situation. As shown in Tables 22 and 23, 24% reported that they
had postponed retirement, while 5% now plan to retire earlier. Plans to postpone
retirement were most prevalent among workers over 55 and workers with higher
household incomes. Perhaps not surprisingly given the loss of wealth experienced during
the recession, more respondents report that the chance that they will leave an inheritance
has fallen instead of increased during the past year, with declined chances more likely to
be reported by for those who are financially distressed.

        Asked whether over the next 12 months they expect that it generally will become
easier, harder or equally difficult to obtain credit or loans compared to the past 12
months, about twice as many respondents expect credit conditions to worsen: 39% expect
credit to become more difficult to obtain (with the rate being as high as 59% for those
under water), while 20% expect it to become easier.

        Finally, significantly more respondents expect to be financially better off than
worse off 12 months from now. Comparing across age and income groups, we find that
younger individuals are far more optimistic than older individuals, but find little
differences across income groups. Individuals who are most financially distressed report
the most optimistic expectations.




                                            18
5. Conclusion


        In this paper we first documented the extent to which households were affected by
the declines in the housing, stock and labor markets as well as the heterogeneity in the
impact of these declines across age, income, education groups and geographic areas.
Next, we analyzed the nature of behavioral responses to the shocks in income and wealth,
including changes in spending, contributions to retirement and savings accounts, and
changes in household mortgage and non-mortgage debt. Finally, we assessed people’s
expectations about a large set of behaviors and outcomes going forward, including their
expectations about the labor and housing markets, access to credit, their future spending
and saving behavior, and expectations for paying down debts.

        We found large differences across households in the extent to which they were
affected by the recession, especially by income, age and geography. While considerable
proportions of households were not directly affected by declines in the housing, stock and
labor markets, a large share of households were affected by at least one of these. The
proportion of households that suffered large declines in housing wealth and in retirement
savings, and which experienced large income drops varied across demographic groups,
but the proportion that experienced at least one of these was fairly evenly spread across
groups.

        In response to their deteriorated financial situation, households reduced their
average spending. At the same time, they increased their saving, with the personal saving
rate as measured by the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) increasing
considerably from historically low pre-recession levels. Survey data suggest that if there
indeed was a recent increase in household saving, this increase – at least in 2009 – did not
materialize itself through an increase in contributions to retirement and savings accounts.
If anything, such contributions actually declined on average during the past year. Instead,
the higher saving rate appears to reflect a considerable decline in household debt,
mortgage debt in particular. This suggests that rebuilding net wealth was an important
driver of household decisions. Unlike the period leading up to the current recession,
during which the average mortgage debt pay-down rate was negative (increases in debt
associated with second mortgages, cash-out refinances and home equity lines of credit,
exceeded regular principal pay-downs on existing mortgages), since 2008 it has turned
positive. Similarly, the steady annual increase in outstanding non-mortgage debt (also
referred to as consumer debt) came to a halt in 2009. However, unlike mortgage debt,
consumers made little headway in 2009 in actually lowering total non-mortgage debt,
with some debt such as that associated with student loans continuing to grow steadily.



                                            19
        Regarding individuals’ expectations about the future, we find that individuals
across all demographic groups had moderately optimistic expectations about income and
earnings in 2010. At the end of 2009 consumers expected to increase spending in 2010 by
less than perceived increases in earnings and income, and expected to pay down debt and
increase savings, suggesting a shift in attitudes regarding saving and consumption. The
implied moderate increase in saving during 2010 is in fact consistent with what we have
observed so far in 2010. While consumers were moderately optimistic about their income
prospects, they were pessimistic about the availability of credit, with access to credit
expected to become even more difficult during 2010.




                                          20
Appendix

The RAND American Life Panel
        The survey data used in this paper were collected through two survey modules
administered over the internet to participants in RAND’s American Life Panel (ALP).
The ALP is an Internet panel of respondents 18 and over. Respondents in the panel either
use their own computer to log on to the Internet or they were provided a small laptop or a
Web TV, which allows them to access the Internet, using their television and a telephone
line. The technology allows respondents who did not have previous Internet access or a
computer to participate in the panel and furthermore use the Web TVs for browsing the
Internet or use email.
        The first survey module we analyze, referred to in the paper as the RAND survey,
was designed by Michael Hurd and Susann Rohwedder to evaluate the effects of the
financial crisis. The survey was fielded from November 2008 to February 2009, with the
vast majority of respondents completing the survey in November 2008. The NYFed
survey on saving behavior was fielded between the end of October 2009 and January
2010, with the vast majority again responding in November 2009. Respondents were
paid an incentive of about $20 per thirty minutes of interviewing. Although respondents
were allowed to skip questions, those who tried to do so received a prompt encouraging
them to provide an answer.
        Most of the participants in both ALP surveys were randomly selected among
participants in the Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumers at the University
of Michigan's Survey Research Center. An additional group of respondents were
recruited through a snowball sample, through referrals of friends and acquaintances.
While all ALP members were invited to participate in the RAND survey on the effects of
the financial crisis, the NYFed survey on saving behavior was restricted to a subset of
newer ALP members - those who participated in the Michigan Survey after December
2006.
        A total of 900 ALP participants completed the NYFed survey, while 2057
members completed the RAND survey. Respondents in the NYFed survey reported an
average age of 50.5, with a median of 51. In total, 58% were female, 66% were married
or living with a partner, 52% had at least a Bachelor’s degree, 81% owned a home and
89% were white. 21% lived in one of the five states that experienced the greatest housing
bubble and/or bust, which were Arizona, California, Florida, Michigan and Nevada. The
median reported income range was $60,000-$75,000, with 43% of the respondents
reporting incomes over $75,000.
        Respondents in the RAND survey reported an average age of 50.0, with a median
of 51. In total, 57% were female, 65% were married or living with a partner, 45% had at
least a bachelor’s degree, 78% owned a home and 90% were white. 22% lived in one of
the five bubble/bust states. The median reported income range was $60,000-$75,000,
with 37% of the respondents reporting incomes over $75,000. For a more detailed




                                           21
description of the sample see Hurd and Rohwedder’s Effects of the Financial Crisis and
Great Recession on American Households (NBER working paper 16407, 2010).
       In all the analyses reported in this paper, sample weights were applied to make the
two samples representative of the U.S. population. The weights were computed to equate
sample proportions to those in the 2009 Current Population Survey, for all population
subgroups defined by homeownership, living in a ‘bubble state’, income under $30,000,
age under 40, and having a college degree.

The FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel
         Some of the analyses in this study are based on credit report data from the
FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel. The panel comprises a nationally representative 5%
random sample of US individuals with credit files, and all of the household members of
those 5%. In all, the data set includes files on more than 15% of the adult population
(aged 18 or older), or approximately 37 million individuals in each quarter from 1999 to
the present. The underlying sampling approach ensures that the panel is dynamically
updated in each quarter to reflect new entries into and exits out of the credit markets, with
young individuals and immigrants entering the sample and deceased individuals and
emigrants leaving the sample at the same rate as in the population of individuals with
credit files. In each quarter, the records of all other household members who shared a
primary individual’s mailing address were also included. Even though all individuals
included in the database are anonymous, the panel allows one to track individuals and
households consistently over time. In addition to the computation of nationally
representative estimates of individual and household level debt and credit in each quarter,
the panel therefore permits a rich analysis of the dynamics of consumer debt and related
policy issues at both the individual and household levels.
         Since the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel data are collected at the borrower level,
they offer a more comprehensive perspective on mortgage debt than is available in
standard loan-level datasets. In addition to detailed data on all debts secured by
residential real estate, the panel includes information on individuals’ and households’
other loans, such as credit cards, auto loans and student loans. More general information
available in the panel include the residential location of the borrower at the census block
level, the individual’s year of birth, the individual’s credit experience such as foreclosure,
bankruptcy and collection, as well as a consumer credit score that is comparable to the
well known FICO score. More details regarding the sample design and data content can
be found in Lee and van der Klaauw (2010). 24




24
  Lee, D. and W. van der Klaauw, “An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel”, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report 479, November 2010.




                                                22
Table 1 Exposure to the housing market decline
                 All     Age                              Income                         College Bubble
                         <40     40-55 >55                <30K       30-75      >75K             States
Obs (unweighted) 899     244     315    340               171        352        376      466     183
% (unweighted)           27      35     38                10         39         42       52      20
% weighted               40      29     31                29         36         35       27      24

% own home            72       58       78       84       50         71         91       80         68

HOME-OWNERS
Aver [median]         -5.3     -5.2     -5.6     -5.2   -5.4         -6.1       -4.7     -4.8       -9.8
price change past     [-2.4]   [-4.0]   [0.0]    [-2.2] [-4.0]       [-2.4]     [-2.0]   [-2.3]     [-7.7]
year
% home worth less     24       37       19       17       27         24         23       23         35
than when bought
% bought home         18       31       13       12       21         18         18       25         19
after 2005
% has mortgage+       57       69       60       43       44         56         64       65         53
% under water*        21       31       18       11       21         22         21       16         29
% under water+        13       23       12       5        10         13         14       10         17
% under water - all   9        13       9        4        5          9          13       8          12
Source: NYFed survey. + among home owners *: among mortgage debt holders
Home ownership based on question: Do you [(or your spouse/partner)] own a home? For the purposes of
this survey a home is defined as a house, condo, apartment, mobile home, etc. (with or without a
mortgage).
‘Under water’ is based on following question: If you sold your home today, would the proceeds be
sufficient to pay off all mortgage loans and any costs of completing the sale?
For those who own more than one home, data used were for most recently purchased home.


Table 2 Characteristics of mortgage debt holders
                                    % Mortgage holders                % Mortgage holders
                                    above water who ..                under water who …
bought home after 2005              16                                29
have mortgage debt <100K            58                                35
have mortgage debt [100K,200K]      29                                34
have mortgage debt >200K            13                                31
own 1-2 homes                            98                           94
own 3+ homes                             2                            6
Source: NYFed survey.
Mortgage debt based on question: Do you [(or your spouse/partner)] have any outstanding loans against
the value of your home(s), including all mortgages, home equity loans and home equity lines of credit? If
yes: Which category represents the total amount of current outstanding loans against your home(s)? [Less
than $25,000, $25,000 to $49,999, $50,000 to $99,999, $100,000 to $149,999, $150,000 to $199,999,
$200,000 to $299,999, $300,000 to $499,999, $500,000 to $799,999, $800,000 or more]
Table 3 Stock market participation in 2007
                              Families having stock                Median value among families
                              holdings, direct or indirect         with holdings (thousands of
                                                                   2007 dollars)
All families                     51.1                              35.0
Percentile of Income
Less than 20                     13.6                              6.5
20-39.9                          34.0                              8.8
40-59.9                          49.5                              17.7
60-79.9                          70.5                              34.1
80-89.9                          84.4                              62.0
90-100                           91.0                              219.0
Age of Head (years)
Less than 35                     38.6                              7.0
35-44                            53.5                              26.0
45-54                            60.4                              45.0
55-64                            58.9                              78.0
65-74                            52.1                              57.0
75 or more                       40.1                              41.0
Housing Status
Owner                            62.5                              41.2
Renter                           26.0                              8.6

Source: Survey of Consumer Finances 2007. See Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007:
Evidence of the Survey of Consumer Finances (Bucks, Kennickell, Mach and Moore, Federal Reserve
Bulletin, vol. 95 (February 2009)).
      Table 4: Changes in stock values and retirement savings
                   All     Age                  Income                           College    Bubble        Home
                           <40 40-55 >55 <30K           30-75           >75K                States        Owner
Nov08
% self/spouse is   58      47    66      64     27      59              82       80         57            68
stock owner
% with stock value 52      40    59      58     24      50              75       72         51            61
loss since Oct 1
2008
% with more than   22      17    28      24     10      20              34       30         24            26
30% loss

Stock owners
median current       40      15     50       95     9          20       76       74         36            55
stock value ($K) *
median reported %    -25     -24    -25      -22    -20        -20      -26      -25        -25           -25
change in value *
median change in     -12     -4     -15      -25    -3         -4       -25      -22        -13           -15
value since Oct 1
2008 ($K) *

Retirement savings
% with fall in      59       48     71       64     37         57       80       79         61            69
value of retirement
savings **
Median percentage 22         20     25       20     20         20       25       20         25            20
decline amongst
those with
decline+
Median $K decline 9.5        3      15       15     2          5        15       15         10            10
amongst those
reporting decline +

Nov09-Jan10
% You/spouse
currently/ever
been enrolled in:
 DB pension plan     37      25     42       49     23         35       52       46         32            46
 DC pension plan     65      56     78       65     38         68       86       79         66            74
 or IRA
 Either              74      61     86       78     45         79       92       86         76            82
     Source: Nov08 data from RAND survey. Nov09-Jan10 data from NYFed Survey.
     *: among stock holders
     **: proportion who answered yes to the question “Have the recent financial problems in the economy
     reduced the value of [your (and your spouse's partner's)] retirement savings?”
+: based on percentage and absolute amount responses to the question “Thinking of [your (and your
[spouse's/partner's])] retirement savings (not including Social Security) how much have they lost in value
as a result of the problems in the economy since October 1st, 2008?”
RAND survey data based on following questions:
In the next set of questions we will ask you about stock holdings [including those held by you and your
spouse/partner jointly, by you only, or by your and your spouse/partner only]. Do [you (or your
husband/wife/partner)] have any shares of stock or stock mutual funds? Please include stocks that [you
(or your husband/wife/partner)] hold in an employer pension account.
Thinking back to the time immediately before October 1st, 2008, that is, before the large drop in the stock
markets, what were [your (and your spouse's/partner's)] stock holdings worth immediately before then?
Please include the value of stocks that you hold directly and the value of stocks that [your (and your
spouse's/partner's)] hold in an employer pension account.
And what are [your (and your spouse's/partner's)] stock holdings worth now?
NYFed survey data based on following questions:
Please indicate whether you [(or your spouse/partner)] currently are or ever have been enrolled in each of
the following types of pension plans:
A Defined Benefit Plan, also known as a traditional employer-provided Pension Plan, which pays a fixed
amount when you retire, where the amount typically depends on your final or average salary.
A Defined Contribution Plan (such as a 401K, individual retirement account (IRA), tax deferred annuity
or 403(b), 457 thrift savings plan) in which workers and/or their employers make contributions to an
account in which money accumulates, and that money can be paid out in a variety of ways depending on
the plan or worker's choice.
     Table 5 Labor Market Experiences Reported at End of 2009
                All Age                 Income                                   College    Bubble      Home
                     <40 40-55 >55 <30K           30-75 >75K                                States      Owner

% Currently      7         8      6        5       12         6        2         7          9           5
unemployed
% spouse lost    8         10     9        5       8          12       5         7          11          9
job
% self or spouse 14        17     14       9       18         17       7         14         18          12
unemployed

% Incurred         15      15     23       8       14         15       16        18         16          15
pay cut
% had to take      7       9      9        3       7          8        8         8          7           6
furlough days
% lost 401K        8       9      8        7       8          9        8         10         11          8
matching
% lost or had      14      17     15       10      17         16       11        14         25          11
health benefits
reduced
Know               64      65     65       63      59         65       68        69         67          68
friends/family
who lost job

Perceived HH
pre-tax income
change past yr:
  Up               27      32     26       22      22         26       33        33         30          25
  Down             32      32     38       27      30         36       29        29         28          34
  Same             41      36     36       51      48         38       38        38         43          41
Mean % change      -3.9    -2.5   -5.8     -3.9    -5.7       -5.4     -0.8      -2.6       -4.7        -4.2
% income loss      19      19     22       15      19         23       13        17         16          19
over 10%
     Source: NYFed survey.
     Based on following questions: During the past 12 months have you (for each answer Y/N): (1) Had a
     spouse/partner who lost a job, (2) Taken a cut in pay, (3) Lost or had your health benefits reduced, (4)
     Had to take furlough days off from work for which you were not paid, (5) Your employer stopped
     contributing to your 401(k) plan, (6) Known friends or family who lost their jobs?
     Was the total combined income of all members of your household during the last 12 months higher,
     lower or the same as the combined income during the previous 12 months? In percentage terms, by
     approximately how much was it higher/lower?
  Table 6 Access to Credit
                   All Age                         Income                        College     Bubble     Home
                       <40        40-55     >55    <30K        30-75    >75K                 States     Owner
Credit access vs.
past yr
   % easier        12 11          13        12     12          13       12       9           6          12
   % tougher       57 61          58        52     55          57       59       63          55         59
   % same          30 28          29        36     33          30       29       27          39         29
Credit card
accounts closed
 % closed by self 36 36           34        38     30          37       40       34          42         36
 % closed by       13 16          12        10     16          12       12       10          15         14
  bank
Change in total
credit limit
 % increase        20 28          15        15     14          24       21       21          21         19
 % decrease        19 20          21        17     15          19       23       18          22         19
 % stayed same 60 52              64        67     70          56       56       61          56         61

 source: NYFed survey.
 Based on following questions:
 Do you believe it generally has been easier, harder or equally difficult to obtain credit or loans during the
 last year when compared to the year before? [Answer options: (1) Easier, (2) Harder, (3) Equally difficult]
 During the past 12 months, did you pay off and close any of your credit card accounts? (only include
 accounts that were closed at your request)
 During the past 12 months, were any of your credit card accounts closed by your bank or credit card
 company? (only include accounts that were not explicitly closed at your request)
 During the past 12 months, did the combined total credit limit (the maximum amount you are allowed to
 borrow on your cards) on all your credit cards that remained open increase, decrease or stay the same?
  Table 7 Measures of Overall Financial Distress
                 All Age                   Income                              College    Bubble     Home
                       <40 40-55 >55 <30K                    30-75    >75K                States     Owner
As of Nov 08*
Affected by
crisis?+
   No            32 35       24      35    40                32       25       25         24         31
   Yes, little   49 49       52      45    44                49       53       54         51         50
   Yes, a lot    19 16       24      19    16                19       22       21         25         19
Personal fin.
situation vs. yr
ago
  Better         10 16       6       6     7                 12       12       14         10         10
  Same           45 48       41      45    46                42       47       42         44         45
  Worse          45 36       53      49    47                46       42       45         46         46

% self or spouse 8        13     7        5       13         8        5        4          12         7
unemployed
OR under water 13         18     12       7       17         13       10       8          18         13
OR lost >30% of 32        31     36       27      24         30       39       34         37         35
retirement
savings

As of Nov 09**
Personal fin.
situation vs. yr
ago
  Better            13    16     13       10      11         12       17       17         10         13
  Same              51    51     47       55      46         50       56       48         52         51
  Worse             36    32     40       36      43         37       28       35         37         36

% self or spouse    14    17     14       9       18         17       7        14         18         12
unemployed
OR drop             27    29     29       21      28         33       18       25         29         26
household
income>10%
OR under water      33    39     34       23      32         37       28       31         36         35
 *source: RAND survey.
 **source: NYFed survey.
 Based on following questions: from RAND survey: Over the past months there have been reports about
 the nation's financial problems including large drops in the stock market and in the housing market and
 increased rates of foreclosures and joblessness. As this financial crisis unfolds more and more people
 have been affected in different ways. Have you (or your husband/wife/partner) been affected by these
 problems?
 We are interested in how people are getting along financially these days. Would you say that you [(and
 your household)] are better off or worse off financially than you were a year ago?
The proportion of respondents with retirement savings losses over 30% is based on answers in the RAND
survey to the question “Thinking of [your (and your [spouse's/partner's])] retirement savings (not
including Social Security) how much have they lost in value as a result of the problems in the economy
since October 1st, 2008?” In the RAND survey, the proportion under water is calculated based on the
perceived current value of a house and the total amount owed on the house. In the NYFed survey the
proportion under water represents households with a mortgage who answered no to the question “If you
sold your home today, would the proceeds be sufficient to pay off all mortgage loans and any costs of
completing the sale?”. In NYFed survey, the proportion with over 10% income drop represents the
proportion of respondents who reported drops of over 10% in the total combined income of all members
of your household during the last 12 months.
  Table 8 Changes in Spending Behavior
                All    Age                         Income                      College    Bubble     Home
                       <40 40-55 >55               <30K      30-75 >75K                   States     Owner
As of Nov 08+
% cut spending 75      77    79     69             76        77       72       71         75         75
since Oct 1 08
Median amount 200 200 200           100            100       200      200      250        200        200
cut ($)
Median % cut    20     20    20     15             25        20       15       15         20         20

As of Nov 09*
hh spending vs.
year ago
  Up               22      20     18       27      24        22       20       25         19         22
  Down             27      29     33       16      33        25       22       23         32         27
  Same             52      50     49       56      43        53       59       52         49         51
Average % chg      -2.2    -2.0   -6.1     1.1     -4.2      -2.0     -0.8     -0.9       -4.6       -2.0

 +source: RAND survey
 *source: NYFed survey
 Based on following question: The next questions are about your household's spending. Please include the
 spending of everyone who lives with you in your household, as well as your own. Consider household
 interest payments on mortgages, amount spent on rent, homeowner's or renter's insurance, vehicle taxes
 and repairs, home repairs, property taxes, utilities, food and groceries, clothing, housekeeping supplies
 and services, garden/yard services, health insurance, drugs, medical supplies and doctor/hospital visits,
 gasoline, personal care products and services, trips and vacations, hobbies and leisure equipment. Also
 include child support and alimony payments, gifts to anyone outside your household and losses from a
 farm, business or professional practice. Exclude money saved or invested, including real estate
 investments like home purchases.
 How does your current monthly household spending compare with your household's monthly spending a
 year ago? [Answer options: Higher now, About the same, Lower now]
 In percentage terms, by how much has your monthly household spending increased [decreased] compared
 to a year ago?

 Table 9. Spending Behavior and Wealth and Income Losses
                 All    Unemployed Lost >10% Under
                                      income      Water

As of Nov 09*
hh spending vs.
year ago
  Up                22        5                  21            18
  Down              27        60                 48            47
  Same              52        35                 31            35
Average % chg       -2.2      -18.2              -9.6          -5.9

 *source: NYFed survey. See notes to Table 8.
   Table 10 Changes in Contributions to Retirement and other Savings Accounts Nov08-Nov09
                    All Age                    Income                  College Bubble     Home
                          <40 40-55 >55 <30K             30-75 >75               States   Owner
Change in
retirement accnt
contributions past
12 months
% Increased contr   11    12     13      9     5         11      14    13        13       12
     Median         100 100      45      300   25        75      150   150       100      100
     Increase ($)
% decreased contr   12    14     12      8     7         12      13    16        9        12
     Median         150 150      160     200   150       100     200   200       150      150
     Decrease ($)
% Started contr     3     6      2       1     3         5       2     1         3        3
% Stopped contr     16    12     13      24    25        19      10    16        22       15
% Prematurely       11    7      13      14    14        17      5     7         12       10
   withdrew

Change in other
savings (vs last yr)
Checking accounts
 % added more –        -8    -7    -15   -3    -15     -10    0      -7        -7        -5
  % withdrew more
Savings accounts
 % added more –        -5    -1    -9    -5    -14     -11    +10    +4        0         -2
  % withdrew more
Money Market
 % added more –        -2    1     -2    -5    -5      -2     2      3         0         -2
  % withdrew more
Stocks
 % added more –        1     1     3     1     -3      2      5      2         0         3
  % withdrew more

Net change in
allocations to
other saving
accounts
% added more than      25    27    26    22    13      21     41     36        28        29
used up
   Median net          5     2     5     6     0.6     2.5    5.0    6.5       5.0       5.0
   Addition ($K)
% used up more         38    32    40    44    44      46     25     36        35        37
than added
   Median net          3.5   2.0   3.5   6.0   2.0     3.0    6.0    6.0       3.0       5.0
   withdrawal ($K)
Source: NYFed survey.
Based on questions: During the past 12 months have you: (indicate Y/N for each) … (1) Started putting
less of your money in 401(k), IRA or other retirement accounts?, (2) Started putting more of your money
in 401(k), IRA or other retirement accounts?, (3) Stopped putting money in a 401(k), IRA or other
retirement accounts?, (4) Started saving (for the first time) in a 401(k), IRA or other retirement account?,
(5) Prematurely withdrawn money from your retirement savings?
You indicated that you started putting more[less] of your money into your retirement account(s). By how
much did you [(and your spouse/partner)] increase[decrease] your total monthly contribution to your
retirement account(s)?
Our next question asks about other savings and investments you may have, excluding those in a
retirement account. We first want to know whether you made any contributions and/or withdrawals to
your savings and investments over the past year. Please do not consider changes in the market value of
the funds in these accounts, only consider the amounts of new money you added and the amounts you
took out.
For each of the following would you say that over the past 12 months you [(and your spouse/partner)]
have withdrawn more from your investments or savings than you have added to them in new money, that
you have added more to savings and investments than you withdrew, or neither? [checking accounts,
saving accounts, money market accounts, stocks]
Considering all accounts together, would you say that during the past 12 months you [(and your
spouse/partner)] have used up more of your investments or savings than you have added to them in new
money, that you have added more to savings and investments than you used up, or neither? Answer
options: (1) Have used up more than added, (2) Have added more than used up, (3)Added about the same
as used up.
During the past 12 months, about how much more did you [(and your spouse/partner)] use up or withdraw
from your investments or savings than you added to it? During the past 12 months, about how much more
did you [(and your spouse/partner)] add to your investments or savings than you used or withdrew from
it?
Table 11. Allocations to Savings Accounts and Wealth and Income Losses

      Change in retirement       All      Unemployed      Lost >10%      Under
      account contributions                               income         Water
      over past 12 months
      % increased contribution   11       0               6              12
          Median                 100                      150            80
          Increase ($)
      % decreased contribution   12       28              27             5
          Median                 150      150             150            50
          Decrease ($)
      % started contributing     3        0               2              2
      % stopped contributing     16       41              29             9
      % prematurely withdrew     11       16              19             9

      Net change in
      allocations to other
      saving accounts
      % added more than used     25       21              14             16
      up
          Median net             5.0      8.0             3.0            3.0
          addition ($K)
      % used up more than        38       45              55             47
      added
          Median net             3.5      2.0             3.5            3.6
          withdrawal ($K)

Source: NYFed survey.
See notes to Table 10.
Table 12 Reasons provided for changing allocations to savings accounts

    (a) Reason for increase in contributions to retirement and other savings accounts –
        proportion who list option as moderately or very important
                                              Retirement Accounts       Other Savings Accounts

        Job Change                                27                         29
        Salary Change                             53                         51
        Change in other income                    29                         37
        To increase savings for retirement        92                         60
        Now is a good time to invest              75                         40
        To be able to leave a bequest             23                         19
        To make up for decline in value           19                         15
        house
        To make up for loss in stocks/            33                         23
        investments
        To build cushion for future job loss      NA                         51
        To build cushion for future health        NA                         51
        expenses



    (b) Reason for decrease in contributions to retirement and other savings accounts –
        proportion who list option as moderately or very important
                                               Retirement Accounts      Other Savings Accounts

        Job Change                                31                         26
        Salary Change                             51                         44
        Change in other income                    39                         38
        Involuntary job loss                      31                         22
        Voluntarily stopped working               14                         13
        To pay down/pay debt                      43                         45
        To pay bills                              30                         41
        To pay for general living expenses        48                         70

Source: NYFed survey.
Panel (a) applies to those who responded that they reduced contributions or stopped contributing to their
retirement account, while panel (b) applies to respondents who indicated that they had started putting
money or had increased contributions into a retirement account. The proportions in the table are based on
responses to the following questions:
Please indicate how important each of the following was for the increase/decrease in your monthly
contribution.… [options: very important, moderately important, not at all important, not applicable].
Please indicate how important each of the following was in your decision to withdraw some of your
investments or savings [to add more to your investments or savings]… [options: very important,
moderately important, not at all important, not applicable].
  Table 13 Saving Motives

                     All   Age                     Income                       College    Bubble     Home
                           <40 40-55        >55    <30K       30-75 >75K                   States     Owner
% reporting as
very important
Retirement/old     40 29           50       46     38         34       49       49         35         42
age
Precautionary
reasons
    Job loss       33 35           41       22     34         30       34       33         39         33
    Illness        29 24           37       29     38         27       24       24         31         28
    General        33 29           40       31     44         31       26       28         39         32
    emergencies
Bequest/Transfers
    Education of   38 52           37       20     35         33       45       42         34         37
   (grand)children
   gifts to        9     6         12       11     10         11       6        9          10         8
   children/family
  Charitable contr 11 8            12       14     14         10       10       12         6          11
To make large
purchase
   house           17 23           19       8      18         16       17       21         21         12
   car             15 22           14       7      19         13       13       12         16         12
   Source: NYFed survey.
  Based on following question: Now we would like to ask you some questions about your household's
  attitudes towards savings. People have different reasons for saving, even though they may not be saving
  all the time. For your household, please indicate how important you consider the following reasons for
  saving to be.
Table 14 Reallocations of savings

                                                 Proportion among retirement account holders
Between Oct08 - May 09*
Allocations of new funds
 % Increased amounts to stocks                   4.7%
 % Decreased amounts to stocks                   5.1%
Allocation of balances
 % Increased amounts to stocks                   6.2%
 % Decreased amounts to stocks                   15.5%
% sold all stocks in retirement accounts         2.7%

Between end 2008 – end 2009+
Moved retirement savings into less risky         18%
investments
*Source: Effects of the Recession on American Households, by Hurd and Rohwedder, Sept 2009, RAND.
+ Source: NYFed survey.
Based on following question: During the past 12 months have you … moved your retirement savings into
less risky investments? [Y/N]
    Table 15 Changes in Household Debt end2008-end2009

                          All Age                        Income                         College     Bubble      Home
                              <40 40-55           >55    <30K        30-75     >75K                 States      Owner
Change over past
year in:
Mortgage debt
  % with increase         5      7      6         3      3           5         6        6           1           7
    Reason:
    Missed/Late           31     41     25        10     59          41        8        21          52          31
    Payments (%)
    Added HELOC/          31     32     27        34     5           24        50       35          48          31
    2nd mortgage (%)
    Refinance (%)         28     15     45        42     9           28        39       40          0           28
  % with decrease         33     31     41        29     13          30        53       39          33          46
    Reason:
     Paid down            69     79     57        71     82          69        66       60          69          69
     regular schedule
     Prepaid              17     12     22        18     6           12        22       25          22          17
     principal
     Refinance            11     7      16        11     9           13        11       12          6           11
  % stayed same+          31     17     30        49     31          33        29       32          31          43
  % NA*                   31     45     23        19     52          31        12       23          34          3

Non-Mortgage Debt
  % with increase         24     29     22        19     22          30        19       27          26          21
  % with decrease         30     28     36        27     24          28        37       33          27          32
  % stayed same           46     42     42        53     53          42        43       40          46          46
  Average change          0.4    1.1    0.3       -0.4   1.6         1.7       -2.0     0.7         0.5         -0.4
 ($1000s)
    source: NYFed survey.
    *: includes those not currently owning a home or who purchased a home within the past year.
    +: includes those who did not have a mortgage over the past 12 months.
    Based on following questions:
    During the past 12 months has the total amount you [(and your spouse/partner)] owe on these mortgages
    increased, decreased or stayed the same?
    If decreased or increased: What was the reason for this change in your overall mortgage balance? (Check
    all that apply) … (1) Paid down some of the principal on the regular schedule, (2) Pre-paid (ahead of
    schedule) some of the principal, (3) Refinanced, (4) Missed, or made late or incomplete payments and
    fees were added to the mortgage balance, (5) Added an additional mortgage or borrowed on a home
    equity line of credit.
    Next consider all outstanding debt you [(and your spouse/partner)] have, including balances on credit
    cards (including retail cards), auto loans, student loans as well as all other personal loans but excluding all
    mortgage debt. During the past 12 months has the total outstanding balance (that is the total amount you
    owe) of these loans combined increased, decreased or stayed the same? By how much has the overall
    combined balance on these debts increased/decreased during the past 12 months?
 Table 16 Changes in Household Debt for Affected Subgroups

Change over past         All         Unemployed           Lost >10%          Under
year in:                                                  income             Water

Mortgage debt
% with increase          5           12                   10                 11
% with decrease          33          19                   31                 45
% stayed same+           31          19                   33                 39
% NA*                    31          50                   26                 5

Non-Mortgage Debt

% with increase          24          30                   31                 36
% with decrease          30          39                   31                 34
% stayed same            46          31                   38                 30
Average change           0.5         2.3                  0.5                2.6
($1000s)

 Source: NYF survey.
 *: includes those not currently owning a home or purchased a home within the past year.
 +: includes those who did not have a mortgage over the past 12 months.
 See notes to Table 15.
 Table 17. Reported responses to hypothetical income shocks

                   All   Age               Income                  College   Bubble   Home
                         <40 40-55   >55   <30K     30-75 >75K               States   Owner
Surprise 10%
extra income
next yr
% save or          22    20   19     28    22       19        26   22        22       20
invest all of it
% spend or         1     0    0      1     0        1         1    1         1        1
donate all
% use all to pay   26    31   26     18    29       25        23   21        19       27
down debt
% spend some,      16    12   15     23    17       16        15   16        19       18
save some
% spend some,      7     7    6      7     8        5         7    6         4        7
pay some debt
% save some,       13    14   13     13    13       11        15   15        16       14
pay some debt
% spend some,      16    17   21     11    12       23        12   21        19       14
save some, pay
some debt

% save/invest  41        37   39     49    39       39        45   44        44       41
% spend/donate 15        13   14     18    16       16        12   15        17       14
% pay debt     44        50   47     33    44       45        42   41        38       45

Surprise 10%
less income
next yr
% cut spending     53    51   53     54    55       54        49   43        52       50
by whole amt
% cut savings      4     1    3      8     2        3         5    4         4        4
by whole amt
% increase debt    2     4    1      1     4        3         0    1         4        1
by whole amt
% cut spending     30    27   30     31    26       26        36   39        28       34
and savings
% cut spending,    4     5    4      3     2        6         5    4         2        5
increase debt
% cut savings,     0     0    1      0     0        1         0    1         0        0
increase debt
% cut spending,    7     11   8      2     10       8         5    7         10       6
savings and
increase debt
% cut savings      20      17     19       24     18         18       24       24         21          22
% cut spending     74      73     76       73     74         75       73       70         72          74
% increase debt    6       9      5        3      8          7        3        6          7           4

 Source: NYFed survey
 Based on questions: Suppose next year you were to find your household with 10% more income than
 normal, what would you do with the extra income? Answer options: (1) Save or invest all of it, (2) Spend
 or donate all of it, (3) Use all of it to pay down debts, (4) Spend and save some, (5) Spend some and use
 part of it to pay down debts, (6) Save some and use part of it to pay down debts, (7) Spend some, save
 some and use some to pay down debts. For options (4) to (7) follow-up question: Please indicate what
 share of the extra income you would use to ... (Please note that the three proportions need to add up to
 100%)… Save or invest, Spend or donate, Pay down debts.
 Now imagine that next year you were to find yourself with 10% less household income. What would you
 do? Answer options: (1) Cut spending by the whole amount, (2) Not cut spending at all, but cut my
 savings by the whole amount, (3) Not cut spending at all, but increase my debt by borrowing the whole
 amount, (4) Cut spending by some and cut savings by some, (5) Cut spending by some and increase debt
 by some, (6) Cut savings by some and increase debt by some, (7) Cut spending by some, cut savings by
 some and increase debt some. For options (4) to (7) follow-up question: Please indicate what share of the
 lost income you would cover by ... (Please note that the three proportions need to add up to 100%) ..
 Reduce spending, Reduce savings, Increase borrowing.
 Table 18 Expectations of Macro Measures

                    All    Age                    Income                        College    Bubble      Home
                           <40 40-55       >55    <30K        30-75 >75K                   States      Owner
% expect higher     37     27  48          41     45          35    33          33         39          37
unemployment
% expect lower      16     16     15       18     15          15       18       23         16          14
unemployment
% expect higher     52     50     47       61     52          54       50       53         53          54
interest rate
% expect lower      8      11     10       5      14          8        5        7          10          6
interest rate
% expect higher     46     39     45       55     42          49       46       53         38          48
mortgage rate
% expect lower      9      12     9        5      11          9        7        7          9           7
mortgage rate
% expect higher     31     33     29       32     26          34       34       37         32          32
house prices
% expect lower      21     23     26       15     30          19       16       14         21          19
house prices
Aver. expected      0.5    0.8    0.2      0.6    0.2         1.0      0.4      1.0        1.3         0.6
% home price
change
 Source: NYFed survey
 Based on following questions:
 How about people out of work during the coming 12 months -- do you think that there will be more
 unemployment than now, about the same, or less?
 No one can say for sure, but what do you think will happen to interest rates for borrowing money during
 the next 12 months -- will they go up, stay the same, or go down?
 A year from now, do you think interest rates on home mortgages will be higher, lower or about the same
 as they are now?
 One year from now, do you think that the average house price at the national level will be higher, lower or
 about the same as today?
 In percentage terms, how much higher/lower on average do you expect the average house price to be at
 the national level a year from now?
 Table 19 Expectations of Macro Measures for Affected Subgroups


                   All    Unemployed   Lost >10%    Under
                                       income       Water

% expect higher    37     30           30           44
unemployment
% expect lower     16     26           18           8
unemployment
% expect higher    52     34           49           59
interest rate
% expect lower     8      5            10           0
interest rate
% expect higher    46     28           51           54
mortgage rate
% expect lower     9      15           8            5
mortgage rate
% expect higher    31     19           38           42
house prices
% expect lower     21     20           17           24
house prices
Aver. expected     0.5    -0.7         1.6          1.9
% home price
change
 Source: NYFed survey
 See notes to Table 18.
 Table 20 Expectations of Income, Saving, Debt and Spending

                    All   Age                Income                College Bubble   Home
                          <40 40-55 >55      <30K     30-75 >75K           States   Owner
Household
income
% expect HH         32    43    33    16     30       40    25     32      38       28
income higher
% expect HH         17    14    18    19     14       12    23     18      16       18
income lower
Aver. expected      4.1   7.0   5.1   -0.8   8.6      6.0   -1.8   4.9     6.3      0.7
% change in HH
income
Aver. expected      3.4   4.5   2.9   1.3    5.3      3.1   2.6    2.6     4.4      2.5
% wage change+

Saving
% expect to incr.   13    15    18    5      6        13    20     17      15       13
retirement
contributions
% expect to decr.   4     2     6     5      2        5     5      4       3        4
retirement
contributions
% expect to add     29    37    33    15     22       32    31     34      39       27
more/use less of
other savings
% expect to add     24    21    22    29     31       22    19     20      27       22
less/use more of
other savings

Debt
% expect to pay     81    82    82    78     64       84    85     81      80       81
down principal*
% expect to pre-    24    24    25    24     15       21    29     35      30       24
pay principal*
% expect to miss    6     11    4     2      22       6     1      3       1        6
mortg payments*
% expect to add     6     4     8     5      9        7     4      7       7        6
mortgage/heloc*
% expect to decr.   66    70    67    60     61       67    70     63      67       67
non-mortgage
debt
% expect to incr.   4     5     3     4      5        4     4      4       7        3
non-mortgage
debt
Spending
Higher monthly       29     28     24        35     39         25        24       26         28          28
spending
Lower monthly        16     16     18        13     15         16        17       16         14          15
spending
Average change       1.7    2.6    0.6       1.7    4.9        0.5       0.2      1.1        1.4         1.4
in monthly
spending

 Source: NYFed survey
 +: among those currently working
 *: among home owners with a mortgage or a HELOC.
 Based on following questions: During the next 12 months do you expect the total combined income of all
 members of your household to increase, decrease or stay the same? In percentage terms, by approximately
 how much do you expect it to increase/decrease?
 Suppose that, 12 months from now, you actually are working in the exact same [/main] job - at the same
 place you currently work, and working the exact same number of hours. Twelve months from now, do
 you expect your earnings on this job, before taxes and deductions, to have gone up, or gone down, or
 stayed where they are now? By about what percent do you expect that your earnings on this job, before
 taxes and other deductions, will have gone up[down], 12 months from now, in that case?
 Thinking now about the coming year, do you [(and your spouse/partner)] expect to make any changes to
 your contributions to your retirement account(s) during the next 12 months? Answer options: (1) Yes,
 expect to increase total contribution, (2) Yes, expect to decrease total contribution, (3) No, expect to keep
 total contribution the same.
 Thinking now about the coming year, do you [(and your spouse/partner)] expect to use up more, less or
 about the same amount of your savings and investments during the next 12 months than you did in the last
 year? OR Thinking now about the coming year, do you [(and your spouse/partner)] expect to add more,
 less or about the same amount of new money to your savings and investments during the next 12 months
 than you did in the last year?
 Thinking now about the coming year, do you [(and your spouse/partner)] ... (Check all that apply) (1)
 Expect to pay down some of the principal on the regular schedule, (2) Expect to pre-pay (ahead of
 schedule) some of the principal, (3) Expect to miss payments, (4) Expect to add an additional mortgage or
 borrow on a home equity line of credit, or (5) other [Please specify].
 Thinking ahead, one year from now: How do you expect your monthly spending one year in the future to
 compare to your monthly spending today? In percentage terms, by how much do you expect your average
 monthly spending to increase [decrease]?
 Table 21 Expectations of Income, Saving, Debt and Spending for Affected Subgroups

                    All   Unemployed Lost >10%      Under Water
                                     income
Household
income
% expect HH         32    41           46           27
income higher
% expect HH         17    26           21           16
income lower
Aver. expected      4.1   11.1         10.5         1.7
% change in HH
income
Aver. expected      3.4   NA           4.5          1.9
% wage change+

Saving
% expect to incr.   13    11           16           8
retirement
contributions
% expect to decr.   4     12           8            4
retirement
contributions
% expect to add     29    35           30           32
more/use less of
other savings
% expect to add     24    30           31           30
less/use more of
other savings

Debt
% expect to pay     81    65           81           71
down principal*
% expect to pre-    24    15           24           15
pay principal*
% expect to miss    6     30           11           13
mortg
payments*
% expect to add     6     7            5            8
mortgage/heloc*
% expect to decr.   66    51           69           76
non-mortgage
debt
% expect to incr.   4     7            2            10
non-mortgage
debt
Spending
Higher monthly     29     30    25     30
spending
Lower monthly      16     24    28     16
spending
Average change     1.7    1.9   -1.5   2.3
in monthly
spending

 Source: NYFed survey
 See notes to Table 20.
 Table 22 Expectations of Retirement, Bequests, Access to Credit and Financial Wellbeing

                    All     Age                     Income                        College Bubble         Home
                            <40 40-55 >55           <30K        30-75 >75K                States         Owner
Retirement
Prob of working     62      62      65       57     57          63       65       66          52         64
FT at/after 62**
Prob of working     50      50      52       43     51          49       51       52          44         50
FT at/after 65**
Expected            67      66      69       69     70          67       66       67          64         68
retirement age*
Plan to retire      24      16      30       32     24          20       27       29          29         25
later*
Plan to retire      5       6       2        6      5           4        5        2           5          5
earlier*

Inheritance
Decreased           18      13      21       24     23          19       14       19          18         19
chance of
leaving bequest
Increased           7       7       5        8      4           7        8        7           8          7
chance of
leaving bequest

Credit access
Credit easier       20      20      18       24     19          20       21       17          14         20
Credit harder       39      41      42       35     43          36       39       37          34         39

Overall
financial
situation
Will be better      32      45      29       16     29          35       30       36          31         29
off financially
Will be worse       13      6       15       21     16          12       11       13          17         14
off financially
 Source: NYFed survey
 *: among those currently working
 **: among those with age 60 or younger
 Based on following questions: Thinking about work in general and not just your present job (if you
 currently work), what do you think is the percent chance that you will be working full-time after you
 reach age 62 [65]? Has the age at which you plan to retire changed since last year? [Answer options: (1) I
 now plan to retire sooner than I did last year, (2) no change in plans, (3) I now plan to retire later than I
 did last year.] In the past 12 months, have the chances of you [(and your spouse/partner)] leaving an
 inheritance increased, decreased or stayed the same? During the next 12 months, do you expect that it
 generally will become easier, harder or equally difficult to obtain credit or loans compared to the past 12
 months? Now looking ahead - do you think that a year from now you [(and your household)] will be
 better off financially, or worse off, or just about the same as now?
 Table 23 Expectations of Retirement, Bequests, Access to Credit and Financial Wellbeing
 for Affected Subgroups

                   All    Unemployed   Lost >10%   Under Water
                                       income
Retirement
Prob working       62     64           69          64
FT at/after 62**
Prob working       50     55           54          57
FT at/after 65**
Expected           67     NA           69          69
retirement age*
Plan to retire     24     NA           25          1
later*
Plan to retire     5      NA           11          27
earlier*

Inheritance
Decreased          18     32           35          31
chance of
leaving bequest
Increased          7      20           6           3
chance of
leaving bequest

Credit access
Credit easier      20     20           18          12
Credit harder      39     33           41          59

Overall
financial
situation
Will be better     32     47           43          34
off financially
Will be worse      13     15           13          13
off financially
 Source: NYFed survey
 See notes to Table 22.
                      1.FHFA Home Price Trends
FHFA Index                                                                     FHFA Index
350                                                                                  350

                                               FL
300                                                                                  300

                CO
250                                                  CA                              250
                                    Nation

200                                                                                  200

                                      TX
150                                                                                  150


100                                                                                  100
      2002     2003   2004   2005      2006         2007   2008     2009      2010

Source: FHFA                                  Note: FHFA HPI-purchase only (NSA), Quarterly
2. Self-Reported Home Value Change Since Time Bought
Total Home Price Change                                            Total Home Price Change

30                                                                                   30
25                                                                                   25
20                                                                                   20
15                                                                                   15
                          Mean
10                                                                                   10
 5                                                                                   5
 0                                                    Median                         0
 -5                                                                                  -5
-10                         FHFA index*                                              -10
-15                                                                                  -15
  2003         2004       2005           2006           2007       2008          2009
                                   Year Bought Home
Source: NYFed survey             Note: *FHFA Home Price Index - purchase only (NSA, Annual)
                          3. Trends in Owner’s Equity
Trillions of Dollars                                                                             Percent

16                                                                                                 100

14
                Owners' Equity in Household                                                        80
12                Real Estate (Left Axis)


10                                                                                                 60
  8

  6                                                                                                40
                                                     Equity Share - Owners' Equity as a
  4                                                    percentage of household real
                                                             estate (Right Axis)
                                                                                                   20
  2

  0                                                                                                0
      2002      2003     2004      2005       2006       2007       2008      2009        2010

Source: FHFA
                        4. Homeownership Rates
Percent                                                                          Percent
70                                                                                    70

                                               Census Bureau
68                                                                                    68
                                     HPT (NYFed)



66                                                                                    66


64                                                                                    64


62                                                                                    62


60                                                                                    60
  2003      2004       2005      2006      2007      2008      2009      2010

 Source: U.S. Homeownership Rate (NSA), Census Bureau. Effective Homeownership Rate
 as in Haughwout, Peach and Tracy (2010)
                 5. S&P 500 Stock Market Trend

1800                                                         1800

1600                                                         1600

1400                                                         1400

1200                                                         1200

1000                                                         1000

800                                                          800

600                                                          600

400                                                          400

200                                                          200

  0                                                          0
   2003   2004     2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010
 6. Unemployment Rate, Proportion Marginally Attached
             and Average Weekly Hours
Percent                                                                                Hours

20                                                                                       40
                Average hours
18
                     (right axis)
16                                                                                       39
14
12                                                                                       38
                         Marginally attached (incl. involuntary
10
                                     PT) (left axis)
 8                                                                                       37
 6                        Unemployment rate (left axis)

 4                                                                                       36
 2
 0                                                                                       35
     2003     2004          2005       2006        2007           2008   2009   2010

Source: BLS
                               7. Personal Income
Per Capita (2005 $)                                 Per Capita (2005 $)




                 Personal Income




                      Real Disposable Personal
                               Income




Source: BEA, SAAR, in 2005 dollars.
     8.Consumer Credit - Mortgage LTVs and Cash-outs
Percent                                                               Percent
90                                                                        90

80                                                                        80

70                                                                        70
                                  Share of New
60                               Refinances with
                                                                          60
                                    Cash-out
50                                                                        50

40                                                                        40
                    New Home Mortgages with
30                    LTV Ratio over 90%                                  30

20                                                                        20

10                                                                        10

 0                                                                        0
  2002     2003   2004    2005     2006       2007   2008   2009   2010

Source: FHFA
            9. Total Number of New and Closed Accounts
Millions                                                                            Millions
400                                                                                     400

350                                                                                     350
                                                   Number of
                                                Accounts Opened
300                                             within 12 Months                        300

250                                                                                     250

200                           Number of                                                 200
                           Accounts closed
                           within 12 Months
150                                                                                     150

100                                                                                     100

  50                                                                                    50

   0                                                                                    0
     2000    2001   2002   2003    2004       2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010

Source: FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel
                             10. Net Worth (Per Capita)
Thousands of Dollars                                              Thousands of Dollars
250                                                                             250


200                                                                             200


150                                                                             150


100                                                                             100


  50                                                                            50


   0                                                                            0
       2003       2004        2005        2006   2007   2008   2009     2010

Source: Flow of Funds, NSA, current dollars.
          11. Perceived decline in financial situation
Percent        (% worse off compared to year ago)                             Percent
70                                                                                70

60                                                                                60

50                   Better off                                                   50

40                                                                                40

30                                                                                30
                     Worse off
20                                                                                20

10                                                                                10

  0                                                                               0
   2003       2004          2005     2006       2007         2008   2009   2010

Source: Reuters/University of Michigan Survey of Consumers
                           12. Spending per Capita
Thousands of 2005 Dollars (SA)                         Thousands of 2005 Dollars (SA)

35                                                                               35


33                                                                               33

                       Personal Consumption
31                         Expenditures                                          31


29                                                                               29


27                                                                               27


25                                                                               25
   2003       2004       2005      2006       2007   2008     2009       2010

Source: BEA (NIPA)
           13. Daily Discretionary Consumer Spending
Dollars                                                                                                 Dollars




                                                       High-Income




                                                                         All

                                                                                     Middle and Lower
          Question: "Next, we'd like you to think about your spending yesterday, not
          counting the purchase of a home, motor vehicle, or your normal household
                                                                                          Income
          bills. How much money did you spend or charge yesterday on all types of
          purchases you may have made, such as at a store, restaurant, gas station,
          online or elsewhere?"




Source: Gallup Poll                                                         Note: High Income = income over $90K
                      14. Personal Saving Rate
                      Personal Saving as % of Disposable Personal Income
Percent                                                                               Percent
 8                                                                                        8

 7                                                                                        7

 6                                                                                        6

 5                                                                                        5

 4                                                                                        4

 3                                                                                        3

 2                                                                                        2

 1                                                                                        1

 0                                                                                        0
 2003       2004     2005        2006           2007            2008       2009   2010
Source: BEA (NIPA)   Note: Personal Savings Rate: Personal Savings/Disposable Personal Income
              15. Total Debt Balance and its Composition
Trillions of Dollars                                                                                                                         Trillions of Dollars
 15
                                                                 Non-mortgage                 Mortgage

                                                                                                                               12.4 12.5 12.3
                                                                                                                        12.0                       12.1 11.9
                                                                                                                                                               11.6
                                                                                                                 11.3
                                                                                                          11.0
                                                                                                                                      2.5
                                                                                                   10.2                                                        2.3
 10                                                                                          9.7
                                                                                       9.1
                                                                                8.7
                                                                          8.2
                                                                                                                                      10.0
                                                                   7.5
                                                           7.1                                                                                                 9.4
                                                    6.8
                                              6.4
                                 5.9   6.0
                          5.4
                    5.2
             4.9
  5    4.6




  0
      1999         2000         2001         2002         2003           2004         2005         2006          2007          2008         2009      2010

Source: FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel
          16. Changes in Household Debt Available for
Billions of Dollars   Spending (annual)          Billions of Dollars
300                                                                                300



                                             Non mortgage
200                                                                                200




100                                                                                100
                                                        Mortgage

  0                                                                                0




-100                                                                               -100




-200                                                                               -200
    2000    2001   2002      2003     2004      2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
Source: FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel
