                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       NEGATIVE LEAKAGE

                                            Don Fullerton
                                            Daniel Karney
                                            Kathy Baylis

                                        Working Paper 17001
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17001


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




We are grateful for comments and suggestions from Mustafa Babiker, Fernando Pérez-Cervantes,
Brian Copeland, Corbett Grainger, Garth Heutel, Larry Karp, Carol McAusland, Gilbert Metcalf, Sergey
Paltsev, Martin Weitzman, Niven Winchester, and seminar participants at the ASSA meeting in Denver,
the University of Victoria, the University of British Columbia and the University of Illinois. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Don Fullerton, Daniel Karney, and Kathy Baylis. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Negative Leakage
Don Fullerton, Daniel Karney, and Kathy Baylis
NBER Working Paper No. 17001
April 2011
JEL No. H2,H23,Q48,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

We build a simple analytical general equilibrium model and linearize it, to find a closed-from expression
for the effect of a small change in carbon tax on leakage – the increase in emissions elsewhere. The
model has two goods produced in two sectors or regions. Many identical consumers buy both goods
using income from a fixed stock of capital that is mobile between sectors. An increase in one sector’s
carbon tax raises the price of its output, so consumption shifts to the other good, causing positive carbon
leakage. However, the taxed sector substitutes away from carbon into capital. It thus absorbs capital,
which shrinks the other sector, causing negative leakage. This latter effect could swamp the former,
reducing carbon emissions in both sectors.


Don Fullerton                                        Kathy Baylis
Department of Finance                                Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois                               University of Illinois
BIF Box#30 (MC520)                                   Mumford Hall
515 East Gregory Drive                               Urbana, IL 61801
Champaign, IL 61820                                  baylis@illinois.edu
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu

Daniel Karney
Department of Economics
University of Illinois
David Kinley Hall
Champaign, IL 61820
dkarney2@illinois.edu
        A common concern with a unilateral pollution restriction is that one country’s
abatement will be offset by “leakage”, defined as the increase in pollution elsewhere.
Within a country as well, cap-and-trade may apply only to one sector such as electricity,
which raises its price and shifts consumption to goods produced in other unregulated
sectors. Purely domestic leakage may offset some of the regulated sector’s abatement.
In an international context, even without international capital flows, the regulating
country puts itself at a competitive disadvantage. International capital mobility is
thought to make leakage worse, if investment flees the taxed region to help produce
more polluting output in the other region. In the context of climate policy, carbon
leakage is a particular concern due to the global impacts of greenhouse gases.
        The literature has many estimates for carbon leakage associated with the Kyoto
Protocol. For instance, Paltsev (2001) finds a leakage rate of 10%, whereas Babiker
(2005) finds rates as high as 130%. In that case, a carbon tax in one country raises
worldwide emissions. More typical of other recent estimates, Elliott et al. (2010) find a
20% carbon leakage rate from the Annex-B Kyoto countries.
        Given this presumption that leakage is positive, academics have searched for
particular cases with counter-intuitive results. We cannot review all such literature, but
we list a few examples. First, Felder and Rutherford (1993) build a computable general
equilibrium (CGE) model with five regions and ten-year intervals, finding that marginal
leakage can be negative after several decades if the carbon tax leaves enough unused oil
to delay the other region’s introduction of carbon-intensive synthetic fuel. Second,
Copeland and Taylor (2005) show how negative leakage can arise through endogenous
policy: in response to a cut in one region’s emissions, the other region experiences
income gains that induce them to choose more environmental quality by raising their
own pollution tax. Third, negative leakage can arise through endogenous technology:
the carbon tax may induce R&D into new abatement technology that can be used by the
unregulated sector, especially if patents are poorly protected.1 Fourth, Karp (2010)
follows Chua (2003) to find negative leakage in an “extreme example” with particular
cross-price elasticities among three inputs (such as labor, capital, and emissions).2

1
 See Golombek and Hoel (2004), Di Maria and Smulders (2004), Gerlagh and Kuik (2007), and Di
Maria and van der Werf (2008). Each makes particular points, which we cannot review here.
2
  In Karp’s example, production is highly labor intensive, but the carbon tax induces much substitution
into capital, so it can reduce the return to labor, promote production, and reduce import demand for the
dirty good. In a closed economy, Fullerton and Heutel (2007) show that such special cases can generate
other perverse results; a carbon tax can even raise emissions in the taxed sector.
                                                -2-

        In this note, we demonstrate a substantial negative effect on leakage that has not
been identified in existing literature, using a very general and simple model without
special cases, particular parameters, endogenous policy, or induced technology change.
Indeed, the model is a very standard analytical general equilibrium model with only two
competitive sectors that each use carbon and one other input, with constant returns to
scale. Then a carbon tax always raises costs in that sector. We derive expressions that
show exactly when the negative effect on leakage in this model could swamp the
positive effect, such that global carbon emissions fall by more than in the taxed sector.
        Our model can be taken to represent two countries that each produces one good,
or a closed economy that produces two outputs. For instance, the carbon policy could
apply to electricity generation and not other goods, or it could apply in only one region
within a country.3 Many identical consumers earn income from a fixed stock of capital,
and they receive rebate of all tax revenue. Positive leakage arises when consumers
substitute from the taxed country or sector’s output to the other output. If the context
were two countries that produce the same traded good (like steel from the U.S. or
China), then a carbon tax in one country always increases imports and leakage.
        To find a negative leakage effect, we use three reasonable, general assumptions.
First, the two goods are not perfect substitutes. Consumers still cause leakage when they
substitute into the untaxed good, but not perfectly via infinite elasticity of substitution.
Second, we assume that the firm has some ability to substitute out of carbon and into
the other input (which can be labor, capital, or a composite of both). The elasticity of
substitution in production is not zero, so firms can reduce carbon per unit of output by
using ‘abatement resources.’ Third, the clean input is mobile between the two sectors or
countries. These assumptions do not represent a “special case”. Rather, they are
generalizations of prior models that assume capital is not mobile, or that firms cannot
change carbon per unit of output, or that the two goods must be identical.
        Given these conditions, the result is quite easy to explain. A carbon tax or
permit price induces firms to abate carbon per unit of output by using more of a clean
input such as abatement capital. The taxed sector draws resources away from the
unregulated sector or region, which reduces their output and emissions. We call this an

3
 As an example of sub-national policy, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) is a conglomerate
of Northeastern states in the U.S. that agree to limit their own carbon emission. Wing and Kolodziej
(2009) find carbon leakage rates of more that 50%, due to electricity imports from non-RGGI states.
                                                  -3-

“abatement resource effect” (ARE). Its size depends on parameters. If consumers can
shift their purchases easily, then positive leakage may be high. Even then, however,
leakage may be overstated in models that do not allow for substitution in production. If
consumer flexibility is low compared to producers’ ability to abate pollution by use of
other resources, however, then we show that overall leakage may be negative.
        Given the simplicity of this intuitive result, we wonder why previous literature
has not identified this effect. First, some models assume fixed carbon per unit of output
(with no substitution into a clean input). Second, some models assume that capital and
labor are not mobile between countries. They might assume that factors are mobile
between sectors within a country but then find effects of a tax on all carbon in that
country, leaving no scope for firms to draw resources from an untaxed sector. Third,
some CGE models may incorporate all three of our key assumptions but then report net
numerical results, obscuring the fact that our ARE offsets some of the positive leakage.
In any case, we do not find any paper that derives analytical expressions for leakage in a
model where firms can substitute into a clean input that is mobile across regions.
        Our intent is to demonstrate this effect using the simplest possible model, not to
measure actual leakage. We therefore abstract from many important issues such as
materials production and intermediate inputs [e.g. Felder and Rutherford (1993)],
endogenous number of firms [Gurtzgen and Rauscher (2000)], oligopolistic competition
[Babiker (2005)], and strategic interaction [Fowlie (2009)].4 Such features could affect
leakage, but none would remove the ARE in our expressions. In any model with the
three assumptions above, results would still include this negative leakage term.
        The next section presents our basic model. In section 2, we differentiate all
equations to linearize the model and solve for effects of a small increase in one sector’s
pollution price. We identify the abatement resource effect in a closed-form expression
for the change in carbon leakage. Section 3 provides a brief numerical example, while
Section 4 provides further discussion. We investigate the ARE further, to see whether
output in the other sector falls because revenue from the increased tax is not enough to
compensate consumers for the higher price of one good. In some cases, the additional
revenue is negative, which itself reduces consumer purchases.

4
  Our model is also related to Holland (2009), who shows that welfare gains might be higher with an
intensity standard than with a tax on emissions, because it causes less increase in the output price and
therefore less leakage. Without an overall resource constraint, however, he cannot find negative leakage.
                                                  -4-

1. The Basic Model

        Two competitive sectors (i = X,Y) each use clean input Ki and carbon emissions
Ci with decreasing marginal products in a constant returns to scale production function,
X  X ( K X , C X ) and Y  Y ( K Y , CY ) . The clean input is mobile and thus earns the
same return, pK, in either sector. It can be considered a composite of labor and capital,
in fixed total supply K  K X  KY  . Each sector faces its own carbon tax τi (or permit
price for carbon).5 In response to an increased tax on emissions, a firm can reduce its
carbon per unit of output by additional use of abatement technology, that is, by
substitution from Ci into Ki. In the electricity generating sector, for example, firms
can reduce emissions per kilowatt-hour by investing in natural gas plants, wind turbines,
or solar power. All revenue is returned via lump-sum rebate, R   X C X   Y CY .
        This model omits a type of positive leakage, namely, world trade of fossil fuel in
fixed supply. If a taxing country reduces its demand for oil, the fall in the world price
of oil can increase consumption elsewhere.6 Instead, consider τY on coal-fired power
plants, where coal is not scarce (its world price depends primarily on extraction cost).
        Emissions from either sector add to total carbon, C  C X  CY , which negatively
affects utility in a separable manner. Many identical households earn income from
capital and the rebate of revenue, taking as given the total carbon and all market prices
(pX, pY , and pK). They maximize homothetic utility by choice of X and Y :

         max{ X ,Y } U ( X , Y ; C ) s.t.   p K K  R  p X X  pY Y .

We have no need to specify which sector initially has the higher carbon tax rate, and so
we simply investigate effects of a small increase in τY with no change in τX. We
compare the new long run equilibrium to the initial one, ignoring adjustments during the
transition. The increase in τY reduces equilibrium emissions in sector Y, and so
leakage is defined as the effect on emissions in sector X.
5
  Variable supply of labor or capital (factor K) would not remove negative leakage: whatever the new
supply of K, the use of K for abatement in sector Y must come at the expense of output X. However,
input C is not in fixed total supply in any “market” for carbon (or fossil fuels). We just assume each
firm can use any amount of C, given the tax rate. With no uncertainty, however, the resulting choice for
carbon quantity at tax rate τ can equally represent a policy with that number of permits at price τ.
6
  This other type of leakage might be important with border tax adjustments (BTA), which essentially
convert a tax on carbon in production to a tax on carbon in consumption. We model a carbon tax with no
border tax adjustments, that is, without such effect on the world oil price. In any case, adding oil as an
input would change the model, and leakage, but it would not remove the ARE.
                                                     -5-

           This simple model can be interpreted at least two ways. First, it can represent an
international context where Y is produced in one country or set of countries that raises
its carbon tax, while X is produced in the “rest of world”. In this case, we suppose that
all consumers have the same utility function.7 Capital is owned by these identical
worldwide consumers, and it can be used to produce either region’s output. A more
complete trade model might have both regions produce both outputs, with the same type
of negative leakage that we identify (so long as firms can substitute into mobile capital).
           Alternatively, the model can represent a closed economy in which only sector Y
faces a raised price of carbon. For a concrete example that “best” fits our model, the
European Union’s Emission Trading System (EU-ETS) applies to electricity generation
and major industries, including only 40% of total E.U. greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions.8 Any agreement between the E.U. and the U.S. or other nations may apply
GHG or carbon pricing to a similar subset of outputs (with the usual problems of
aggregation). This example is particularly appropriate, because electricity has inelastic
demand, which means low elasticity of substitution in utility – one condition that
increases the size of negative leakage in our model.

2. Solving for Equilibrium Effects

           Given this set-up, we now log-linearize the model to solve for n linear equations
in n unknowns. Totally differentiate the resource constraint K  K X  KY , and use the

“hat” notation to denote a proportional change in any variable (e.g. Kˆ X  dK X K X ):

           0   X Kˆ X  Y Kˆ Y                                                               (1)

where  i  K i K is the share of capital in production of i (i = X,Y), and  X   Y = 1.

Then totally differentiate production to show how changes to inputs affect final output:

            Xˆ   XK Kˆ X   XC Cˆ X                                                          (2)

           Yˆ   YK Kˆ Y   YC Cˆ Y                                                           (3)

where  ij is the factor share of income for input j in the production of good i [e.g. θXK


7
 Our model with a single type of worldwide consumer is not adequate to analyze effects on welfare in
each country, but our goal here is only to look at effects on carbon emissions in each country.
8
    See http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/index_en.htm.
                                                          -6-

≡ (pKKX)/(pXX)]. Then  XK   XC  1 and YK  YC  1 .
       Perfect competition and constant returns to scale imply zero profits, so
p X X  p K K X   X C X and pY Y  p K K Y   Y CY . Totally differentiate these equations
and use the firm’s profit maximizing first-order conditions:

                                                    
        pˆ X  Xˆ   XK pˆ K  Kˆ X   XC ˆ X  Cˆ X                                 (4)

                                                
        pˆ Y  Yˆ   YK pˆ K  Kˆ Y   YC ˆY  Cˆ Y                                  (5)

Each production function has only two inputs, so factor intensity responds to a change
in relative input prices according to each elasticity of substitution,  X and  Y . We
define these elasticities to be positive. Differentiating their definitions yields:

        Cˆ X  Kˆ X   X  pˆ K  ˆX                                                  (6)

        Cˆ Y  Kˆ Y   Y  pˆ K  ˆY .                                                (7)

       Finally, under the assumption that pollution is separable in utility, we use the
single parameter  U to define the elasticity of substitution in utility between X and

Y. Differentiating the definition of  U yields:

        Xˆ  Yˆ   U  pˆ Y  pˆ X  .                                                  (8)

       Suppose β is the share of income spent on Y, and ηYY is the usual own-price
elasticity of demand (with no change in any other prices). Then one can easily show
ηYY = –[β + σU(1–β)]. In other words, a small σU can represent the trade-off between
Y, a good like electricity with inelastic demand, and all other goods X.
       Equations (1) – (8) are the log-linear system for general equilibrium effects of a
small change in policy. We define capital as numeraire ( pˆ K  0 ), which leaves the eight
numbered equations above with eight unknowns (changes in X, Y, their two prices, and
the four input quantities). We assume ˆ X  0 , where ˆY is a small positive exogenous
change in tax. Sector X experiences no change in relative input prices ˆ X  pˆ K  0  ,

so equation (6) simplifies to Cˆ X  Kˆ X . Note, we do not assume Liontief production in
X. Those firms have a positive σX, but they choose not to alter input ratios because
they face no relative input price changes. In addition, unchanged input prices means no
change in the breakeven output price, so pˆ X  0 [from equations (2) and (4)].
                                                   -7-

       Next, observe from (3) and (5) that pˆ Y  YCˆY  0 . This additional carbon tax
always raises the price of Y relative to the price of X. Further algebra reveals:

       Yˆ   X  U  Y  Y YCˆY                                                   (9)

       Since all parameters in this equation are positive, the negative sign out front
means that the increase in τY unambiguously reduces output – to an extent that depends
on substitution elasticities and the carbon share of production. Algebra also yields:

                                                       
                                                       
       Cˆ Y     X  U  Y  Y YC  YK  Y ˆY                                 (10)
                 
                         Output           Substitution 
                         Effect           Effect       
       The second term inside the large brackets is the “substitution effect”, since the
tax changes relative input prices and induces substitution through the elasticity σY.
Firms reduce carbon per unit of output. Then the first term is just Ŷ , from (9). It
represents an “output effect”, since the tax raises output price and reduces demand, so
firms further reduce both inputs. The tax on carbon reduces carbon emissions through
both of these channels, and so (10) shows that ĈY is unambiguously negative.
       Two effects operate in different directions in the other sector, however:
                                                                    
       Cˆ X   Y  U   Y  YCˆY   U  Y  YC   Y  Y  YC ˆY               (11)
                                          
                                                         
                                         TTE              ARE      

The first effect in (11) is a terms-of-trade effect (TTE), because the higher price of Y
induces consumer substitution into X (to an extent that depends on σU). Alone, it
would raise production of X and therefore raise CX (positive leakage). The other term
in (11) is what we call the abatement resource effect (ARE). It depends on σY, because
the firms in Y substitute from carbon into capital for abatement, and thus bid capital
away from X. Since ˆX  pˆ K  0 , those firms choose not to substitute and instead
reduce both KX and CX. This term yields negative leakage.
       Clearly, from (11), the relative size of these offsetting effects depends on the
relative size of σU and σY. If consumers can substitute easily between goods, then the
terms-of-trade effect dominates, and leakage is positive. This effect would be large for
the case with international trade in close substitutes. Using the Armington (1969)
assumption, for example, then σU would be large, and leakage is positive. Even in that
                                             -8-

case, however, researchers might overstate leakage if they do not allow for any negative
effect on leakage through home substitution into abatement capital (the ARE effect).
           In other cases such as the pricing of carbon permits in the electricity sector,
demand is inelastic, and so σU is small. If technology allows for abatement per unit of
output, then σY may exceed σU, and overall leakage is negative. In this case, models
that ignore the ARE would find the wrong sign for overall leakage. The net effect of
unilateral pollution regulation could be overall pollution reduction beyond what is
achieved within the regulating sector, region, or country.

3. Numerical Magnitudes

To see the size of these effects, we assign values to parameters and calculate the leakage
response to a 10% increase in tax ˆY  0.1 . To calculate Ĉ X in (11), however, we

need four parameters. First, we set the initial carbon intensity YC  0.5 and allocate

half of capital to each sector  X  Y  0.5       Then in figure 1, we show carbon
leakage on the vertical axis as a function of the elasticity of substitution in production
 Y  .   The top dotted line in the figure is for σU =1.5, where leakage declines from
+4.0% to –1.5% as σY varies from zero to 2.0 on the horizontal axis. Thus negative
leakage is possible, even with high σU, but it is more likely with lower σU. The middle
dashed line is for σU =1.0, and the bottom solid line is for σU =0.5, where leakage
declines from +1.0% to –4.0% as σY varies from zero to two.
           Perhaps the overall point is clear from equation (11), but figure 1 conveys size
and makes it visual: negative leakage is possible, and it is made more possible by high
values of σY (where substitution into abatement technology is easier) or low values of
σU (where consumers buy nearly as much of the taxed sector’s output).

4. Discussion
           This analysis raises at least four questions, which we now address. First, many
have wondered how factor prices can remain unchanged in sector              X.   Does the
interpretation depend on the choice of numeraire? We chose pˆ K  0 as numeraire, and
we found that pˆ X  0 , so the choice of X as numeraire would yield exactly the same
results. Yet we also assume ˆ X  0 , which means that policymakers hold constant the
tax on carbon in sector X relative to either their output price or input price. Only
                                           -9-

relative prices matter, so it seems reasonable that the other country would hold constant
its tax relative to its own prices. Yet, suppose that policymakers were to hold τX
constant relative to pY (or to some overall weighted average price level). Since pY rises,
that would raise τX relative to our numeraire (pK or pX), which would reduce leakage.
In this respect, our assumption yields a conservative expression for negative leakage.

Figure 1 – Carbon Leakage Depends on σY and σU [θYC=0.5,  X   Y =0.5, ˆY =0.1]




       Second, we find that leakage Ĉ X is negative when output declines ( X̂ <0), but
how is that consistent with a decline in the relative price of X? Recall that p̂Y >0, while
p̂ X =0. Does demand for X have the wrong slope? No, we can calculate the usual own-
price elasticity of demand for X with no change in other prices, ηXX = –[(1–β) + σUβ],
which is clearly negative. A fall in pX alone would raise X, partly because it increases
real income. In contrast, the increase in pY reduces real income and therefore tends to
decrease world demand for both goods. In fact, the cross-price elasticity of demand for
X with respect to a change in pY is ηXY = β(σU–1), which can have either sign.
       Third, however, consumers receive back all of the tax revenue, so how can this
compensated increase in pY/pX reduce X? Recall that consumers earn I  pK K  R ,
where R = τYCY+τXCX. The answer is that the rebate of revenue is never enough to
reach the same indifference curve, especially since the increase in the input tax worsens
production inefficiency, shifting inward the production possibility frontier. An increase
in the distorting tax τY always reduces the utility from consumption (even if it provides
                                                      - 10 -

benefits from a better environment). In fact, increasing deadweight loss from an input
tax is the reason for a Laffer Curve, where revenue is a hump-shaped function of the tax
rate. Initial increases in τY may raise positive revenue, but successive increases yield
zero and then negative revenue.
       Fourth, we wonder if our negative leakage result is related to this insight about
the Laffer curve. Is the sign of Ĉ X related to the sign of R̂ ? As it turns out, the set of
parameters for which leakage is negative is not a subset of the parameters for which the
effect on revenue is negative, nor the other way around.
       Since the capital stock and its price are fixed, the only change to income is the
change in the rebate of revenue. We totally differentiate that expression for R and find:

        Rˆ  ( Y   Y )YC ( U   Y )   Y  Y   Y ˆY                         (12)

where  X   X C X R ,  Y   Y CY R , and  X   Y  1 ; that is,  X    is the share of
total tax revenue from sector X.
       To see how the change in revenue and leakage each depend on substitution
parameters, figure 2 plots σY on the horizontal axis and σU on the vertical axis. First
note that ĈX in equation (11) has a term (σU –σY) times ˆY , so leakage is zero whenever
σU =σY (on the 45 degree dashed line in figure 2). Leakage is positive to the upper-left
of that line (with higher σU) and negative to the lower-right (with higher σY).
       To find areas for positive or negative changes in revenue in figure 2, we set
Rˆ  0 in equation (12) and solve:

                          Y                          Y       
         U  1                     Y                                        (13)
                    YC  Y   Y             YC Y  Y  
This line has a slope that depends on the sign and magnitude of (δY – αY). If the share of
tax revenue from sector Y exceeds its share of capital (δY >αY), then this slope can be
negative. Figure 2 depicts the case where δY = 0.75, and αY = 0.5, using a dotted iso-
revenue line. To the lower-left, where both σ elasticities are small, the increase in τY
raises revenue; to the upper right of this line, the larger responsiveness means that an
increase in τY reduces the tax base by enough that revenue falls. If δY = αY , then the
line is vertical, and if αY > δY the slope is positive. The iso-leakage and iso-revenue
                                               - 11 -

lines always intersect where σU and σY both equal one. In any case, the figure clearly
shows four different areas: the signs of ( Ĉ X , R̂ ) can be (+,+), (+,-), (-,+), or (-,-).

Figure 2 – Tax in Sector Y Yields Most Revenue (δY=0.75, θYC =0.5,  X   Y =0.5)




        So far, leakage seems unrelated to revenue. But suppose the initial τY is zero,
with no revenue from sector Y (δY = 0). Then equation (13) shows that the iso-revenue
line has an intercept of zero and a slope of one. In this case, it is coincident with the
iso-leakage line. In other words, an initial increase in τY from zero necessarily has
both negative leakage and negative net revenue whenever σY > σU. The initial increase
in τY induces sector Y to substitute into abatement, which draws capital away from
sector X. The output of X shrinks, along with both of its inputs. Less CX means
negative leakage, and it also means less revenue from τXCX .
        The point of our paper is not that leakage must be negative. Various extensions
might reduce the size of our negative leakage effect. Rather, we show that in some
cases leakage might be negative. More importantly, policymakers and economists who
ignore the abatement resource effect might be overstating the size of carbon leakage.

References
Armington, P. S. (1969), “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of
   Production,” IMF Staff Papers, 16: 159–76.
Babiker, Mustafa H. (2005), “Climate Change Policy, Market Structure, and Carbon
    Leakage,” Journal of International Economics, 65(2): 421-45.
                                        - 12 -

Chua, Swee (2003), “Does Tighter Environmental Policy Lead to a Comparative
     Advantage in Less Polluting Goods?” Oxford Economic Papers, 55(1): 25-35.
Copeland, Brian R., and M. Scott Taylor (2005), “Free Trade and Global Warming: A
   Trade Theory View of the Kyoto Protocol,” Journal of Environmental Economics
   and Management, 49: 205-234.
Di Maria, Corrado, and Sjak A. Smulders (2004), Trade Pessimists vs Technology
   Optimists: Induced Technical Change and Pollution Havens,” Advances in
   Economic Analysis & Policy 4(2), Article 7.
Di Maria, Corrado, and Edwin van der Werf (2008), “Carbon Leakage Revisited:
   Unilateral Climate Policy with Directed Technical Change,” Environmental &
   Resource Economics, 39(2): 55-74.
Elliott, Joshua, Ian Foster, Samuel Kortum, Todd Munson, Fernando Perez Cervantes,
     and David Weisbach (2010), “Trade and Carbon Taxes,” American Economic
     Review, May, 100(2): 465-469.
Felder, Stefan, and Thomas F. Rutherford (1993), “Unilateral CO2 Reductions and
    Carbon Leakage: The Consequences of International Trade in Oil and Basic
    Materials,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 25(2): 162-76.
Fowlie, Meredith L. (2009), “Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect
   Competition, and Emissions Leakage,” American Economic Journal: Economics
   Policy, 1(2): 72-112.
Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel (2007), “The General Equilibrium Incidence of
    Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, 91(3-4): 571-91.
Gerlagh, Reyer, and Onno Kuik (2007), “Carbon Leakage with International
    Technology Spillovers”, FEEM paper 33.2007, Milan, http://www.feem.it
Golombek, Rolf, and Michael Hoel (2004), “Unilateral Emission Reductions and Cross-
    Country Technology Spillovers,” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 4(2),
    Article 3.
Gurtzgen, Nicole, and Michael Rauscher (2000), “Environmental Policy, Intra-Industry
    Trade and Transfrontier Pollution,” Environmental & Resource Economics, 17(1):
    59-71.
Holland, Stephen P. (2009), “Taxes and Trading Versus Intensity Standards: Second-
    Best Environmental Policies with Incomplete Regulation (Leakage) or Market
    Power,” NBER Working Paper #15262, Cambridge, MA.
Karp, Larry (2010), “Reflections on Carbon Leakage”, working paper, Berkeley, CA.
Paltsev, Sergey V. (2001), “The Kyoto Protocol: Regional and Sectoral Contributions to
     the Carbon Leakage,” The Energy Journal, 22(4): 53-79.
Wing, Ian Sue, and Marek Kolodziej (2009), “The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative:
   Emission Leakage and the Effectiveness of Interstate Border Adjustments,” Mimeo
   (Available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1448748).
