                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 SHOULD CENTRAL BANKS RAISE THEIR INFLATION TARGETS? SOME RELEVANT
                              ISSUES

                                         Bennett T. McCallum

                                         Working Paper 17005
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17005


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2011




This paper was presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference “Revisiting Monetary
Policy in a Low Inflation Environment,” held October 14-15, 2010, in Boston. For helpful discussion
and comments, I am indebted to Marvin Goodfriend, Joseph Gagnon, Edward Nelson, and Julio Rotemberg.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Should Central Banks Raise their Inflation Targets? Some Relevant Issues
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 17005
May 2011
JEL No. E31,E52,E58

                                              ABSTRACT

Should central banks, because of the zero-lower-bound problem, raise their inflation-rate targets?
Several arguments are relevant. (1) In the absence of the ZLB, the optimal steady-state inflation rate,
according to standard New Keynesian reasoning, lies between the Friedman-rule value of deflation
at the steady-state real interest rate and the Calvo-model value of zero, with calibration indicating
a larger weight on the latter. (2) An attractive modification of the Calvo pricing equation would, however,
imply that the weight on the second of these values should be zero. (3) There may be some scope
for activist monetary policy to be effective even when the one-period interest rate is at the ZLB; but
there is professional disagreement on this matter. (4) Present institutional arrangements are not immutable.
In particular, elimination of traditional currency is feasible (even arguably attractive) and would remove
the ZLB constraint on policy. (5) Increasing target inflation for the purpose of avoiding occasional
ZLB difficulties would tend to undermine the rationale for central bank independence and would constitute
an additional movement away from policy recognition of the economic necessity for intertemporal
discipline.


Bennett T. McCallum
Tepper School of Business, Posner 256
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu
1. Introduction

        The purpose of this paper is to consider the merits and demerits of the recently

renewed suggestion that central banks should, because of the difficulty of providing

additional monetary stimulus when the policy interest rate is at its zero lower bound, raise

their inflation-rate targets—for example, from 2 percent per annum to 4 percent. As is

well known, this suggestion has been put forth by several economists over the years1 but

has recently attracted special prominence as the result of a working paper co-authored by

Olivier Blanchard, who is not only a leading macroeconomist but is also currently serving

as director of research of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The paper by

Blanchard and coauthors (Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro, 2010) does not explicitly

promote this suggestion but discusses it in a distinctly sympathetic manner.

        In considering the issue one apparently needs to compare the magnitude of the

benefits from occasionally being able to provide additional monetary stimulus against the

costs of maintaining inflation at a higher value (on average) than would be chosen in the

absence of the zero lower bound (ZLB). An extensive and sophisticated analysis relating

precisely to this topic has recently been provided by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010), a

paper which will be drawn upon heavily in what follows. Our discussion begins in

Section 2 with the usual starting point for such matters, the analysis underlying Milton

Friedman’s “optimal quantity of money” result, often termed “the Friedman Rule.”2 Next



1
  Frequently-cited examples are Summers (1991) and Fischer (1996). Also see Yellen (2009) and Williams
(2009).
2
  It has been my preference to refer to this result as the “Chicago Rule” because (i) there is a different
“Friedman Rule,” which stipulates that the “total stock of money ... rises month by month, and indeed, so
far as possible, day by day, at an annual rate of X percent, where X is some number between 3 and 5”
(Friedman, 1962, p. 54) and (ii) the criterion of satiating the holders of money with the transaction-
facilitating services of money balances had been put forth Tolley (1957), who proposed interest on
reserves—not deflation to drive the interest rate to zero—as the operative mechanism. In any event,


                                                    1
in Section 3 attention is turned to the type of distortion emphasized more prominently in

the mainstream New Keynesian literature of recent years, namely, resource

misallocations brought about by the existence of nominal price stickiness that, in each

period, affects some sellers but not others. Section 4 reports on the Schmitt-Grohé and

Uribe (2010) analysis of one key question, namely, whether a steady inflation rate greater

than 2 percent would be optimal, as indicated by recent formal analysis, when account is

taken of the ZLB. Section 5 is concerned with suggestions to the effect that when the

ZLB is a constraint on the usual one-period policy interest rate, other variables such as

exchange rates or longer-term interest rates could be effectively used as the instrument

variable. Then in Section 6 our focus shifts to a line of argument that contends that the

ZLB is not in fact a necessary bound, i.e., that with modified institutions it would not be

impossible for central banks to provide monetary stimulus even when the basic one-

period interbank rate is zero. Finally, in Section 7 we take up matters not considered to

that point, ones having to do with the essential role of central banks and other related

political-economy issues. Section 8 concludes briefly.

2. Traditional Theory: Taxation Distortions

         Most monetary economists are familiar with the basic idea of the Friedman-rule

analysis: valuable transaction-facilitating services are provided in larger amounts by

larger holdings of real money balances, which will be chosen by agents when the interest-

opportunity cost of holding money is lower. This cost can be varied by varying the

ongoing inflation rate, which can be adjusted by varying the rate of nominal money

creation. Accordingly, since different rates of (paper) money creation do not require


Friedman’s first clear statement of the optimal-inflation-rate rule appears in Friedman (1960, p. 70), not
Friedman (1969).


                                                      2
different rates of usage of tangible resources, the rate should be chosen that leads agents

to satiate themselves with the transaction-facilitating services provided by holdings of

money balances.3 Furthermore, this rate prevails when the opportunity cost is zero, i.e.,

when 1 times the inflation rate (the real rate of return on money holdings) is equated

with the real rate of return on other assets, i.e., when the nominal interest rate equals zero.

         This result is developed more formally, and under several assumptions, by

Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010).4 Their analysis develops some points that involve

variants of the basic reasoning and are perhaps unfamiliar to some readers. One of these

concerns the absence of non-distortionary taxes. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe emphasize

that the basic Friedman result requires that the fiscal authority must use taxation to

continually reduce the money supply by enough to bring about the deflation rate that

yields a zero nominal interest rate. Thus the basic reasoning presumes that the fiscal

authority has available to it some form of lump-sum taxation.

         Alternatively, suppose that some government consumption is essential to

optimality and that only non-lump-sum taxes on income (of various types) are available.

Then it is often argued that that an inflation tax (i.e., an inflation rate above the Friedman

-rule magnitude) is necessary since optimality requires that the distortionary cost per unit

of revenue raised must be the same at the margin for all utilized sources of taxation.

Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe dispute this conclusion, associated with Phelps (1973), on the

basis of a finding that under certain specified conditions the optimal inflation rate


3
  This argument does not, of course, require a model specification that implies monetary superneutrality.
4
  Their initial and simplest statement is as follows: “In monetary models in which the only nominal friction
takes the form of a demand for fiat money for transaction purposes, optimal monetary policy calls for
minimizing the opportunity cost of holding money by setting the nominal interest rate to zero. This policy,
also known as the Friedman Rule, implies an optimal rate of inflation that is negative and equal in absolute
value to the real rate of interest.” (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2010, p.1).


                                                     3
continues to equal the Friedman-rule magnitude even when some distorting taxes must be

used to finance government consumption: They argue that “in contrast to Phelps’s

conjecture, negative inflation emerges as optimal even in an environment in which the

only source of revenue available to the government, other than seignorage revenue, is

distortionary income taxation. Remarkably, the optimality of the Friedman rule obtains

independently of the financial needs of the government ...” (2010, p. 15). This interesting

result apparently requires, however, the following assumptions: (i) exactly constant

returns to scale in production, (ii) factors paid their marginal products, (iii) all factor

incomes taxed at the same rate, and (iv) zero transaction costs for government

consumption. The first three are interesting baseline assumptions, but (iv) seems

unattractive: are the resources used by government in shopping not valuable?

        Before moving on, it is germane to point out some unorthodox opinions

concerning the Friedman line of analysis that are expressed in the frequently-cited piece

by Summers (1991), mentioned above. Summers states: “I think the view that inflation is

costly is correct, but it has nothing to do with optimal tax theory.... A valid case for low

inflation must have to do with the inefficiencies caused by allowing the monetary

standard to vary and by the instability that results when the inflation trend is changed.

Standard optimal tax issues along Ramsey lines are nth-order considerations. Inflation as

a Ramsey tax may be the most overstudied issue in macroeconomics.” (1991, pp. 626,

627). That I have some sympathy with one aspect of Summers’s position may become

apparent below.

3. Mainstream New Keynesian Theory: Calvo-Model Distortions

       In recent years, due in large part to the huge influence of Woodford’s (2003) opus,




                                               4
less attention has been devoted to “nominal frictions” of the type discussed in the

previous section, i.e., those having to do with the medium-of-exchange role of money.5

Instead, the frictions focused upon pertain to posited stickiness of nominal prices of

goods and, in some cases, labor. While other models of gradual price adjustment have

been put forth,6 the clear leader in this regard is the basic discrete-time version of Calvo

(1983). As is well known, the stylized friction is that in each period only a fraction 1

of the economy’s sellers, randomly selected, have the opportunity to change their prices,

the others continuing with the same prices as in the previous period. In any period,

accordingly, there are sellers (of goods that have the same production cost functions)

charging different prices in a setting of monopolistic competition. These features imply

a misallocation of productive resources among the various sellers, which is the social cost

of the nominal friction implied by the Calvo price specification. Only if monetary policy

generates an average inflation rate that makes the average price of currently-reoptimizing

sellers equal those of the other sellers (who are stuck with their previous prices) will this

distortion be eliminated. Consequently, the optimal inflation rate in this environment

(with no other nominal friction) equals zero.7

         To consider the compromise between the Friedman-rule and Calvo-model optimal

inflation rates, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe adopt a specification that includes both types of

friction and obtain results under various different calibration assumptions. By and large,

their results suggest that the tradeoff is such that the optimal rate is close to zero, i.e., that

5
  Actually, there is an important sense in which these are “real,” not nominal, frictions. That is, typical
 specifications posit that real transaction costs (either shopping time or real resource usage) are reduced
when purchasers keep on hand additional quantities of money in real—not nominal—terms.
6
  The “sticky information” formulation of Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Reis (2009) has attained a fairly
substantial following; my own favorite is discussed in McCallum (2008).
7
  For fleshed-out discussions see Woodford (2003, pp. 392-419) and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010, pp.
38-42).


                                                      5
the importance of the price-setting friction is quantitatively greater, to a considerable

extent, than the medium-of-exchange aspect featured in the Friedman-rule analysis.

Their summary statement is “We conclude that for plausible calibrations the price-

stickiness friction dominates the optimal choice of long-run inflation” (Schmitt-Grohé

and Uribe 2010, p. 51).

         In this regard, I would like to suggest that there is one feature of the standard

Calvo model that is crucial for this finding and which should be considered as

questionable at best. In particular, I would argue that the basic version of the Calvo

model is flawed, as a model of optimal price setting with the assumed type of friction, via

its assumption that those sellers, who do not have an opportunity to reoptimize in a given

period, leave their prices at the value charged in the previous period. This might make

sense in a world in which the steady-state inflation rate is zero, but if that rate was (say)

X percent per period, it would seem that a rational pricing policy would call for each

seller who cannot reoptimize to have his selling price automatically rise from its previous

level by an amount that implies an X percent increase.8 For an example of one

formulation of this type, but extended to non-steady-state conditions, see the pricing

behavior assumed in Woodford (2008, pp. 1566-8).9 Under such a formulation, the

average dispersion of prices will be unaffected by the steady-state inflation rate, so the

social optimum depends only on Friedman-rule considerations. To demonstrate this,

suppose that the price adjustment relationship is written, as in Woodford (2008), as

8
  These automatic price adjustments would have been arranged earlier, on the basis of existing information
concerning the prevailing steady-state inflation rate.
9
  It is well-known that Yun (1996), in an important early paper, utilized a price adjustment model that is
somewhat similar to the basic Calvo model but in terms of deviations of inflation from steady-state values.
More recently, specifications embodying the same basic idea as (1), i.e., that automatic price adjustments
for sellers unable to reoptimize should be part of an optimizing price strategy in the face of price stickiness,
have been extensively developed by Calvo, Celesun, and Kumhoff (2001) and Freedman, Kumhof, and
Laxton (2010), among others.


                                                       6
(1)                 p t  t  (E t p t 1  t 1 )  (mc t )

where p t is inflation in period t, t is the period-t expected value of the ongoing

inflation rate in the economy under consideration with the monetary policy rule under

consideration,10 and mct is the fractional deviation of marginal production cost in t from

its steady state value. Also 0 <  < 1, and  > 0. That the cost of inflation in the usual

version of the Calvo model, in which the t and t 1 terms do not appear, is proportional

to the unconditional expectation Et = Et+1 can be seen as follows. From a steady-state

perspective we have

(2)        p  p  (mc)

so mc = [(1)/]p, which departs from zero in proportion to the ongoing inflation rate.

Thus in that setup the costs are minimized if p = 0. In the modified model (1), however,

we have—since Ept = Ept+1 = Ep and Et = Et+1—the steady state relation is

(3)        (1  )(0)  (1  )(0)  E(mc t ) ,

which implies that the average dispersion cost equals zero for whatever steady-state rate

prevails. With this specification, then, the steady-state cost of inflation depends (in the

absence of the ZLB) only upon the Friedman-rule “shoe-leather” cost occasioned by non-

satiation with the services of the medium of exchange.

4. Optimality in the Presence of the Zero Lower Bound

           At this point we turn to the ZLB issue more directly. One significant

accomplishment of the Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010) paper is to consider, by means of


10
     Woodford (2008, p. 1568) notes that t can be operationally viewed as the Beveridge-Nelson (1981)
value of the “stochastic trend rate of inflation,” i.e., a stochastic growth rate for the price level, which is
well defined so long as the inflation rate is difference-stationary with an unconditional mean of zero for its
first difference, which is here assumed. This value is ultimately given by the central bank’s inflation target.


                                                         7
simulations of a rich calibrated model under various assumptions, quantitative aspects of

the optimal rate of inflation in economies with more than one nominal friction. Indeed,

one section of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010) is entitled “Does the Zero Bound Provide

a Rationale for Positive Inflation Targets?” A quotation from the paper may be useful in

judging the nature of their study:

        We believe ... this argument is best evaluated in the context of an empirically
        realistic quantitative model of the business cycle. In Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
        (2007b) we study Ramsey optimal monetary policy in an estimated medium-scale
        model of the macroeconomy. The theoretical framework employed there
        emphasizes the importance of combining nominal as well as real rigidities in
        explaining the propagation of macroeconomic shocks. Specifically, the model
        features four nominal frictions, sticky prices, sticky wages, a transactional demand
        for money by households, and a cash-in-advance constraint on the wage bill of
        firms, and four sources of real rigidities, investment adjustment costs, variable
        capacity utilization, habit formation, and imperfect competition in product and
        factor markets. Aggregate fluctuations are driven by three shocks: a permanent
        neutral labor-augmenting technology shock, a permanent investment-specific
        technology shock, and temporary variations in government spending (2010, p. 52).


Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe explain how parameter values used in these exercises are

obtained and offer plausible justification. The basic finding is that “the Ramsey optimal

policy implies a mean inflation rate of 0.4 percent per year.... Under the Ramsey

optimal monetary policy, the standard deviation of the nominal interest rate is only 0.9

percentage points at an annual rate ... [while] the Ramsey optimal level of the nominal

interest rate is 4.4 percent... [implying that] for the nominal interest rate to violate the

zero bound, it must fall more than 4 standard deviations below its target level” (2010, p.

53). In this regard, the quoted results are for an assumed time-preference rate of 0.03 per


                                               8
year, smaller than that implied by the 0.99 quarterly discount factor that is typically used

in monetary policy studies. Moreover, “lowering the subjective discount factor ... to 1

percent per year results in a Ramsey-optimal nominal interest rate process that ... [implies

that] ... the nominal interest rate must still fall by almost three standard deviations below

its mean for the zero bound to be violated” (2010, p. 53).

         The point is, then, that the Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe analysis suggests that the

ZLB constraint will be binding so rarely that these authors are led “to conjecture that in

an augmented version of the model that explicitly imposes the zero bound constraint, the

optimal inflation target would be similar to the 0.4 percent per year that is optimal” in

their model. In support of that view, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe comment on results of

Adam and Billi (2006), as follows: “These authors compute the optimal monetary policy

in a simpler version of the new Keynesian model.... An advantage of their approach is

that they take explicitly into account the zero bound restriction in computing the optimal

policy regime. They find that the optimal monetary policy does not imply positive

inflation on average and that the zero bound binds infrequently.... We conjecture ... that

should a money demand be added to their framework, the average optimal rate of

inflation would indeed be negative” (2010, p. 54).11

         Results of the type cited in this section are optimistic in that they do not offer

much—if any—support to the idea that raising the inflation-target objective (and with it

the average inflation rate) would be desirable. Unfortunately, however, they are

inherently open to challenge and/or reinterpretation.


11
  Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010, p. 54) also cite results of Reifschneider and Williams (2000) that are
compatible. Recently, Williams (2009) has, by contrast, discussed considerations that are more favorable
with respect to the proposal of a raised inflation target. Even more recently, Billi (2010) has demonstrated
that an inability of the central bank to commit can raise the optimal inflation rate considerably.


                                                     9
         A significant problem, for example, is the absence from the Schmitt-Grohé and

Uribe analysis of the distinction between one-period interbank rates of interest and one-

period rates of the “risk-free” or “purely intertemporal” variety that is relevant for

intertemporal decisions. That is, in analysis that recognizes a banking sector that uses

resources to make loans that finance its money issues—the central bank supplying this

sector with base money—the discrepancy between these interbank and risk-free rates can

be quite large. In the calibration of Goodfriend and McCallum (2007), for example, the

difference between the (real) rates is 6.0  0.84 = 5.16 percent per annum (2007, p.

1492).12 Since it is the lower interbank rate that is relevant for the ZLB problem whereas

the Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe analysis implicitly refers to the risk-free rate, recognition of

this distinction could completely overturn the optimistic presumption that the analysis

described above suggests that the ZLB would be binding only rarely.13

5. Alternative Monetary Strategies

         Before moving on to more drastic proposals, mention should be made of some

proposed strategies for monetary policy management in the face of the ZLB constraint,

taking it for granted that such a constraint exists. Here the prevailing view seems to be

that of Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), who show that the output loss from a temporary

ZLB constraint can be lessened by use of a “history dependent” rule for the one-period

policy interest rate, designed in a manner that has the effect of implying that policy will

12
   Here the 6.0 figure comes from assumed values of a 4 % p.a. time preference rate and a 2% p.a. growth
rate of population. The 0.84% p.a. figure is close to the 1% that Campbell (1999, p. 1241) reports for the
real three-month T-bill rate for the United States over 1947.2-1996.4. (Somewhat confusingly, Campbell
refers to this as the “risk-free” rate since he is also assuming the absence of costly banking.)
13
   Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2010) provide interesting analyses of several topics not mentioned in the
present paper, including the effects of foreign demand for domestic currency and of incorrectly estimated
inflation rates.


                                                    10
be kept more stimulative in the future than would otherwise (i.e., without the temporary

ZLB constraint) be the case.

         Alternatively, it has been argued by Svensson (2001) and McCallum (2000) that

monetary demand management can be conducted effectively under ZLB conditions by

appropriate exchange-rate policies. The idea is that one-period risk-free bonds and

foreign exchange are not perfect substitutes, presumably for reasons stressed in the

“portfolio balance” literature of the 1970s.14 Central bank purchases of foreign exchange

will, accordingly, tend to depreciate the country’s exchange rate. The central bank could

then exploit that relationship to manage the (nominal) exchange rate in accordance with a

policy rule expressed in terms of an exchange rate instrument—with the rate of exchange

rate appreciation appearing in place of the policy interest rate in a Taylor-style rule.15 Of

course, real exchange rate depreciation appears in the “expectational IS” portion of a

typical New Keynesian open-economy model, so with sticky prices this mode of policy

behavior can have systematic effects on real aggregate demand in the economy under

discussion, even with the one-period interest rate immobilized at zero. Simulations

reported in McCallum (2000, 2003), for example, indicate that substantial stabilization

can be effected in this manner.16 Also, if the economy in question is small in relation to

the world, the policy will not have “beggar-thy-neighbor” effects.

         An argument against this position might seem to be implied by Woodford’s

(2005) comment on the suggestion by McGough, Rudebusch, and Williams (2005) of

“Using a Long-Term Interest Rate as the Monetary Policy Instrument.” Specifically,

14
   See, for example, Dornbusch (1980).
15
   To apply this rule the central bank would not need to know the specification of the portfolio balance
relation between foreign exchange purchases and the rate of depreciation, just as Taylor-rule central banks
do not need to know money demand functions to be able to implement interest-rate policy rules.
16
   For alternative results in much the same spirit, see Coenen and Wieland (2003).


                                                    11
Woodford criticizes the long-rate strategy and mentions that “similar comments apply to

the proposal by Svensson (2003) that the exchange rate be used as the instrument of

policy when an economy is in a ‘liquidity trap.’”17 The problem is that rules based on

multi-period interest rates (or on exchange rates) cannot expand the set of possibilities

without driving the one-period rate into the negative (and therefore infeasible) range.

That argument is, however, based on an assumed term-structure model in which the

longer-term interest rates are related to one-period rates by a relationship that depends

only upon expected yields, with no included “portfolio” terms involving quantities, such

as those mentioned above. This same statement applies, moreover, to the uncovered

interest parity relationship involving exchange rates. Thus, Woodford’s argument

apparently does not refute the one made above, which does presume the presence of

portfolio-balance departures from the counterpart of the expectations theory as applied to

exchange rates, i.e., uncovered interest parity.18 In addition, the argument made here

would apply also to use of long term domestic interest rates if the term-structure

relationship involves relative quantities of different-maturity bonds. Emphasis on the

exchange-rate case would seem to imply a belief that foreign one-period bonds are more

imperfect substitutes for domestic one-period bonds than are domestic long-term bonds.

6. Is the ZLB Actually a Genuine Bound?

        But is it actually the case that zero represents a lower bound on nominal interest

rates? Of course the precise lower bound may be slightly negative because of the cost of

storing money, as mentioned by McCallum (2000, p. 875) and others, but this magnitude


17
  Presumably, the same objection would apply to the closely related proposal in McCallum (2000).
18
  My argument is, nevertheless, open to the objection that quantitative magnitudes have not been explored;
my simulations simply assume that the exchange rate depreciations called for by the policy rule can be
implemented.


                                                   12
is small enough to be neglected. That is not the matter here under discussion. Instead,

our concern now is the validity of the argument, developed by Goodfriend (2000, 2001)

and Buiter (2003, 2010), that with modern technology institutions can be designed so as

to permit payment of negative nominal interest on all forms of money, thereby making it

possible to have negative (as well as positive) rates for the central bank’s policy rate, and

thereby eliminating—rather than surmounting—the putative problem of the ZLB. In this

regard, Citi Research (2010, p.5), presumably influenced strongly by Buiter (2010), states

that “there are at least three administratively and technically feasible ways to eliminate

the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates completely... The first is to abolish

currency. The second is to ... start paying interest, positive or negative, on currency. The

third is to ... end the fixed exchange rate ... between currency and bank reserves or

deposits with the central bank.”

       The abolishment of currency seems like an extremely radical step—almost

unimaginable—until one contemplates it somewhat calmly. My own attitude has been

influenced by a rather trivial aspect of my own routine—lunch each day at my university.

Only a few years ago, my regular lunch companions and I used cash to pay for our

lunches at the Carnegie Mellon Faculty Club, and I was annoyed when someone in line

ahead of us chose to pay by credit card and thereby slowed the process noticeably. Then

a new system for accepting credit-card payments was adopted by the cashier, and the

time needed for a credit-card transaction decreased sharply. A couple of years ago, I

realized that one of my companions had adopted a routine of paying by credit card—and

that this apparently involved no extra time at all. Finally, a few months ago, I realized

that all of my regular companions had switched to credit-card payment as their usual




                                             13
mode of transaction—and that each of them was taking less of the cashier’s time (and

that of other customers) than I was imposing each day with my cash transaction! A

second recognition was that taxi cabs now typically have facilities for accepting credit-

card payments, thereby eliminating an example that I used to mention in undergraduate

classes as transactions for which one needed to carry cash.

       More seriously, I have been impressed by the point that approximately 75 percent

(by value) of U.S. currency outstanding consists of 100-dollar bills. These are notes of

the largest denomination, of course—which are of greatest use to “... the underground

economy, the criminal community, that is, those engaged in tax evasion, money

laundering and the financing of terrorism, and those wishing to store the proceeds from

crime and the means to commit further crimes out of sight and reach of the authorities”

(Buiter, 2010, p. 224). In the case of the Euro, 59 percent of the value of Euro notes

outstanding in April 2009 were in the denominations of 100, 200, or 500 euros while less

than 10 percent of the stock value was in the form of 5, 10, and 20 euros (Buiter, 2010, p.

223). Partly on the basis of these facts, Buiter develops a strong argument for the

elimination of (government) currency. An important part of the argument is the

suggestion, made in Goodfriend (2000), that the central bank make available free

transaction accounts to all legal residents, accounts that could be administered through

“commercial banks, post offices, and other retail facilities” (2000, p. 224).

       A second approach involves taxation of currency. Buiter (2010) stresses,

however, that there are inherent problems with the administration of positive tax rates

(i.e., negative interest rates) on negotiable bearer instruments that sharply reduce the

attractiveness of this approach. Goodfriend (2000, p. 1016) has suggested that “... a carry




                                             14
tax could be imposed on currency by imbedding a magnetic strip in each bill. The

magnetic strip could visibly record when a bill was last withdrawn from the banking

system ... [with a tax] deducted from each bill upon deposit according to how long the

bill was in circulation since last withdrawn ....” Perhaps such a system could become

viable in the future, but with today’s technology it would appear excessively expensive.

        A third approach of Buiter’s is to unbundle—divorce—the medium of exchange

(MOE) and the medium of account (MOA). The MOE consists in part of currency and

claims to currency; the MOA is the entity in terms of which prices are quoted.

Governments do not invariably have full control over either of these, but can retain

control over the MOE if government currency is not issued to excess. And by requiring

that transactions with the government must be denominated in terms of an appointed

MOA it can most likely gain acceptance for its choice of the latter. Then in each period it

can specify interest rates for both, with the MOE interest rate kept non-negative but with

no such stipulation for the MOA rate, by issuing bonds in terms of both media. Then the

central bank can conduct policy in terms of its instrument, the MOA interest rate. If

prices in terms of this MOA are the prices that are relevant for market supplies and

demands, then the central bank continues to be able to influence aggregate demand by

variations in the policy interest rate even when the MOE rate is immobilized at zero.

        Buiter (2010) devotes many words to analysis of this third approach, but it seems

that his preference is probably for the abolition of currency.19 Actually, it should be said,

it is the abolition of a government-issued currency that Buiter and Goodfriend have in

mind. Both evidently would favor regulations that would not rule out the possibility of


19
 In this regard, Goodfriend has remarked in conversation that “currency is the most unsanitary object that
most of us handle on a regular basis.”


                                                    15
private issuers attempting to put their own currency-like vehicles into circulation.20

         In any event, it would seem entirely appropriate that serious consideration be

given to the Buiter and Goodfriend proposals, if it transpires that the ZLB constraint is

more of a problem than the Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe analysis suggests.

7. The Duties of a Central Bank

         Before the financial crisis of 2008-2009, monetary economists had become rather

proud of the development of their subject over the preceding 10-15 years. There had been

great progress in formal analysis and also in the actual conduct of monetary policy.

Analytically, the profession developed an approach to policy analysis that centers around

a somewhat standardized dynamic model framework that is designed to be structural—

that is, respectful of both theory and evidence—and therefore usable in principle for

policy analysis. This framework includes a policy instrument that agrees with the one

typically used in practice and recognizes that, for imperfectly understood reasons,

nominal price adjustments do not take place immediately so that monetary policy actions

will have significant consequences for the behavior of real aggregate variables such as

output and employment. Indeed, models of this type were being used (in similar ways) by

economists in both academia and in central banks, where several economic researchers

had gained leading policymaking positions. Meanwhile, in terms of practice, most

central banks had been much more successful than in previous decades in keeping

inflation low while also avoiding major recessions (with a few exceptions) prior to 2008.

20
   Before continuing, it should be noted that there similarities but also (crucial) differences between
Buiter’s third approach and what I would term the Yeager-Greenfield system. The latter has been
developed in a number of papers by Leland Yeager (1983, 1992), plus others that are co-authored with
Robert Greenfield (Greenfield and Yeager, 1983). A brief discussion is provided in McCallum (2010).
One major difference is that the Yeager-Greenfield system was originally designed as one intended to
eliminate, or reduce as far as possible, governmental influence on monetary affairs. A second is that a
major objective of the Yeager-Greenfield system is to achieve “stability,” in the sense of constancy through
time, of the price level, whereas Buiter’s approach is more concerned with avoidance of recessions.


                                                    16
Furthermore, these improvements in science and application had been interrelated: the

“inflation targeting” style of policy practice that had been adopted by numerous

important central banks—and that arguably had been practiced unofficially by the

Federal Reserve—is strongly related in principle to the prevailing framework for

analysis.21 Accordingly, one keystone of the “consensus” view was that central bank

control of the inflation rate is the central ingredient in successful monetary policy

practice, and that this control called both for inflation “stability,” in the sense of little

variation from year to year, and for a low average level—often in the range of 1 percent

to 2 percent per annum. The crisis has, however, damaged—if not destroyed—that

consensus; the Blanchard, et. al. paper is evidence of that.

         It would seem, however, that the recent crisis is highly inappropriate as a

centerpiece for reconsideration of an economy’s monetary policy. To a considerable

extent, the crisis was precipitated by events in the United States. There the primary root

of the crisis was a genuine macroeconomic imbalance that required correction, namely,

the housing price boom. What were its origins? The situation in housing was largely

brought about by deliberate government action designed to stimulate homeownership

even among—actually, especially among—families that were not suited for and could not

afford homeownership.22 This sectoral imbalance was then turned into a macroeconomic

collapse by unwise regulations and practices in financial markets that led to the freezing-

up of the latter. In that regard numerous practices of private enterprises in the financial

industry were truly appalling, but again much of the problem can be traced back to an

unwise governmental framework; one prominent example being regulations that gave

21
   For an exposition that discusses this development, by an author who participated both as researcher and
policymaker, see Goodfriend (2007).
22
   For short discussions, see Pinto (2010) and Wallison (2010).


                                                    17
undue importance to the ratings of a few private firms in the credit-rating industry. The

point is that none of these failures had much if anything to do with monetary policy.23 To

drastically alter the objectives of monetary policy in response to the crisis would seem,

accordingly, to be lacking in logic.

         From a more general perspective, some lack of clarity about the monetary policy

duties of a central bank has resulted from the drastic change in monetary arrangements—

from metallic standards to fiat money arrangements—that occurred during the 20th

century. Under a metallic standard, the central bank has basically no price-level duties so

long as the standard does not break down. Behavior of the price level is governed

primarily by the mint, whereas the central bank is just that—an intermediary intended to

facilitate the financial activities of the government. Under a fiat-money arrangement, by

contrast, price level trends are determined by the abundance of money in circulation

relative to the quantity needed (i.e., useful) for conducting transactions, and modern

central banks have been universally assigned the duty of price level management. For

example, in the Journal of Economic Literature’s recent “panel discussion” of Federal

Reserve duties by Blinder (2010) and Feldstein (2010), both contributors take it for

granted that central banks will be the makers of monetary policy and argue that they

should have extensive independence in that role.24

         In my opinion, a major justification for central-bank independence is that

generally—except in ZLB situations—the desirable effects of monetary policy loosening


23
   John Taylor (2009) has argued that monetary policy was unduly expansionary during the period 2003-
2005 and that this mistake was an important cause of the crisis. I would agree that policy was inappropriate
in that manner, but consider this policy mistake as less egregious than the other items mentioned in the
present paragraph. In any event, Taylor’s argument would certainly appear to provide no support for an
increase in the target inflation rate!
24
   Consequently, the panel discussion referred to is mostly concerned with the regulatory responsibilities of
a central bank. For an ambitious recent proposal for Federal Reserve strategy, see Goodfriend (2010).


                                                     18
occur rapidly and the undesirable effects materialize only after a greater lag. When the

CB eases policy—i.e., making monetary conditions more stimulative and aggregate

demand stronger—the socially desirable effects arrive more promptly than do the

undesirable effects. That is, there will normally be effects that can be thought of as

expansions of output and employment (relative to what would have prevailed in the

absence of the policy change) that will begin to occur within two or three months. Then

after one or two years there will also occur upward pressures on the inflation rate. If

instead the policy action is one that tightens policy, rather than loosening it, there will be

relatively prompt reductions of output and employment, followed in a year or so by

reductions in the inflation rate. Now, it is the case that most economists, congressmen,

commentators, and citizens consider expansions in the level of employment and output to

be desirable and increases in the inflation rate to be undesirable. Accordingly, if

monetary policy is required to be politically acceptable, there is a tendency for policy to

be more expansionary and inflationary the more impatient is the policymaker—the

shorter is his effective time horizon. One way to avoid policies that give primary

emphasis to short-run considerations is to place responsibility for monetary policy in an

institution that is somewhat sheltered from the stresses of day-to-day politics, and

consequently able to take a longer-term perspective.

       An extremely important ingredient in such a perspective is the understanding that

there exists no usable long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment (or output)

—i.e., that some version of the “natural rate hypothesis” is valid. Moreover, a major

contribution of the “consensus” position of mainstream monetary economics that evolved

in the 10-15 years prior to 2008 was the development of models that incorporated this




                                              19
natural-rate feature25 while also reflecting the property that monetary policy has

substantial short-term effects on the behavior of output and employment.

        But to adopt the position that the average ongoing inflation rate should be raised

(as it certainly would be if the target were raised), in order to prevent or shorten

recessions involving the ZLB, is to accept the notion that there does exist a long-run

tradeoff. It is based on a different mechanism than the Phillips Curve tradeoff, but in

public debate and actual policy consideration this distinction would be lost. Thus it

would serve to overturn a basic message that the profession has been at great pains to

present to policy makers. Admittedly, this is an argument based on considerations of

“communication,” not science, but nevertheless should arguably be taken into

consideration.

        To some readers a move to a 4.0 percent inflation rate may seem entirely

innocuous. To emphasize the contrary possibility, let us ask the following question:

What would be the United States price level now, in 2010, if a steady 4 percent inflation

rate had prevailed since 1792, the year in which a United States monetary standard was

first established?26 Since 2010  1792 = 218, the price level today would be 1.04218 =

5167.3 times the price level of 1792 if inflation had been 4 percent each year. In fact, the

actual CPI price level today is only 23.54 times as high as in 1792.27 Consequently, if a 4

percent inflation rate had prevailed since 1792, prices today would be 219.5 times as high




25
   Actually, with the basic Calvo model of price adjustment, these models do not quite have the strict
natural-rate property. The modification promoted in Section 6 does, however, satisfy a non-strict version
as discussed by Andrés, López-Salido, and Nelson (2005).
26
   Under the Articles of Confederation, the states did not share a national monetary standard.
Implementation of the Constitutional provisions regarding money began with the Coinage Act of 1792.
27
   The CPI index, on the basis of a 100 value for 1982-84, is reported by Measuring Worth (2010) to have
equaled 9.72 in 1792, whereas the June 2010 value reported by the St. Louis Fed’s FRED is 218.2.


                                                    20
as they actually are, on average.28

         Finally, I would suggest that in the United States, and also in many other

countries, central banks have shown themselves in recent years to be the primary—

indeed, only visible—source of intertemporal discipline in fiscal affairs. The point is that

the overall government budget constraint implies that if the central bank maintains a low

growth rate of the monetary base, it limits the extent to which the fiscal authority can

engage in deficit finance.29 If the treasury seeks to exceed this limit by means of

(excessive) borrowing (selling bonds) it will run into a constraint reflecting the implied

violation of a transversality condition relevant for optimal behavior for private lenders.

In this context, a switch to a higher target inflation rate evidently represent one more

move away from intertemporal discipline, a position that that many economists would

want to avoid.

8. Conclusion

         A summary of the paper’s arguments can be presented briefly, as follows. First,

in the absence of the ZLB, the optimal steady state inflation rate, according to standard

New Keynesian reasoning, lies somewhere between the Friedman-rule value of deflation

at the steady-state real rate of interest and the Calvo-model value of zero, with careful


28
    I would have to admit that in terms of economic analysis, this last fact alone is rather devoid of
significance. At the same time, I schizophrenically believe that many citizens, even well educated ones, are
frequently confused in thinking about issues relating to inflation. (My own mother, who was the author of
a well-respected work in U.S. history that was kept in print for two or three decades by a reputable
university press, would occasionally express doubts that the inflation rate had recently fallen by stating that
“I know that [specific item] costs more now than it did at the same store a year ago.”) That being the case,
it would seem that a desirable monetary system would have the property of being easy for an average
citizen to understand and cope with. Under current conditions, a substantial fraction of measured GDP
consists of the activities of persons seeking to profit from other individuals’ lack of understanding of the
causes and effects of inflation. A general if somewhat elusive discussion that emphasizes the medium of
account role of money is provided by Niehans (1978, pp. ).
29
   This contention presumes that the central bank is in fact given control of the monetary base, even when
its desires conflict with those of the ministry of finance. It is my impression that this is the appropriate
assumption for the United States and most other developed economies.


                                                     21
calibration indicating that the weight on the latter may be considerably larger. Second,

however, an attractive modification of the Calvo model would imply that the weight on

the latter of these values should be zero, so that the Friedman-rule prescription would be

optimal (in the absence of the ZLB). Third, even when the effects of the ZLB are added

to the analysis, the optimal inflation rate is (according to this line of reasoning) probably

negative. Fourth, there is perhaps some scope for activist monetary policy to be effective

(via, e.g., an exchange-rate channel) even when the one-period nominal interest rate is at

the ZLB; but there is professional disagreement on this matter. Fifth, while the ZLB is a

genuine constraint under present institutional arrangements, these are not immutable.

Elimination of traditional currency could be effected, in which case there would be no

zero lower bound on one-period nominal interest rates and therefore no reason involving

such losses for having an increased target rate of inflation. Sixth, increasing the target

inflation rate for the purpose of avoiding occasional ZLB difficulties would constitute a

reversal of a central message, of recent monetary policy analysis, to the effect that there

is no long-run benefit in terms of output or employment from the adoption of increased

inflation rates. Seventh, such an increase in the target inflation rate would tend to

undermine the rationale for central bank independence and would constitute an additional

movement away from intertemporal discipline.




                                             22
                                      References



Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi. 2006. “Optimal Monetary Policy Under

       Commitment with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,” Journal of Money,

       Credit, and Banking 38, 1877-1905.

Andrés, Javier, J. David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson, 2005. “Sticky-Price Models

      and the Natural Rate Hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 1025-1053.

Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson, 1981. “A New Approach to the Decomp-

       osition of Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with

       Particular Attention to Measurement of the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary

       Economics 7(2), pp. 151-174.

Billi, Roberto M., 2010. “Optimal Inflation for the U.S. Economy,” Working paper,

       Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Giovanni Dell’Aricca, and Paolo Mauro. 2010. “Rethinking

       Macroeconomic Policy,” IMF Staff Position Note, International Monetary Fund.

       Also Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(S1), 199-215.

Blinder, Alan S. 2010. “How Central Should the Central Bank Be? Journal of Economic

       Literature 48(1), 123-133.

Buiter, Willem H. 2003. “Helicopter Money: Irredeemable Fiat Money and the Liquidity

       Trap,” NBER Working Paper 10163.

______________. 2010 “Negative Nominal Interest Rates: Three Ways to Overcome the

       Zero Lower Bound,” North American Journal of Economics and Finance 20, pp.

       213-238.




                                            23
Calvo, Guillermo. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal

       of Monetary Economics 12, pp. 383-398.

Calvo, Guillermo, C.A. Celason, and Michael Kumhof, 2001. A Theory of Rational

       Inflationary Inertia. In P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds.,

       Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor

       of Edmund S. Phelps. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., pp. 87-117.

Campbell, John Y, 1999. “Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business Cycle.” In John

       B. Taylor, and Michael Woodford, eds. Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1C.

       Elsevier, Amsterdam. pp. 1231-1303.

Citi Research. 2010. “The Case for Raising the Inflation Target,” Citigroup Global

       Markets, Global Macro View, http://bx.businessweek.com/global-

       business/global-macro-view-05-march-2010-by-citi-

       research/6234371355931297299-fd3b1bf6b0e527571bc3eda957053c32/

Coenen, Guenter, and Volker Wieland, 2003. “The Zero-Interest-Rate Bound and the

       Role of the Exchange Rate for Monetary Policy in Japan.” Journal of Monetary

       Economics 50(5), 1071-1101.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1980. “Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?”

       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 3, 537-584.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates

       and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No.1,

       139-211.

Feldstein, Martin. 2010. “What Powers for the Federal Reserve?” Journal of Economic

       Literature 48(1), pp. 134-145.




                                           24
Fischer, Stanley. 1996. “Why Are Central Banks Pursuing Long-Run Price Stability?”

       In Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. pp. 7-34.

Freedman, Charles, Michael Kumhof, and Douglas Laxton, 2010. “Fiscal Stimulus to the

       Rescue: On the Short-Run Benefits and Potential Long-Run Costs of Fiscal

       Deficits,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Friedman, Milton. 1960. A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham

       University Press.

__________, 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

___________, 1969. “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in The Optimum Quantity of

       Money and Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co..

Goodfriend, Marvin, 2000. “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy,”

       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 1007-1035.

________________, 2001. “Financial Stability, Deflation, and Monetary Policy,”

       Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies 19(S-1), 143-167.

___________, 2007. “How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy,” Journal

       of Economic Literature

____________, 2010. “Central Banking in the Credit Turmoil: An Assesssment of

       Federal Reserve Practice,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58, forthcoming.

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Bennett T. McCallum, 2007. “Banking and Interest Rates in

       Monetary Policy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Monetary

       Economics 54, 1480-1507.

Greenfield, Robert L., and Leland B. Yeager, 1963. “A Laissez-Faire Approach to

       Monetary Stability.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27(3), 302-15.




                                          25
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis, 2002. “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices:

       A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 112(4), 1295-1328

McCallum, Bennett T., 2000. “Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on

       Nominal Interest Rates.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4,pt.2), pp.

       870-904.

_______________, 2003. “Japanese Monetary Policy: 1991-2001,” Federal Reserve

       Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 89(1), pp. 1-31.

_______________, 2008. “Reconsideration of the P-Bar Model of Gradual Price

       Adjustment,” European Economic Review 52, pp. 1480-1493

________________, 2010. “Alternatives to the Fed?” Cato Journal 30(3), pp. 1-11.

McGough, Bruce, Glenn D. Rudebusch, and John C. Williams, 2005. “Using a Long-

       Term Interest Rate as the Monetary Policy Instrument,” Journal of Monetary

       Economics 52(5), pp. 855-879.

Niehans, Jurg, 1978. The Theory of Money. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD.

Phelps, Edmund S., 1973. “Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance,” The Swedish

       Journal of Economics 75, pp.67-82.

Pinto, Edward, 2010. “The Future of Housing Finance.” Wall Street Journal, August 17.

Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams, 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy

       in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4,pt.2) , pp.

       936-966.




                                            26
Reis, Ricardo, 2009. “A Sticky-Information General Equilibrium Model for Policy

       Analysis,” in K. Schmitt-Hebel and C.E. Walsh, eds., Monetary Policy Under

       Uncertainty and Learning. Central Bank of Chile, Santiago, 125-186.

Measuring Worth, The annual consumer Price index for the United States, 1774-2008.

       http://www.measuringworth.org/datasets/uscpi/result.php

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe, 2007. “Optimal Inflation Stabilization in a

       Medium- Scale Macroeconomic Model,” in Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel and Rick

       Mishkin, eds, Monetary Policy Under Inflation Targeting, Central Bank of Chile,

       Santiago, Chile, pp.125-186.

__________________________________, “The Optimal Rate of Inflation,” NBER

       Working Paper 16054, June 2010. Forthcoming in: Benjamin Friedman and

       Michael Woodford, editors, 2010. Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 2.

       Amsterdam, North-Holland Pub. Co.

Summers, Lawrence H., “How Should Long-Term Monetary Policy Be Determined?”

       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 23, 1991, 625-631.

Svensson, Lars E. O., 2003. “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: the

       Foolproof Way and Others,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 145-166.

Taylor, John B., 2009. Getting off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions

       Caused, Prolonged, and Worsened the Financial Crisis. Hoover Institution Press.

Tolley, George S., 1957. “Providing for Growth of the Money Supply,” Journal of

       Political Economy 65, 477-84.

Wallison, Peter J., 2010. “Government Housing Policy and the Financial Crisis,” Cato

       Journal 30, 397-406.




                                           27
Williams, John C., 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the The Zero Lower

       Bound,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Fall, pp. 1-37.

Woodford, Michael, 2003. Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ

_______________, “Comment on: Using a Long-Term Interest Rate as the Monetary

       Policy Instrument,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 2005, 881-887.

________, 2008, “How Important is Money in the Conduct of Monetary Policy?” Journal

       of Money, Credit, and Banking 40(8), pp. 1561-1598.

Yeager, Leland B. 1983. “Stable Money and Free-Market Currencies,” Cato Journal 3, pp.

       305-326.

______________. 1992. “Towards Forecast-Free Monetary Institutions.” Cato Journal

       12, pp. 53-73.

Yellen, Janet L., Panel Discussion: Federal Reserve Board/JMCB conference “Financial

       Markets and Monetary Policy.” http://frbsf.org/news/speeches/2009/0605.html

Yun, Tack, 1996. “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogenity, and Business

       Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.




                                          28
