                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SUSTAINABILITY AND ITS MEASUREMENT

                                             Geoffrey Heal

                                         Working Paper 17008
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17008


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Geoffrey Heal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Sustainability and its Measurement
Geoffrey Heal
NBER Working Paper No. 17008
May 2011
JEL No. H0,Q20,Q30,Q50

                                           ABSTRACT

I present a non-technical high-level review the concept of sustainability and the various approaches
to quantifying it.


Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
616 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu
                                                                                                  1



        Sustainability and its Measurement

        Geoffrey Heal, Columbia Business School1.

Abstract: I present a non‐technical high‐level review the concept of sustainability
and the various approaches to quantifying it.
Key words: Sustainability, GDP, NDP, adjusted net savings, genuine savings, green GDP, natural
capital

JEL classification: Q 20, Q 30, Q 50, H 00

Overview
        In business schools there is a saying that “What gets measured, gets
managed.” This is bad news for managing our natural capital and the interactions
between our economic activity and the environment: these are almost entirely
unmeasured, and often unmanaged too.

        Economic measurement is never easy: economic systems are immensely
complex. It might be helpful to begin by thinking about something more
straightforward than managing an economy – driving a car. Whenever we drive, the
car’s dashboard provides us with some basic data: how fast we are going, how hot
the engine is, how fast it’s revving, and some warnings about possible problems via
a range of warning lights. And of course there is the fuel gauge showing us how
much longer we can drive. In modern cars this data is often supplemented by a
satellite navigation system, telling us exactly where we are and how to get to our
destination. The people who manage our economies would love to have the
equivalent information about the economies they manage, but in general they don’t.
They are far less well informed about their task than the average car driver about
hers.

        We do have something like a speedometer, the rate of growth of gross
domestic product. We have data on unemployment and inflation, which are warning
lights of a sort. We don’t have anything like a satellite navigation system: we often


1
 gmh1@columbia.edu, www.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/gheal . This paper is based on a chapter of my
forthcoming book Whole Earth Economics.
                                                                                                     2


don’t know exactly what is happening in the economy until a quarter or more after it
has happened, because data are collected slowly.

        Perhaps most striking, we don’t have anything analogous to the fuel gauge,
telling us how much longer we can carry on doing what we are doing. The analogue
of the fuel gauge would be an indicator of sustainability, telling us how much longer
our forms of economic organization can continue as is without spluttering to a halt.

        None of the usual numbers – GDP, unemployment, inflation – tell us anything
about the state of our natural capital. In fact they can be positively misleading.2
Parts of India are running out of water, and the water table is falling. Farmers have
to drill deeper wells to find water, using more labor and energy. The extra spending
raises GDP. So water shortages appear to be raising India’s GDP, making India better
off, and indeed they are in a macroeconomic sense raising economic activity. But
more important is the fact that they are a threat to its growth: when it is no longer
possible to find more water by drilling deeper, agricultural output will collapse and
welfare will drop.

        Here we are missing a warning sign – falling water table ‐ and wrongly
reading it as a contribution to growth.

Alternatives to GDP
        What changes in our measures of economic performance would improve
upon GDP and give an accurate signal about our environmental performance? A
relatively simple move, at least conceptually, would be to move from gross domestic
product GDP to net domestic product NDP. The difference is that the depreciation of
capital is subtracted from GDP to calculate NDP. In the national accounts as they
currently exist, the capital whose depreciation is subtracted is physical capital, the
only type of capital that is measured currently. So subtracting the depreciation of
physical capital will convert GDP to NDP, and this is really a better measure of what
the economy is producing, what it is making available to its members. The reason


2
 For a more general critique of GDP see Stiglitz Sen and Fitoussi 2010, and the pioneering work of
Nordhaus and Tobin 1972.
                                                                                                3


we work with GDP rather than NDP is purely pragmatic: it is hard to measure
depreciation of capital accurately.

           From an environmental perspective the difference between GDP and NDP
matters, because much of the impact of human activity on natural capital can be
thought of as depreciating this capital, reducing it in amount or value. A simple
example is Saudi Arabia: this country makes its living by extracting and selling oil.
Oil is a form of natural capital, so they are running down their natural capital. Each
year their stocks of oil are lower than they were the previous year, the decrease
representing depreciation of their natural capital. The depreciation of this capital is
the value of the oil that they sell, so that if we were to calculate their Net Domestic
Product by subtracting depreciation of natural capital from GDP, this would more or
less cancel out their income from the sale of oil, which is most of their income,
leaving them poor.3

           The conclusion here is that NDP is a better measure of output than GDP,
particularly if we make the effort needed to measure and value changes in natural
capital. It is an improvement on what we have today, but by no means the real
answer to the question “What should we measure?”

           Some people have tried to answer this question by moving away altogether
from a money‐based income measure and constructing something that tries to
measure the well‐being of members of a society more directly. The best known of
these is the Human Development Index (HDI), developed and published by the
United Nations Development Program (UNDP). The HDI is based on three sets of
data relating to health, education and income, which UNDP sees as the key
dimensions of welfare. These are life expectancy at birth, mean years of schooling
and average income per capita. The UNDP takes data for these and combines them
into a single number, the country’s score on the HDI. The HDI does not address




3
    For an early recognition of this point see Repetto et al 1989 and Dasgupta and Heal 1979.
                                                                                       4


environmental issues, but could provide a model for non‐monetary measures
including environmental data, some of which have been developed recently.4

      An intriguing variant on the conventional approaches is found in the small
Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan, where economic and social performance is
measured by the index of Gross National Happiness (GNH). The country’s Bhuddist
culture influenced its decision to move towards a measure more spiritual than GDP,
with its exclusive emphasis on material possessions. GNH tries to take into account
performance on nine dimensions: Psychological Well‐being, Time Use, Community
Vitality, Culture, Health, Education, Environmental Diversity, Living Standard and
Governance. Environmental diversity is intended to be a measure of the health of
natural capital and ecosystems, and is measured by the level of afforestation or
deforestation and some other measures of environmental degradation. Time use is a
measure of how much time is available for non‐work activities such as recreation
and time with family and friends. It also measures the time devoted to volunteer
activities that help the community. Community vitality is an attempt to measure
trust, reciprocity, how safe people feel, and how closely connected they feel to
others.
      The intentions behind GNH are clearly excellent – it’s difficult to fault them. If
there are problems they lie in the execution: how well is it in fact possible to
measure these concepts, how do we combine the results of measurement into a
single number and in particular whether this could be done in a country the size and
complexity of the US.
          To get some sense of the pictures given by these different measures of
economic performance, figures 1, 2 and 3 show GDP per capita, the HDI and a
quantity called Adjusted Net Savings – which we will explore below in connection
with sustainability issues–for six countries, the U.S. and Germany, two leading
industrial countries, China and India, the two preeminent emerging economies and




4
    See for example the CIESIN index, CIESIN no date.
                                                                                                      5


leaders in the BRIC group, and Botswana and Papua New Guinea, two small
countries that are interesting examples.5

              50,000
              45,000
              40,000
              35,000
                                                                             United States
              30,000
                                                                             Germany
              25,000
                                                                             China
              20,000
                                                                             Botswana
              15,000
              10,000                                                         India

               5,000                                                         Papua New Guinea
                    0




            Figure 1: GDP per capita for selected countries, 1980 to 2010. Source: UNDP

                    1
                  0.9
                  0.8
                  0.7                                                             United States
                  0.6                                                             Germany
                  0.5                                                             China
                  0.4                                                             Papua New Guinea
                  0.3                                                             Botswana
                  0.2                                                             India
                  0.1
                    0
                        19801990200020052006 20072008 20092010



              Figure 2: Human Development Index HDI for selected countries, 1980 to
                                          2010. Source: UNDP



5
    All data in these figures is drawn from the web site of the United Nations Environment Program.
                                                                                           6



                   60

                   50

                   40                                                  USA
                                                                       Germany
                   30
                                                                       China
                   20
                                                                       India
                   10
                                                                       Papua New Guinea
                    0                                                  Botswana
                        1990 2000 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                  ‐10

                  ‐20


               Figure 3: Adjusted Net Savings as % of Gross National Income, selected
                               countries, 1990 to 2008. Source: UNDP

           Figure 1 shows that for all these countries GDP per capita has risen over the
last thirty years. However the implications of this for the wellbeing of the average
citizen are far from unambiguous.6 It also shows the US and Germany as being far
richer than the rest, and shows very clearly that Botswana is much richer – in GDP
terms at least – than China or India.

           If we move to figure 2 and the HDI, although the measure we are using here
is totally different from GDP, it actually tells a rather similar story. All countries have
again improved their performance over the thirty‐year period. The two rich
countries come at the top, though they are much closer than before. Now China
ranks on a par with Botswana, and again India and Papua New Guinea are at the
bottom.

           Adjusted Net Savings (ANS), shown in figure 3, is one of the better measures
of sustainability and is perhaps something of an analogy to the fuel gauge on a car.
Now we see a completely different picture: Botswana dominates the top ranking,
with China second. The US and Germany do not fare well. Being rich perhaps is not
the same as being sustainable – a good entry to the issue of sustainability.

6
    See Stiglitz Sen and Fitoussi 2010.
                                                                                        7



           Sustainability

           When it comes to human wellbeing there are two distinct questions that we
might ask – firstly how well off are people now, and how this level is changing over
time, and secondly whether current levels of wellbeing can be sustained over time.
Will our successors be able to live as well as we do? GDP and its various refinements
and the HDI (as in figures 1 and 2 above) are attempts to answer the first question.
The second question leads into a discussion of sustainability, to some degree
captured by ANS (figure 3).

           Sustainability is a buzzword these days. Everyone and everything wants to be
perceived as sustainable. However analytically the issue of whether or under what
circumstances growth can continue is not new: it was addressed extensively in the
1970s literature on exhaustible resources, and indeed dates back to Malthus.7

Some Examples
           Botswana, Namibia and Saudi Arabia are good countries to think about when
trying to understand sustainability. Botswana and its neighbor Namibia are similar,
with a long border in common: both arid or semi‐arid and in the southern cone of
Africa. Botswana’s population is about 1.8 million and its land area is 600,000
square kilometers, slightly smaller than Texas. Namibia has a population of 2 million
and a larger land area, 825,000 square kilometers. Namibia has a long coastline on
the Atlantic Ocean and a major fishery, whereas Botswana is land‐locked. Both are
largely desert, Botswana being dominated by the Kalahari Desert and Namibia by
the Namib.

           Botswana has one truly remarkable feature, the Okavango Delta in the north.
The Okavango River is the only large river in the world not flowing into a sea:
instead it flows into the Kalahari Desert. A huge river rising in the Central African
highlands and flowing into one of the hottest deserts on earth is a stunning
phenomenon. It creates a unique environment, amazingly rich in species. The


7
    See Dasgupta and Heal 1974, 1979, Solow 1974, Stiglitz 1974, Hartwick 1977.
                                                                                          8


environment varies from aquatic where the river first reaches the desert, home of
crocodiles and hippos and a range of fishing birds, to semi‐arid scrubland on the
fringes of the areas irrigated by the river. The Okavango Delta provides the basis for
Botswana’s immensely successful ecotourism industry: it’s a natural asset that
drives thousands of high‐paying visitors each year. Namibia has some remarkable
landscapes too, especially the skeleton coast area in the north, and a growing
ecotourism industry. Both are well worth a visit!

       In addition to the kinds of natural environments that support ecotourism,
both are rich in minerals. Botswana has huge deposits of gem‐quality diamonds.
Namibia also has diamonds, though fewer than Botswana, but is in addition rich in
uranium, lead, tin, zinc, silver and tungsten. The long Atlantic coast also gives it large
fishing grounds.

       Both countries are generating income by depleting natural capital – their
diamonds, uranium, lead, fish etc. They are also generating ecotourist income from
their unique biodiversity. They could be offsetting their depletion of natural capital
by building up holdings of other forms of capital, or they could be letting their total
stock of capital assets fall. As it happens, Botswana is doing the former and Namibia
the latter. Botswana is a paragon of sustainability as figure 3 above shows:
neighboring Namibia is not. Botswana is in fact one of the developing world’s
success stories, a much‐needed Africa success story. It’s living standards have
grown consistently and rapidly since independence in 1966, making it a middle
income country rather than a poor one, and it is also a very successful democracy.

       The ultimate in unsustainability is Saudi Arabia. It is rich, certainly, but not
sustainable – again we see that these are very different concepts. Saudi Arabia
makes its living by selling its oil reserves, in effect selling off the family silver.
Eventually – though not in the near future as its reserves are huge – it will run out of
oil and gas. Then there will be nothing to pull from the ground and sell, and unless
Saudi Arabia has built up some other forms of capital its living standards will
suddenly collapse. Its living standards are not sustainable in the long run.
                                                                                                  9



Sustainability: The Concept
        A lifestyle, a way of doing things, is sustainable if most of the world’s
population could continue it for a long time without major adverse consequences.
Our current patterns of energy use are not sustainable: they produce greenhouse
gases, changing the climate and leading to threats to our lifestyles and even our
civilization. Our current patterns of agricultural production are probably not
sustainable either: they lead to loss of soil and massive pollution of waterways by
fertilizers. And they are threatened by a changing climate.8 They are also probably
dependent on levels of water availability that will not continue. Our current patterns
of water use are not sustainable: we are depleting underground water faster than it
recharges and polluting surface water. And our current levels of fish catch are
manifestly unsustainable: they will destroy key fish populations within decades.9

        The Brundtland Report,10 written for the United Nations by a committee
chaired by the ex Prime Minister of Norway, Dr. Gro Harlem Brundtland,
commented that “Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs.” Although vague, this definition has been adopted by many people. One
point that this definition does make clear is that there is an intergenerational aspect
to sustainability: we could live well now but ruin the Earth in the process and pass
on to our successors a world greatly diminished – as the examples at the end of the
previous paragraph suggest we may be doing. The Brundtland idea of sustainability
enjoins us not to do this. In this respect, sustainability is a bit like estate planning.
Most parents will want to leave their children the means to be comfortably off but
will not want to bequeath so much to them as to seriously impair their own
lifestyles. So one component of being sustainable is like global estate planning: we
have to show an appropriate level of concern for our successors. This idea of
responsibility to later generations is often interpreted as meaning that we should



8
  See Schlenker Fisher and Hanemann 2005
9
  For analytical discussions of the concept of sustainability, see Heal 1998 and Neumayer 2010.
10
   Formally the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987.
                                                                                                       10


leave them enough assets to be as well off as we are, and this goal is built into the
idea of ANS shown in figure 3, and considered in detail below. ANS can tell use
whether we are leaving enough for future generations to be as well off as we are.

Trading Natural for Physical Human and Intellectual Capital
        There is another dimension of sustainability, omitted by the Brundtland
definition, that has to do with the environment – the examples of unsustainable
behavior mentioned above concerned greenhouse gases and agriculture, both
involving environmental impacts. The natural environment, natural capital, is of
immense value to human societies. We depend on it in many ways, and there are
services that it provides that we probably could not replace.11 A lot of our activities,
those that damage the environment, are depleting this natural capital, running it
down so that future generations will inherit less than we have, less than we
inherited from our predecessors. It is this environmental damage and depletion of
natural capital that may be making our activities unsustainable. We are leaving our
successors less and poorer natural capital – a world with a less stable and
hospitable climate, fewer species, less water and less of many other environmental
assets. Perhaps this is condemning them to an impoverished lifestyle.

        To be fair to ourselves, as a possible offset against this we are leaving them
more than we inherited in the way of built capital: more freeways, airports,
buildings, and infrastructure. And we are also leaving them more intellectual capital:
our research and development programs are developing cures for diseases, new
products, new ways of doing things. In only the last twenty years the internet and
wireless communications have come from nowhere to dominate our lifestyles: we
will hand these on to our successors, together with other things not yet invented,
perhaps in compensation for the depleted environment that we leave them.12

        Will this compensation be adequate? Can we compensate for a depleted
natural environment by more of the fruits of human labor and ingenuity? So far we

11
  See Daily 1997 and Heal 2000.
12
  For a very clear documentation of these trends in the composition of capital stocks see World Bank 2006
and World Bank 2010.
                                                                                                             11


certainly have: we are by general consent far better off than our predecessors a
century ago, and in the interim what has happened is that we have built up our
intellectual and physical capital massively, while running down our natural capital.
We have lost forests, rangelands, and quite a number of species, but have gained
cures for common diseases, acquired central heating and air conditioning, domestic
appliances, cell phones, laptops and the Internet. We have traded Spix’s macaw, the
Chinese freshwater dolphin (the Baiji) and other unique species for the iPhone and
other (not so unique) gadgets. Most of us are probably not unhappy with this deal.
So to date we seem to have been able to compensate ourselves for declining natural
capital by amassing more of the fruits of human labor and ingenuity. Can we
continue this way? Do we want to continue trading natural environments and
endangered species for better technology and infrastructure? That’s the nub of the
sustainability issue.13

         It seems likely that matters are changing and we won’t in fact be able to
compensate in the future for the loss of natural capital. Climate change is a new
phenomenon, not something we were aware of a century ago. It has grown to
prominence with the massive expansion of fossil fuel use in the twentieth century,
will lead to changes qualitatively quite different from those resulting from past
economic activity, and within the relatively short time frame of the next few decades
could inflict substantial costs on the world. The current rate at which we are losing
species is also without historical precedent: while we have driven species to
extinction in the past (the Dodo and the Passenger Pigeon are examples), we have
never threatened as many as we are doing today. Forests are being cleared at a rate
unprecedented even in the times of the industrial revolution when wood was the
principal fuel. We are also having a dramatic and negative effect on the oceans: the




13
  It’s also possible that future people will value these natural assets differently from us – perhaps more as
they will be scarcer, perhaps less as they will be used to a more synthetic world. On this see Beltratti et al
1998 and LeKama and Schubert 2004.
                                                                                                        12


populations of large fish in the sea – the ones we eat – are claimed to be down to
about 10% of what they were only half a century ago.14

        The bottom line here, then, is that we are depleting our natural capital faster
than ever before, and have already depleted it to a great extent than ever before. We
depend on it, we need it, and our current lifestyle will not survive without it. So it is
not clear that the old tradeoffs will continue to work, that we can compensate for
the loss of natural capital as we have in the past by more and more intellectual and
physical capital.

Case Studies
        It is interesting to look in detail at this issue of compensating for the loss of
natural capital by the buildup of other forms of capital in some specific cases. A good
example is Saudi Arabia. Let’s look at some numbers to get a rough idea of the
magnitudes involved. Saudi Arabia produces roughly ten million barrels of oil per
day, and has a population of about twenty five million. At its peak oil was selling for
about $130 per barrel, though this is much higher than the average price for the last
few years, which is below $100. Anyway, at the high price of $130 per barrel, Saudi
annual oil revenues amount to just under $19,000 per head. That is to say, if the
total oil revenues were divided equally between all Saudis, then each would receive
about $19,000 per year. A family of four would have just under $80,000. Not super‐
rich, but not bad for not working. At a price of $60, much more typical of prices over
the last few years, each person would get $8,700, making about $35,000 for a family
of four. When Saudi Arabia’s oil runs out, this income will stop short. It is
unsustainable. There will be nothing to replace it ‐ unless some of the revenue from
oil has been invested in a way that can replace oil as a source of revenues. For
example, a fraction of the oil revenues could have been invested in shares and bonds
from around the world, yielding a flow of dividends and capital gains to replace the
income from oil when the time comes. If enough were invested to replace all the oil



14
  There is some dispute about the accuracy of this claim: see Myers and Worm (2003) and Sibert et al.
(2006).
                                                                                            13


income, then Saudi Arabia would be running its economy sustainably: if less than
that amount is invested then it is being run unsustainably. Alternatively, income
could be invested in productive assets such as factories in Saudi Arabia and in the
education of its people. This too could generate a source of income that could
replace oil revenues in due course.15

           In contrast there are oil countries or regions that are trying to run their
economies sustainably. Two good examples are Norway and Alaska, with the
Norwegian State Petroleum Fund and the Alaska Permanent Fund. These are both
funds set up to take revenues from the sale of oil and invest these to provide a long‐
run income source that will continue even after the oil reserves are depleted. In the
case of the Norwegian State Fund, revenues for investment come from the
government’s 80% share in Statoil, the Norwegian oil company that develops the
country’s North Sea oil fields. This fund now has $147 billion invested. The Alaska
fund receives about 25% of oil and gas royalties, and now has accumulated about
$28 billion. It pays an annual dividend to all Alaska residents, averaging over $1000
per year per head and peaking at $1800. In both cases what we are seeing is the
conversion of natural capital – oil is a form of natural capital – into financial capital.
The financial capital can continue and yield dividends after the natural capital is
fully depleted. So these are both examples of countries or states compensating for
the loss of natural capital by the accumulation of another form of capital.

           It’s worth thinking briefly about this from an accounting perspective. Think
of the country’s statement of assets and liabilities. Initially its assets consist largely
of natural capital. Then over time this is depleted and the value of this asset falls. If
this were all that happened, then the total value of the country’s assets would fall.
But if the revenues generated by the depletion of natural capital are invested in
financial capital, a new asset appears on the balance sheet, the financial capital
assets of the investment fund, and the build up of these offsets to some degree the
rundown of the natural capital assets. If well‐managed this could keep the total



15
     For more discussion of these issues see Heal 2007.
                                                                                           14


value of the country’s assets constant. Saudi Arabia is clearly not doing this: Alaska
and Norway may be.

           The Government of Botswana has deliberately sought to invest a significant
part of the revenues from diamond mining in physical and human capital.16 Both
wealth per person and income per person have roughly tripled in Botswana in the
last twenty years, whereas both wealth and income per person have declined in
neighboring Namibia. Much of Botswana’s success is due to its policy of consciously
using revenues from natural capital to build up physical and other forms of capital,
following the Hartwick rule.17 Lacking any explicit policy of using revenues from
natural capital to build up other forms of capital, Namibia has seen falls in both its
total capital stock, the total value of its assets, and its per capital income. Figure 4
shows this contrast.




16
     See Lange 2004 and Lange and Wright 2004.
17
     See Hartwick 1977.
                                                                                          15


                                   Figure 4: Source ‐

Tradeoffs Again
       What does this tell us about sustainability? It says that in the case of mineral
resources, basing an economy on running down natural capital need not imply that
income levels are unsustainable. You can compensate for the depletion of this type
of natural capital by investing in other forms of capital, keeping your balance sheet
intact and replacing one asset by another. The big question that this analysis raises
is – is this also true for the depletion of forms of natural capital other than mineral
resources? Can we expect to compensate for the loss of aspects of the climate
system, or of the hydrological cycle, or of our biodiversity or tropical forests, by
building up more of the kinds of assets that we produce – physical or intellectual
capital? Can the accumulation of physical and intellectual capital allow us to adapt to
climate change, in the sense of maintaining our living standards in the face of an
altered climate?

       This is a controversial question. The real issue here is the extent to which the
services of capital constructed by humans can replace the services from living
natural capital. Can we make substitutes for what we get from nature? In the limit
the answer has to be no. We need oxygen, it’s what powers our bodies. Oxygen is
produced by photosynthesis, carried out by plants and by photosynthetic algae in
the oceans. We can’t replace them as a source of oxygen. Food is also something
whose production depends on the services of natural ecosystems: it depends on the
productivity of soil, a complex ecosystem easily damaged by overuse, on the climate,
determined in part by the complex world‐wide carbon cycle, and on the actions of
agricultural pests that attack food crops and their natural predators, such as birds
and bats, that keep them under control.

       We cannot replace all aspects of natural capital by physical or financial or
intellectual capital. Mineral resources are just wealth: they provide their owners no
other services than the wealth that they generate in the market. So we can
compensate for their depletion by building up our wealth, along the lines of Alaska
and Norway and Botswana. But forests and coral reefs and ecosystems in general
                                                                                          16


are more than just wealth and can’t be fully replaced by financial assets or physical
capital. This is what New York City decided when it chose to conserve the Catskill
Watershed, and it’s what the Chinese government decided when it chose to stop
deforesting watersheds and instead moved to an aggressive program of
reforestation: there was no real cost‐effective substitute for natural capital in the
form of forests and riverine ecosystems.18 The real issue here is the elasticities of
substitution between the various types of capital both in production and in welfare
functions: I am suggesting that for certain types of natural capital this elasticity is
less than one, implying that some minimum quantity is needed to maintain
wellbeing, an issue modeled in a preliminary way in Heal (2010).

           So sustainability requires that we maintain some of our natural capital intact,
as it provides services that matter to us and that we can’t replace, but there are
other parts of natural capital that we can safely deplete as we can replace them with
money or other assets that we can produce. It is largely the living aspects of natural
capital that are in the first category, exemplified by species and forests. And it is the
inanimate natural capital that we can do without, in that we can replace it.
Ironically, from the way markets are working at the moment you would think that it
was exactly the opposite: mineral resources, and oil in particular, are valued very
highly, and biodiversity and forests almost not at all.

Sustainability – weak or strong?
           Sustainability comes in two varieties, weak and strong.19 So far we’ve
implicitly been talking about the former, weak sustainability. We are weakly
sustainable if what we are doing will let future generations achieve our living
standards or better, if we aren’t compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their needs, the core of the Brundtland definition of sustainability. This is a
common and totally plausible interpretation of the idea of stewardship and
responsibility to future generations. But it does not incorporate any concept of



18
     For more details see Heal 2000.
19
     This distinction is discussed in detail by Neumayer 2010
                                                                                         17


stewardship of and responsibility towards the natural world and the other species
who share it with us.

            As a consequence, not everyone is convinced that this is what we should
mean by sustainability: there are environmentalists who feel that natural capital
itself, or at least the animate part of it, should be sustained, and that the constancy of
this form of natural capital should be our criterion of sustainability. Sustainability
for them means sustaining all forms of life on our planet and not just maintaining
our own living standards, which they see as a narrow‐minded and parochial goal.
They see us as having responsibilities to all life forms on Earth and not just to our
own life form. As the dominant species on Earth, their argument goes, we owe it to
other species, whose destinies are in our hands, to allow them to survive and
prosper too. Ultimately the choice between these two concepts is a personal one:
should we be seeking to conserve human living standards, or to conserve all life
forms, or perhaps both? The former implies that we value the animate part of
natural capital, biodiversity in essence, only in so far as it contributes to human
welfare, whereas the latter implies that we value other life‐forms in their own right.

           This is an important distinction. The Endangered Species Act of the United
States specifically seeks to save species from extinction even if there is no economic
merit to doing so: it reflects the belief that species have a right to exist
independently of their value to us, a position taken by an increasing number of
people who feel that this is an issue on which they have to take a moral stance.20
Personally I sympathize with them, agreeing that we do not have the right to
condemn other species to oblivion. I also feel that it’s economically unwise to do so,
so that to me the two arguments lead in the same direction. Economists have
studied both concepts of sustainability, and have called maintaining animate natural
capital intact “strong sustainability” and maintaining human living standards “weak
sustainability.”




20
     See Goble 2006 and Callicott 2006 for a development of this point.
                                                                                        18


       Obviously the world is not currently sustainable in the strong or ethical
sense: this requires maintaining animate natural capital intact, which in turn
requires not driving other species to extinction. We are failing on this criterion.
Whether we are succeeding or failing on the other criterion, namely weak
sustainability or keeping total capital intact and maintaining human welfare, is more
of an open question. We have spoken of Saudi Arabia, which is certainly not, and of
Botswana, which is: there are many countries in between.

       In analytical terms the relationship between weak and strong sustainability
depends on the elasticity of substitution between animate natural capital and other
forms of capital: if this is small enough, the two concepts are not that different,
whereas if it is large they are different and maintaining welfare levels does not
require maintaining species.




Measuring Sustainability
       We would like to be able to measure how sustainable or unsustainable our
policies and institutions are, as the issues at stake are important and need to be the
focus of our policy‐making. Recall the adage “What gets measured, gets managed.”
We need an equivalent to a car’s fuel gauge.

       There is unfortunately no way in which GDP will indicate whether an income
level or lifestyle is sustainable. For that we need to look at something quite different,
at how total wealth is evolving, where by total wealth we mean the total value of all
of capital stocks – natural capital, physical capital, intellectual capital and any other
forms of capital that are relevant. Botswana has invested the rents from diamond
mining in new forms of capital that replace the natural capital it is depleting, its
wealth has grown over time, and as a result its living standards are sustainable.
They are hedged against the expiry of its diamond mining operations. Likewise
Alaska and Norway are partly hedged against the expiry of their oil reserves.

       We think of income as the return on wealth or on accumulated assets; it’s the
flow of payments or services from our wealth. John Hicks back in the 1930s defined
                                                                                         19


income as “The maximum you can spend this month, consistent with spending the
same in all subsequent months.” This is a clever definition: it has an element of weak
sustainability built in. According to this definition, Saudi Arabia’s oil revenues are
not income, as the oil will run out, but the earnings of the Norwegian sovereign
wealth fund are income because they will be there in all future periods.

       There is a subtle problem here that we need to look at carefully. I noted
above that there are some aspects of natural capital that we probably cannot
replace, particularly the animate aspects of it such as species and rainforests. If this
is true, in what sense can we be sure that we have a sustainable economy if the total
value of the capital stock remains constant? After all this constancy of the total could
conceal a falling stock of animate natural capital and growing stocks of physical and
intellectual capital, with the latter two replacing the former. The falling stock of
animate natural capital could be compromising our ability to produce foods and
medicines and stabilize the climate. I will come back to this point.

       When we talk about wealth, the total value of the stock of capital of all sorts,
we are talking about a monetary or dollar value. For physical capital, this is
relatively easy: we can find prices for items of capital equipment and then use these
to value them. Intellectual capital is harder to value, though there are instances in
which a value is clearly placed on ideas. For example, a firm may buy a patent from
another: that is buying intellectual capital and is a process that puts a price on the
intellectual capital that is transferred.

       There are also situations in which natural capital is bought and sold –
mineral rights, for example, can be traded. Soil is a form of natural capital that is
partly mineral and partly animate – there are complex microbial and invertebrate
ecosystems in soil that account for its productivity – and is also bought and sold
when land or farms are traded. So there are forms of natural capital, even living
natural capital, in which there is a market and for which we can find prices. But
there are certainly other types of natural capital for which there are no prices,
biodiversity being a good example. It is both an important component of natural
capital and one in which there is typically no market and for which there are no
                                                                                                           20


prices. In a case like this we need to calculate shadow prices, reflecting the value of
the resources concerned to society – which is in fact exactly what price will reflect in
a well‐functioning competitive market. So in computing a society’s total wealth we
can value its natural capital either by market prices, if there are active and
competitive markets, or by shadow prices otherwise.21

         It’s important to understand the effect of scarcity on the price or shadow
price of an essential form of natural capital. If some form of animate natural capital
is truly essential to us and it is becoming very scarce, then its shadow price will rise
sharply. This is the possible resolution of the difficulty noted above, that constancy
of the value of total capital could mask a decline in important types of natural capital
that are essential to our continuing wellbeing. Important goods, when scarce,
become very expensive. If one unit of this capital has a huge shadow price – say one
billion dollars – then if we lose one unit, to keep the total value of wealth constant
we would need to compensate by one billion dollars of built or intellectual capital.
And if the essential natural capital became even scarcer, then we might need even
more of other forms of capital to make up for the loss of one unit. So eventually the
essential natural capital will be so scarce, and its value so high, that it will be
impossible to compensate for its loss by adding more of other forms of capital and
the total value of wealth will fall. This will indicate non‐sustainability.

         We have already encountered in figure 3 above a widely‐used measure of
sustainability that attempts to measure the change in a nation’s total wealth,
Adjusted Net Savings. Developed by the World Bank (see World Bank 2006 and
2010 and Hamilton and Hartwick 2005), Adjusted Net Savings is in principle a
measure of the total change in the value of all of a nation’s capital stocks – physical,
natural, intellectual. If it is positive, the country is sustainable, and if negative it is
not, at least in the sense of weak sustainability.22



21
   For a more extensive discussion of the valuation of natural capital and the services that it provides, see
National Research Council 2005.
22
   There is some complex theory behind this statement. See for example Heal and Kristrom 2008, Hamilton
and Hartwick 2005 and Arrow Dasgupta and Maler 2003.
                                                                                                      21


        We get ANS by starting with a conventional measure of net investment in
plant and equipment, that is investment net of depreciation. Then we add to this
investment in human capital through education and in intellectual capital through
R&D, and then subtract the depreciation or degradation of natural capital. The
World Bank produces figures for this number for each country, which is where the
data I have presented originated, though I actually downloaded them from the web
site of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP).

        The following figure, figure 5, shows this process of calculating ANS: it is
taken from Arrow et al. 2004. It shows that we start with domestic net investment
(first column of numbers), then add to this to allow for education (investment in
human capital), then subtract to allow for various forms of environmental damage
that represent depreciation of natural capital. Finally we adjust for population
growth, giving the rate of change of total capital per person. The final column shows
ANS per capita, growth of total capital per person, for the various countries or
regions. These adjustments clearly make a massive difference: for example, China’s
net domestic investment is 30.06% of its GDP, whereas after all adjustments the
number is 7.77% ‐ still positive, meaning that accumulation of non‐environmental
capital is more than compensating for the depletion of natural capital. These
calculations are unfortunately very rough, and certainly overestimate ANS, because
we have no good data on many aspects of environmental degradation and loss of
natural capital.23




23
  Probably the most sophisticated calculations of this type are in Arrow, Dasgupta, Goulder, Mumford and
Oleson 2010.
                                                                                                            22



Country          Domestic     Education   Damage      Energy      Mineral     Net forest   ANS     ANS
                 Net          Expendit    from CO2    depletion   depletion   depletion            per
                 Investment   ure         emissions                                                capita


Bangladesh       7.89         1.53        0.25        0.61        0.00        1.41         7.14    0.30


India            11.74        3.29        1.17        2.89        0.46        1.05         9.47    0.54


Pakistan         10.92        2.02        0.75        2.60        0.00        0.84         8.75    0.59




China            30.06        1.96        2.48        6.11        0.50        0.22         22.72   7.77


Sub‐Saharan      3.49         4.78        0.81        7.31        1.71        0.52         ‐2.09   ‐2.58

Africa


Middle East &    14.72        4.70        0.80        25.54       0.12        0.06         ‐7.09   ‐3.82

North Africa


United           3.70         5.21        0.32        1.20        0.00        0.00         7.38    2.29

Kingdom


United States    5.73         5.62        0.42        1.95        0.05        0.00         8.94    0.75



                Figure 5: the calculation of ANS. All figures expressed as a % of GDP.



           Figure 6 shows more data on ANS, and references the examples we discussed
earlier: it shows the movement of ANS as a percent of GDP over time for Botswana,
Namibia, Saudi Arabia and Norway. Botswana’s ANS is always the highest of the
four, whereas Saudi Arabia actually has a negative ANS for much of the time. We
know why. Namibia, almost a twin of Botswana in many ways, is much less virtuous
in building up its capital stocks, though its ANS is still commendably positive. And
Norway has a steadily positive ANS in spite of the fact that its economy, like that of
Saudi Arabia, is based on depletion of natural capital.

           Let me end by emphasizing that when we talk of the constancy of total
wealth as indicating sustainability, then we are talking about the sustainability of
living standards, weak sustainability, which was the focus of the Brundtland
                                                                                         23


definition. That definition spoke of the ability of the present generation to meet its
needs without compromising the ability of future generations to do likewise. We are
not measuring whether living natural capital is being maintained at a reasonable
level.



            60

            50

            40

            30                                                      Saudi Arabia
                                                                    Namibia
            20
                                                                    Botswana
            10                                                      Norway

             0
                 1990    2000   2005   2006    2007   2008
           ‐10

           ‐20


Figure 6: ANS for Botswana, Namibia, Norway and Saudi Arabia from 1990 to 2008.
                                 Source: UNDP



Conclusions
         Where does this leave us in our overall assessment of sustainability and its
measurement? The concept matters: we need to know whether we are
compromising the abilities of future generations to live as we live. We also need to
know whether we are sentencing a large fraction of life on earth to death to the
power two, to extinction and complete obliteration. Both of these issues matter and
on the surface reflect somewhat different interpretations of sustainability. But some
researchers, particularly in biology and ecology, claim that there is in fact no
difference between these weak and strong interpretations of sustainability, that any
world in which many species are obliterated will be one in which humans suffer too.
                                                                                      24


In economic terms they are saying that there is limited substitutability between
some type of natural capital and other forms of capital.24

           And where are we when it comes to measuring sustainability, and judging
whether we are managing our affairs in a sustainable fashion? In the commission
appointed by President Sarkozy to consider these issues,25 chaired by Joe Stiglitz,
we concluded that currently we don’t have the data to produce a single number that
tells us convincingly whether we are sustainable. The Adjusted Net Savings measure
is what we would really like, but we don’t have good quantitative measures of some
aspects of wealth, and nor do we have measures of the economic values of several
important types of wealth, so we can’t yet construct an accurate measure of ANS.
Prominent in the categories that we can’t measure or value fully are some types of
natural capital. The commission suggested that we measure ANS as well as we can,
and continue to improve our measures till we have good ones, but in the meantime
supplement this with a small number of additional numbers showing the physical
state of some of the more important environmental threats that cannot be captured
by a wealth measure, examples being the concentration of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, the number of species close to extinction and the acidity of the oceans.

References
Arrow, K. J, P.S. Dasgupta and K‐G Maler. 2003. “Evaluating Projects and Assessing
Sustainable Development in Imperfect Economies.” Environmental and Resource
Economics 26 (4): 647‐85.

Arrow K.J, P.S. Dasgupta, L.H. Goulder, K. Mumford and K. Olseon. 2010. “China, the
US and Sustainability: Perspectives Based on Comprehensive Wealth”. Chapter 4 of
Is Economic Growth Sustainable? International Economic Association Conference
Volume No 148, G.M. Heal editor, Palgrave Macmillan 2010.

Arrow K. J et al. 2004. “Are We Consuming Too Much?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 18 (3) Summer 2004: 147‐172.

Beltratti A., G. Chichilnisky and G.M. Heal 1998. “Uncertain Future Preferences and
Conservation,” chapter 3.4 pp 257‐276 of Graciela Chichilnisky Alessandro Vercelli



24
     For a discussion see Ehrlich and Goulder 2007.
25
     Stiglitz Sen and Fitoussi 2009.
                                                                                         25


and Geoffrey Heal (eds) Sustainability: Dynamics and Uncertainty, Kluwer Academic
Publishers and Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei

Callicott, J. Baird 2006. “Explicit and Implicit Values.” Chapter 4 pages 36‐48 of The
Endangered Species Act at Thirty: Conserving Biodiversity in Human­Dominated
Landscaopes, Volume 2. Editors J.M. Scott, D.D. Goble and F.W. Davis, Island Press,
Washington D.C. 2006.

CIESIN Environmental Sustainability Index. Available at R.
http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/es/esi/

Daily, G. 1997. Nature’s Services: Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems.
Island Press, Washington D.C. 2007.

Dasgupta, P.S and G.M. Heal. 1974. “The Optimal Depletion of Exhaustible
Resources.” Review of Economic Studies, Symposium on The Economics of
Exhaustible Resources 1974 3‐28

Dasgupta P.S. and G.M. Heal. 1979. Economic Theory and Exhaustible Resources.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge England, 1979.

Ehrlich P. and L. Goulder 2007. “Is current consumption compatible with
sustainability? A general framework and initial indicators for the US.” Conservation
Biology, 21:DOI:10.1111/j 1523‐1739. 2007.00779.x

Hartwick, J. M. 1977. “Intergenerational Equity and Investing the Rents from
Exhaustible Resources.” American Economic Review 66: 972‐74.

Hamilton, Kirk and John M. Hartwick . 2005. “Investing Exhaustible Resource Rents
and the Path of Consumption.” Canadian Journal of Economics 38 (2): 615‐21.

Heal, G.M. 1998. Valuing the Future: Economic Theory and Sustainability. Columbia
University Press, New York, 1998.

Heal, G.M. 2000. Nature and the Marketplace. Island Press, Washington D.C. 2000.

Heal, G.M. “Are Oil‐Producers Rich?” in M. Humphreys,sJ. Sachs and J. Stiglitz
Escaping the Resource Curse, Columbia University Press, 2007.

Heal, G.M. and Bengt Kristrom. 2008. “A Note on National Income in a Dynamic
Economy.” Economics Letters 98: 2‐8.

Heal, G.M. 2010. “The Economics of Climate Change: a Post‐Stern Perspective.”
Climatic Change, July 2009

Goble, D. 2006 “Evolution of At‐Risk Species Protection.” Chapter 2 pages 6‐23 of
The Endangered Species Act at Thirty: Conserving Biodiversity in Human­Dominated
Landscaopes, Volume 2. Editors J.M. Scott, D.D. Goble and F.W. Davis, Island Press,
Washington D.C. 2006.
                                                                                        26


Lange, G. 2004. “Wealth, Natural Capital and Sustainable Development: Contrasting
Examples from Botswana and Namibia.” Environmental and Resource Economics 29
(3):257‐83

Lange, G. and M. Wright. 2004. “Sustainable Development in Mineral Economies: The
Example of Botswana.” Environment and Development Economics 9 (4): 485‐505

LeKama, Alain and Katheline Schubert 2004. “Growth Environment and Uncertain
Future Preferences,” Environmental and Resource Economics, 2004, 28, 1, 31‐53

Malthus, Thomas. An Essay on the Principle of Population. First Published 1798,
now available from Oxford World Classics, Oxford, England, 1993.

Myers Ransom A. and Boris Worm, “Rapid worldwide depletion of predatory fish
communities,” Nature (423:280 ‐ 283, May 15, 2003)

National Research Council of the National Academies. 2005. Valuing Ecosystem
Services: Toward Better Environmental Decision‐Making. The National Academies
Press, Washington D.C. 2005.

Neumayer, Eric 2010. Weak versus strong sustainability: exploring the limits of
two opposing paradigms. Edward Elgar Publishing , Cheltenham, UK.

Nordhaus W.D. and J. Tobin 1972. “Is Growth Obsolete?” Economic Research:
Retrospect and Prospect Vol 5: Economic Growth, pages 1‐80 National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.

Repetto, R., W. Magrath, M. Wells, C. Beer, F. Rossinni 1989. “Wasting Assets: Natural
Resources in the National Income Accounts.” World Resources Institute, Washington
DC. Also Chapter 25 in A. Markandya and J. Richardson (eds) Environmental
Economics: A Reader, St Martin’s Press, New York, 1992.

Sibert, John et al. “Biomass, Size and Trophic Status of Top Predators in the Pacific
Ocean.” Science Vol 314 15 December 2006 1773‐76.

Schlenker W., A. Fisher and M. Hanemann "Will U.S. Agriculture Really Benefit
from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic
Approach," American Economic Review, 95(1), March 2005, p. 395-406.
Stiglitz, Jospeph E., Amartya K. Sen and Jean‐Paul Fitoussi. 2009. Report by the
Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.
Paris: Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social
Progress. Available at www.stiglitz‐sen‐fitoussi‐fr. Also available as Mis­Measuring
Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn’t Add Up by Joseph E. Stiglitz, Amartya Sen and Jean‐Paul
Fitoussi, The New Press, New York, 2010.

Solow, R. M. 1974. “Intergenerational Equity and Exhaustible Resources.” Review of
Economic Studies, Symposium on The Economics of Exhaustible Resources 1974 29‐
48.
                                                                                   27


Stiglitz, J.E. 1974. “Growth with Exhaustible Natural Resources: Efficient and
Optimal Growth Paths.” Review of Economic Studies, Symposium on The Economics
of Exhaustible Resources 1974 123‐138.

World Bank. 2006. Where is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Capital for the 21st
Century. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

World Bank. 2010. The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable
Development in the New Millenium. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Our Common Future.
Also known as the Brundtland Report. Available at http://www.un‐
documents.net/wced‐ocf.htm
