                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE ORGANIZATION OF R&D IN AMERICAN CORPORATIONS:
        THE DETERMINANTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF DECENTRALIZATION

                                           Ashish Arora
                                          Sharon Belenzon
                                            Luis A. Rios

                                        Working Paper 17013
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17013


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We thank seminar participants at the 2010 NBER Summer institute, IFN Stockholm Conference, HBS
TOM Seminar, Technion Israel Strategy Conference, as well as Nick Bloom, Tom Hubbard, Will Mitchell,
Raffaella Sadun, Mark Schankerman, John Van Reenen, Nathan Letts and Ray Gilmartin for helpful
comments. We thank Hadar Gafni for excellent research assistance. All remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, and Luis A. Rios. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Organization of R&D in American Corporations: The Determinants and Consequences
of Decentralization
Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, and Luis A. Rios
NBER Working Paper No. 17013
May 2011
JEL No. D23,D83,L22,O32

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the relationship between decentralization of R&D, innovation and firm performance using
a novel dataset on the organizational structure of 1,290 American publicly-listed corporations, 2,615
of their affiliate firms, as well as characteristics of 594,903 patents that they hold. We explore the
tension between centralization and decentralization of R&D, which trades off between responsiveness
to immediate and local business needs and the type of research that can benefit the firm as a whole.
To do this, we develop two novel measures of decentralization. First, using intra-firm patent assignments,
we distinguish between patents that are assigned to the inventing unit rather than to corporate headquarters.
Second, we exploit the variation between firms which posses a central corporate R&D labs and those
that do not. We find that centralized R&D tends be more scientific, broader in scope, and have more
technical impact, while being more likely in firms that operate within a narrower range of businesses,
in complex technologies, or that are less reliant upon acquisitions. Additionally, we find that firms
with a more decentralized structure, on average, invest less in R&D, generate fewer patents per R&D,
and exhibit greater sales growth and higher market value. We discuss several theories that can explain
these relationships, as well as potential avenues for future research.


Ashish Arora                                          Luis A. Rios
Fuqua School of Business                              Duke University
Duke University                                       luis.rios@duke.edu
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
ashish.arora@duke.edu

Sharon Belenzon
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
1 Towerview Drive, Durham, NC
United States
sharon.belenzon@duke.edu
1         Introduction
Why do otherwise similar firms exhibit markedly diﬀerent organizational structures? Though
central to much theorizing in economics, strategic management, and organization studies,
the internal organization of firms has received very little large-scale empirical analysis. In
this paper we advance this exploration by analyzing new data that identifies whether an
invention originates from a firm’s corporate lab, in conjunction with data on the assign-
ment of patent rights within large American firms, to measure decentralization of R&D
in a firm. The main contribution of this paper is to document characteristics of research
under diﬀerent organization forms in large American corporations. We show that large
American firms vary substantially in terms of their internal structure, and show that this
structure has strong implications for innovation, such as R&D investment and patenting
intensity, and for overall firm performance, such as growth and market value.
        R&D is an important function, and there has been considerable empirical and theo-
retical work on the relationship between performance and R&D investment (Henderson
& Cockburn, Penner-Hahn & Shaver, 2005), and how firms link through R&D alliances
(Arora, Fosfuri, & Gambardella, 2001; Mowery, Oxley, & Silverman, 1996; Rosenkopf &
Almeida, 2003). However, possibly due to the diﬃculty of looking inside the black box
of the firm, little empirical work has been devoted to exploring how firms organize R&D
internally, for example by centralizing or decentralizing this function.1 Though there is a
growing literature on the geographical location and management of R&D activities (e.g.,
Leiponen & Helfat, 2010; Singh, 2008; Lahiri, 2010) especially across national boundaries
(e.g. Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; Kuemmerle, 1999, Penner-Hahn and Shaver, 2006),
the question of geography is logically distinct from the question of internal organization.2
For although the location of activities obviously has implications for how they should be
managed, other considerations such as access to users, talented researchers, or knowledge
spillovers are arguably more important considerations (Kogut, 1991; Alcácer, 2006; Jaﬀe,
Trajtenberg, & Henderson, 1993). By contrast, the salient trade-oﬀ in the internal orga-
nization of R&D involves the allocation of decision making within the organization about
    1
     Notable exceptions include DeSanctis, Glass & Ensing, (2002), Birkinshaw, Nobel and Ridderstale
(2002), Argyres and Silverman, Kastl et al., Kay, which are discussed in greater detail below.
   2
     For example, as Singh puts it, a firm could have a decentralized formal organization even with rela-
tively small number of R&D locations, while another firm might have a much more centralized organization
despite having a much greater number of R&D locations.


                                                   2
which R&D projects to fund and how to manage them. This in turn focuses attention on
diﬀerences in information and incentives within firms.
   Our analysis is motivated by a trade-oﬀ between local information and the internal
capture of spillovers. Though units may have superior local information, such as about
the needs of their customers (Furman, 2003; Jensen & Meckling, 1992; Von Hippel, 1998),
unit managers may also be more likely to ignore the potential spillovers from their research
for other parts of the firm (Nobel & Birkinshaw, 1998), due to a lack of knowledge (Hitt
& Hoskisson, 1990), or because unit managers tend be rewarded principally for the perfor-
mance of their own units, not that of the firm as a whole. The flipside of the this trade-oﬀ
is that centralized R&D, by being able to invest in longer term and riskier projects, can
incorporate potential spillovers better, but may risk losing information on what customers
need. Also, though corporate R&D labs’ resources may attract more talented researchers
and thus increase productivity, these researchers may choose projects for their scientific
interest rather than their economic potential alone. Put diﬀerently, in some instances,
central R&D labs may be subject to “capture” by the researchers employed there.
   This basic trade-oﬀ has several implications for the conditions under which we should
expect to observe decentralization and for the consequences of decentralization. In this
study, we develop a novel dataset that details the organization of patent origination and
patent assignment in a significant subset of American firms. We complement this with
patent-level data on whether inventors were located in corporate R&D labs or elsewhere
in the organization (we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of our measures in section
3). It is plausible that decentralization of R&D is also associated with delegation of other
types of authority for managing innovation, such as managing IP and licensing. However,
for sharpness in exposition we speak of “R&D decentralization” when the managers of
divisions, business units or wholly owned subsidiaries (hereafter collectively referred to as
“units”) make the key decisions such as which types of R&D projects should be funded,
how the projects and the resulting IP should be managed. By contrast, “centralized”
R&D is associated with a central R&D organization, managed by executives reporting to
headquarters (rather than a unit), and typically conducted in a corporate R&D lab.
   Our paper combines data from several sources: (i) patent level information from the
United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), (ii) ownership structure data from
Icarus and Amadeus by Bureau Van Dyke (BVD), (iii) data on location of corporate


                                             3
R&D labs in the United States from the Directory of American Research and Technology,
the US Oﬃce of Management and Budget’s Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSA areas)
database, and a commercial zip-code matching database (iv) Merger and acquisition data
from Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum and Zephyr by Bureau Van Dyke, (v) accounting
information from U.S. Compustat. Our sample includes 595,396 patents that are matched
to 1,491 American publicly-listed corporations, a total of 30,834 of their private and public
units, of which 2,615 was assigned at least one patent.
   We matched a total of 595,396 patents to our firm sample, where 112,428 of these
patents (18.9%) are assigned to units. To anticipate our results, we find that decentraliza-
tion of R&D is more extensive for firms that operate in discrete technology industries, rely
more heavily on acquisitions, and that manage a diverse range of technologies. Consistent
with prior findings (Argyres & Silverman, 2004), decentralized research is more incremen-
tal in nature, narrow in scope, and less likely to draw upon scientific research. In addition,
we find that decentralized firms tend to invest less in R&D and generate fewer patents
from their R&D, but also grow faster. Intriguingly, we also find that whereas the existence
of corporate labs is associated with higher market value, the extent of decentralization is
positively associated with the market value of the firms. These findings underline the
importance of R&D projects that focus on what customers want, while also pointing to
the value that centralized R&D can create through greater eﬃciency and by coordinating
projects to capture R&D spillovers. They suggest that firms may create more value from
R&D by creatively linking central R&D to the needs of the downstream businesses.
   Though we build upon a number of studies of the organization of R&D in large firms,
our paper is novel in two important respects: Instead of survey-based measures or case
studies used in the earlier studies, we develop a new measure based on patent assignments
and supplemented by a direct measure of whether patents originate within a corporate
R&D lab, as opposed to originating in other parts of the firm. This enables us to use a
much larger sample and allows for a systematic, large scale, empirical examination of the
determinants of the organization of R&D. Second, unlike the vast bulk of the previous
literature, we also link R&D organization to measurable outcomes: sales growth and
market value. Although we do not claim to establish causal relationships, we are able
to provide a sounder empirical basis for various theoretical perspectives on organizational
structure and the implications for firm performance.


                                              4
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 places our paper in the literature.
Section 3 develops our hypotheses on the contrasting implications of centralizing versus
decentralized R&D in multi-unit firms. In Section 4 we discuss the limitations of using
patent assignments to measure the decentralization of R&D, and how we mitigate some
of the problems by using data on inventor location within the organization. Section 4
describes the data and our principal measures. Section 5 presents our empirical findings
on how decentralization is related to the firm’s environment, and the nature of its research.
Section 6 explores the relationship between decentralization and outcomes. Section 7
concludes by summarizing our findings and discussing the implications for theory and
practice as well as suggestions for future research.


2     Decentralization of tasks and authority in organi-
      zations broadly defined
2.1     Organization of R&D within multidivisional firms
The tension between centralization and decentralization of R&D in American corporations
is well illustrated by Hounshell and Smith’s (1988) classic study of R&D at Du Pont, with
its vivid description of the firm’s oscillations between these forms. Du Pont’s pre-WWI
diversification eﬀorts created a situation where centralized R&D was deemed as insuﬃ-
ciently responsive to the needs of a diverse set of businesses which included explosives,
celluloid plastics and films, lacquers, paints and varnishes, and dyestuﬀs. Consequently,
individual business units were given authority in the 1920’s over their R&D activities, and
each business created a separate research division. However, the various businesses were
still connected by a common scientific base, as shown by the hugely successful nitrocel-
lulose lacquer Duco, which was invented by the cellulose division instead of the paints
and varnish division. Though Duco was a major success, it highlighted the problems with
decentralized R&D —these intra-firm spillovers required extensive coordination, which is
better managed in a central R&D organization. For instance, using Duco for furniture
required additional technical advances in resins, which had to be carried out by Du Pont’s
central R&D organization. Thus, under Charles Stine R&D gradually swung back towards
centralization which was again the dominant form by 1928. Centralization of R&D was
also motivated by growth opportunities. For instance, even as the rayon business matured,


                                               5
researchers in the rayon division were constrained to work only on cellulosic fibers (from
which Rayon had come), and the general manager of the Rayon division was reluctant to
authorize more broad ranging research in synthetic fibers. As one R&D manager noted in
1933:

           “In our some ten years rayon experience, we have in but two cases bent any
        part of our research program in a direction other than one relating directly to
        the most immediate manufacturing and selling problems . . . Unless we conclude
        that there will be no radical departures in the synthetic fiber (or film) industry
        in the next ten years, then it must be concluded that our technical program falls
        short in its more radical and forward looking aspects” (Hounshell and Smith,
        1988: 181-182).

   The relevant point for our discussion, as Argyris and Silverman (2004) also stress,
is that decentralized R&D tends to be product focused, whereas central R&D groups are
better able and better motivated to invest in more basic, non-specific R&D. And sometimes
this type of research yields huge payoﬀs, such as Nylon. A lesser known impact of this
miracle fiber was the eﬀect it had on the organization of R&D at Du Pont, by providing the
justification for a major investment in basic research and a focus on science. Indeed, the
new laboratory for fundamental research was dubbed “Purity Hall” by Du Pont chemists,
signifying its distance from the grubbier concerns of the businesses. This is another feature
of centralized research: Along with a focus on non-specific research, centralized R&D also
tends to be more scientific in its orientation.
   The strengths and weaknesses of centralized research are evident in other contexts
as well. For example, IBM’s scientists laid the foundations for relational databases, but
IBM’s database division (which rightfully should have commercialized it) was seemingly
unaware of it until Larry Ellison’s startup SDL (the precursor to Oracle) appropriated the
technology from readily available IBM scientific publications (Bhaskarabhatla, 2010). It is
unlikely that it would have been developed in a more product oriented divisional R&D lab.
Yet, as the example also shows, the origins in central R&D also hindered its exploitation
by the business unit.




                                                6
2.2    The Trade-oﬀ
These examples show both the power of centralization and the potential drawbacks which
may encourage decentralization. Scholars have emphasized many channels through which
decentralization in general may aﬀect behavior, such as decentralization being associated
with higher flexibility (Child, 1984; Mintzberg, 1979), independence (Kanter, 1985), ini-
tiative (Chandler, 1977), or merely through the motivation arising from the perception
of freedom (Gupta and Govindarajan, 2000) or pride of ownership (Estrin et al. 1987).
Our paper, however, is specifically focused on the inherent trade-oﬀs between centraliza-
tion and decentralization of R&D, and contributes to the literature broadly motivated by
similar questions. Nobel and Birkinshaw’s (1987) studied the organization of R&D in a
sample of 115 MNCs, relating the type of R&D unit to how it is managed. Subsequent
work such as Birkinshaw et al., (2002) explored a related aspect of R&D organization,
namely whether R&D units have autonomy and whether they are integrated with other
units. Using a combination of case studies and surveys they found that R&D that adapts
technology to the needs of local units is decentralized, whereas R&D for creating new
knowledge is more centralized.
   However, our study diﬀers from these in three important ways. First, by concentrating
in US-based firms we strip away the international component (and its various county-
level confounding factors (Kogut, 1991)). Second, we rely upon observable patent-based
measures instead of the survey measures that often underpin intra-organizational study
(e.g. Cohen & Levinthal, 1990 ), and as a result, have much larger sample sizes. Third,
and most importantly, our study also links outcomes to decentralization instead of simply
exploring how R&D decentralization is related to the nature of R&D.
   Kay (1988) discusses characteristics of R&D projects that increase the tendency to-
wards increased centralization. First, since a project may feed into several downstream
products, R&D has potential economies of scope.       However, individual business units
would be less likely to invest in R&D projects that provide benefits to other units in the
firm (Hitt & Hoskisson, 1990; Saxenian, 1994; Feinberg & Gupta, 2004; Gupta & Govin-
darajan, 2000; Nobel & Birkinshaw, 1998; Hitt & Hoskisson, 1990; Saxenian, 1994)).
Second, R&D has uncertain returns, which combined with the fact that business unit
managers are mobile (Podolny & Baron, 1997), will disfavor projects where the payoﬀ



                                            7
may come after a manager has moved on to other firm or unit. Mobile managers will also
disfavor investment R&D projects with long lags and lumpy investments (Argyres & Sil-
verman, 2004; Cockburn, Henderson, & Stern, 1999; Ghemawat, 1987; Leiponen & Helfat,
2010; Roberts & McEvily, 2004). Consistent with this, Galunic and Eisenhardt (2001)
find that corporate managers are more likely to pursue opportunities in new markets than
are unit managers. Henderson and Clark (1990) conclude that central R&D labs are less
reliant on local information channels and more likely to explore broader architectural in-
novations. Lerner and Wulﬀ (2007) find that in firms with centralized R&D, long-term
incentives for managers go together with more heavily cited and original patents, but
that this eﬀect does not exist in firm with decentralized R&D structures, suggesting that
centralized R&D is more conducive to encouraging more original research.
   On the other hand, there are counteracting influences for some R&D to be conducted
and managed by the individual business units (and increase the tendency toward decreased
centralization). Individual units may have superior access to local knowledge, such as in-
formation about customer needs, and therefore better evaluate what sorts of projects will
have a higher payoﬀ. Also, central R&D is eﬀectively financed by a tax on individual
business units, which potentially distorts incentives inside firms (Kay, 1988). More impor-
tantly perhaps, as the R&D management literature has repeatedly found (Hill, Martin,
& Harris, 2000; Kline & Rosenberg, 1986; Reger, 1999) a close interaction between R&D
and functions such as marketing and manufacturing is often the diﬀerence between success
and failure.
   Our work is also related to a large economics literature on decentralization of tasks
and authority in organizations. This work tents to be theoretical (see Mookherjee 2004
for a review of the economics literature), and empirical studies remain scarce. Most of the
empirical studies focus on the impact of changes in communication costs or the adoption
of information technology. For example, using US data, Rajan and Wulf (2005) provide
empirical evidence that firms tend to select flatter organizational structures in more recent
years relative to the past. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) and Caroli and Van
Reenen (2001) find that with greater investment in information technology, firms tend
to adopt more decentralized organizational structures. Acemoglu et al. (2007) find that
British and French manufacturing firms in the 1990s closer to the technological frontier,
operating in more heterogeneous environments, or younger, are more likely to decentralize.


                                             8
Colombo and Delmastro (2004) find that local information increases decentralization to
plant managers in Italian firms, as does superior communication technology, but central-
ization increases with the need for coordination. Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2008)
find that trust and social norms increase decentralization as does product market com-
petition (interpreted as a proxy for importance of local information). These empirical
exercises generally frame the issue in terms of diﬀerences in information (e.g., Radner and
Jacob Marschak 1972) and diﬀerences in incentives within firms.
   In our context, a unit may have more information than headquarters about which
research projects are worth pursuing, which inventions are worth patenting, which patents
are worth maintaining and enforcing, and which licensing deals are worthwhile. Superior
information implies that the unit can make better decisions. For instance, Bradley, et.
al. (2010) conclude that greater decentralization enables unit mangers to exercise greater
discretion in dealing with the demands of the unit’s environment. However, though better
informed about its own needs, the unit may be ill-informed about those other parts of the
firm. Thus, leaving the unit with the authority over these decisions has to be balanced
against other considerations. One is the cost and time involved in communicating the
relevant information up the hierarchy, needed to coordinate the actions of the various
units. The cost of information transfer need not only be physical costs and delay. The
unit, though having superior information, may hide it or shade it because its interests are
not fully aligned with those of the firm as a whole. This consideration animate both the
theory of transaction costs (e.g., Williamson, 1975) and the principal-agent theory (Jensen
and Meckling, 1992). The property rights view provides a complementary perspective.
Managers in the unit may fear being “held-up” by top management, and thus under-
invest. Decentralization is a means of credibly assuring them against such expropriation.
For instance, Riordan (1990) provides a model in which a principal delegates authority
to provide incentives for cost reduction. Aghion and Tirole (1997) provide a model in
which a principal delegates authority as a credible way of leaving information rents with
the agent, so as to provide incentives for suitable choice of projects. Similarly, Belenzon,
Berkovitz and Bolton (2009) argue that units in business groups have superior incentives
to invest in more basic innovation because they enjoy greater legal protection against the
“parent” firm expropriating their rents from innovation.
   Two recent studies address the trade-oﬀ we are concerned with more directly, and pro-


                                             9
vide useful touch points for our paper. Kastl et al. (2009) frame their study of mostly
small Italian manufacturing firms in terms of whether decentralization — delegation of
authority regarding R&D as well as financial, administrative and business decisions to
divisions and units — provides superior incentives for investment in R&D. They find that
decentralization is associated with greater investments in R&D in Italian manufacturing
firms. They also explore the determinants of decentralization and find, contrary to Ace-
moglu et al. (2007), that age, distance to the technology frontier, and heterogeneity of
the environment are not associated with decentralization. Argyres & Silverman (2004)
study the organization of R&D in a sample of 71 large US corporations, focusing specifi-
cally on the organization of R&D, rather than the organization of the firm more broadly
(in contrast to Kastl, et.al.). They hypothesize and find that decentralized R&D results
in lower impact research outcomes, and with research that is narrower in technical and
organizational scope. Once again, our study is distinctive in a number of respects. As
discussed above, we do not use survey based measures of decentralization. Instead, we use
observed behavior (i.e., whether patents are assigned to the parent entity or decentralized
to divisions) as a measure of the extent of decentralization, complemented by whether the
patent was produced by a corporate R&D lab. Patent data are widely available and our
study opens the possibility for further research using patent assignments in this manner.
Our sample also diﬀers significantly, as it consists of nearly 1,300 large, publicly traded, US
firms, allowing us to explore both the determinants and consequences of decentralization.
Thus, we study not only the nature of R&D (Argyres & Silverman, 2004) and the amount
of R&D (Kastl, Martimort, & Piccolo, 2009), we also study how decentralization is related
to patenting behavior itself (i.e., we estimate a patent production function). Moreover,
we also study how the extent of decentralization is related to sales growth and the market
value of the firm.


3     Hypotheses
We have three main sets of hypotheses. The first concerns the nature of decentralized
research activities as compared to centralized activities. The second concerns the im-
plications of decentralization for extent of investment in R&D and patenting, and third
concerns the consequences for growth and market value.


                                              10
3.1    The nature of decentralized research:
Since unit managers are rewarded primarily for the short-term performance of their own
unit, they will tend to favor research projects with short term goals, and disfavor pioneering
projects. Consequently, units will have limited incentives to invest in research that could
spill over to other parts of the firm. Indeed, competition for resources inside the firm may
create incentives against such research, lest it allow other divisions to use the fruits of
the research and claim additional resources, as was the case with Duco and the Cellulose
Division in Du Pont. Siggelkow and Rivkin (2006) argue that delegation will enable
low-level managers to screen out alternatives that do not serve their parochial interests.
By contrast, centralized R&D is conducive to more pioneering research, research that
explores new markets, and more fundamental advances (Galunic and Eisenhardt 2001;
Henderson and Clark, 1990; Lerner and Wulﬀ, 2007). Furthermore, centralization of R&D
also facilitates greater coordination across the various units. This coordination is more
valuable when the units share common technologies (i.e., are more closely related) or if
the products (of the various units) themselves must be mutually compatible or have other
forms of inter-dependencies. Thus, centralization of R&D is more likely to be observed
when the firm operates a narrow range of businesses, or if the underlying technology is
“complex”, with marketable products being composed of many diﬀerent parts, produced
by distinct businesses (Brusoni, Prencipe, & Pavitt, 2001; Cohen, Nelson and Walsh,
2000). Firms also diﬀer both in the extent to which they acquire other businesses, and
how they deal with such acquisitions. Centralization is obviously easier to manage if
acquisitions are relatively rare, because each acquisition would then require integration
of new research teams and organizations (Casciaro & Piskorski, 2005; Grossman & Hart,
1986; Szulanski, 1996). Conversely, decentralized firms would naturally find it easier to
deal with acquisitions.
   Following conventional practice in the management and strategy literature, we restate
the above as hypotheses. We couch our hypotheses as patterns of association we expect
in the data, rather than as causal relationships. The causal relationships underlying
these relationships are important. However, examining whether the expected patterns of
association exist is a test, though not a conclusive one, of the predictions of the underlying
theories. Moreover, establishing causality would require identifying exogenous sources in



                                             11
variation in how firms organize their R&D, a topic we leave for future research. For
clarity, we have compared two ideal types, centralization and decentralization. However,
as Siggelkow and Levinthal (2003) argue, and as Du Pont’s history shows, firms will often
try to get the best of both worlds by developing hybrid structures. These structures can
take two complementary forms. First, central R&D labs can coexist with R&D in units.
Central labs take on more fundamental and longer range projects while units undertake
more product —focused and short-term projects (consistent with the hypotheses developed
below). Insofar as R&D itself is subject to scale economies — small labs may not be
viable or cost eﬀective — firms may concentrate activities in central labs but force the labs
to devote some fraction of their eﬀorts on projects desired by units. In eﬀect, the labs
become a seller of R&D services to the units. Conceptually, this is a hybrid form of R&D
organization, where decentralization of authority is not coterminous with decentralization
of the location of the activity. Although we do not theorize about this hybrid form of
organization, we explore this distinction in our empirical analysis.
   Hypothesis 1: Centralized R&D is more likely to be observed in firms where spillovers
are greater: firms operating in a narrow range of businesses, in more closely related busi-
nesses, and in complex technologies. Centralized R&D is less likely in firms that actively
acquire external businesses.
   Hypothesis 2: Centralized R&D will be more scientific in orientation, broader in scope,
and have more technical impact. Conversely, decentralized R&D will be less scientific,
narrower in scope, and incremental.

3.2    Organization of R&D and investment
Theoretical perspectives provide less pointed guidance on how the diﬀerent organizational
forms are associated with outcomes. For instance, the quantum of R&D investment by
a firm can have a complex relationship with how the firm organizes its R&D, in part
because firms facing richer opportunities for technical advancement are more likely to
develop central R&D labs to exploit those opportunities. Even holding opportunities
and other factors constant, however, centralization will be associated with greater R&D
investment. Intuitively, suppose that the firm decides on a cost of capital (a hurdle rate
of return that projects must meet), and the units choose R&D projects that exceed the
hurdle rate. One can imagine budgets of corporate R&D labs being decided in a similar

                                             12
fashion. If the hurdle rates for the two are the same, then units will invest less in R&D
than corporate labs, because units will ignore potential spillovers to other parts of the
firm (perhaps because they are unaware of the spillovers). This is an instance of the
more general result that activities with positive externalities will be underprovided by a
decentralized system (such as a market). Central R&D labs will take a broader view of
the benefits flowing from their research, and thus are likely to undertake projects that
would be rejected by a unit with more parochial interests (see H1). Furthermore, whereas
R&D in units are typically part of a profit center (with competing claims for the overall
investments the unit makes), central labs are typically cost centers. The net result is that
a greater decentralization of innovation activities in a firm should be associated with lower
investment in R&D.
   The diﬀerence in the types of research projects undertaken, discussed in H2 also has
implications for patent propensity. Insofar as decentralized R&D projects are focused on
improving existing products and processes, and less likely than central R&D projects to
pioneer new products and technologies, their results may be intrinsically less patentable.
In some cases, units are more likely to forgo patents, because patents are sometimes op-
tions on the future. Unit managers may be less willing to invest in such long-term options,
at least as compared with managers of central R&D labs. Thus, decentralization should
be associated with fewer patents per dollar of R&D investment. Conversely, insofar as
centralized R&D projects are broader in scope and more scientific in orientation, the out-
comes are more patentable as well. Further, central R&D labs may have greater incentives
to patent as a way of signaling their productivity and justifying their budgets. By contrast,
R&D in units is more likely to be measured by how it contributes to the performance of
the unit, rather than solely by measures such as patenting and publication. Formally we
have that:
   Hypothesis 3: Greater centralization of R&D is associated with greater investments in
R&D, and with greater patenting propensity.

3.3    Organization of R&D and outcomes
The organization of R&D not only aﬀects the type and number of R&D projects that
are funded but also but also the eﬀectiveness of the R&D eﬀort. On the face of it, the
implications for performance are ambiguous. However, we can identify some more nuanced

                                             13
implications for sales and value creation.
   Decentralized research should help the business unit grow by improving products and
reducing costs. However, centralized research can help develop new markets. However,
insofar as decentralization also brings greater control over IP management, it should also
result in less licensing. This is because unit managers are typically rewarded for sales
and profit growth, and so are more likely than central licensing units to eschew licensing
opportunities which might strengthen competitors and hurt their own sales, even if the
licensing revenues more than oﬀset the implied profit loss at the corporate level (see Arora,
Fosfuri and Roende, 2010 for a formal model). More generally, greater autonomy to units
may result in “empire building” by unit managers, which would also manifest is higher
sales growth.
   Though perhaps associated with higher sales growth, decentralization of R&D need not
result in greater value creation. Indeed, neither theory nor historical experience suggest
that either form of organization is overall superior to the other. The neglect of spillovers
and the reluctance to invest in longer-term research will result in unrealized opportunities
for value creation under decentralized research. Conversely, though centralization may
capture spillovers more eﬀectively and pioneer technologies for new markets, central R&D
labs are also less knowledgeable about and less responsive to the needs of existing cus-
tomers. However, though neither form is more valuable on average, the value created
by the marginal project under each form will systematically diﬀer. As H3 posits, units
will underinvest in R&D, particularly that which has potential spillovers for the firm as a
whole, so that the marginal R&D project by units creates more value for the firm than its
cost. There is no reason to believe that central labs underinvest. Moreover, since central
labs are also prone to capture by researchers that value scientific curiosity, the marginal
centralized R&D project may even actually destroy value.
   Since theory does not predict that either form of organization is superior to the other,
the empirical implications are subtle. Firms will create central R&D labs when rich op-
portunities for significant technical advance exist, as hypothesized in H1. It follows that a
central lab may be associated with greater value because it signals richer technical oppor-
tunities. Further, the value of centralized research will be greater when spillovers are more
probable. Put diﬀerently, centralized research is more valuable when the firm’s businesses
share a technical base, as is the case when the businesses are closely related. However, the


                                             14
marginal project of units will be more valuable than the marginal project in central R&D
labs. Collecting these implications together we have:
        Hypothesis 4a: The value of centralized research is greater when R&D spillovers are
more likely. The marginal value from decentralized research is greater than from central-
ized research.
        Hypothesis 4b: The marginal value created from decentralized research is greater than
from centralized research.


4         Data and measures
Our paper combines data from several sources: (i) patent level information from the
United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), (ii) ownership structure data from
Icarus and Amadeus by Bureau Van Dyke (BVD), (iii) Merger and acquisition data from
Thomson Reuters SDC Platinum and Zephyr by Bureau Van Dyke, and (iv) accounting
information from U.S. Compustat. The Appendix details the procedures used to construct
the various datasets that comprise our platform.
        Patents. Patent data are from the USPTO for the period 1975-2007. We match
all granted patents to our sample of publicly traded American firms and their American
aﬃliates. The matching is based on comparing the assignee name and address as it appears
on the patent document to the name and address of companies in Icarus and Zephyr. Thus
we are able to distinguish between centrally assigned patents - patents that are directly
assigned to the parent company, and decentralized patents - patents that are assigned to
aﬃliates. We matched a total of 594,903 patents to our final sample of Compustat firms.
107,654 of these patents (18.1%) are assigned to aﬃliates (that is, separate legal entities
that are diﬀerent from the headquarters firm).
        Patent quality. We measure patent quality using the number of forward citations the
patent receives over its life-cycle. Our Basic characteristics variables include the number of
citations the patent makes to non-patent (scientific) literature, generality and originality.3
    3
    We follow the widely accepted methodology developed by Trajtenberg, Henderson and Jaﬀe (1997)
and define patent generality as inversely proportional to the concentration of the citations it receives
across technology areas. Patent ’s generality, , is computed as:
                                                    X µ  ¶2
                                          = 1 −                                                    (1)
                                                     
                                                         



                                                    15
The number of citations the patent makes to scientific article is an indication of the extent
the patent relies on scientific knowledge. Generality is measured as the breadth of the
technology areas across which a patent’s citations are dispersed, and Originality is the
equivalent measure for the citations contained in the patent.
    Parent firms and units. Ownership data consists of two parts: cross-sectional owner-
ship information from Icarus and Amadeus for 2008, and M&A data from SDC Platinum
and Zephyr. The cross-sectional data informs us on existing active aﬃliates, and the
M&A data informs us on historical aﬃliates that may have dissolved or been fully inte-
grated by the parent company, as well as those that have been kept independent. The
appendix provides details on the ownership algorithm used for aﬃliates identification and
classification.
    We supplement and confirm our ownership data by manually collecting information
on all aﬃliates from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s EDGAR database ,
firms’ annual reports, and from detailed on-line searches. We identify ‘dormant’ aﬃliates
- wholly owned subsidiaries with no significant economic activity that are founded mostly
for tax purposes, as well as aﬃliates that are established solely as holding vehicles for the
purpose of IP management.4 Patents that are assigned to these aﬃliates are classified as
being assigned to the parent company. This screening leaves us with a total of 30,834
aﬃliated firms. Of these, 2,615 firms are assigned at least one patent during our sample
period, and thus are kept in the sample.

   Where,  denotes citing three-digit U.S. class (419 classes),  is the number of citations received by
patent  from patents in technology field  and  is the total number of citations received ³ by´ patent
. Following Hall (2002) we correct  for the number of citations received, as      c =      
                                                                                               −1   In
addition to patent generality, we also include patent originality, which is the equivalent measure for the
concentration across technology fields of the citations made by the patent.
   4
     For each acquired firm we determine whether it remained operational post-acquisition in several steps.
First, we check whether the firm appears in Amadeus or Icarus as a distinct company. Second, we manually
check each company listed in the first step whether it continues to operate independently from the parent
company. We check their corporate websites to confirm that their legal disclaimers and investor relations
information references a parent company. Dissolved acquisitions are much more problematic. Because
we match patents to firms based on the 2008 ownership structure, we lose historical acquisitions that
were fully integrated in the parent company and ceased to exist as separate legal entities. Though we do
capture post-acquisition patents as those are likely to be assigned to headquarters, we may nonetheless
over measure decentralization (because all historical patents that we do not match are centralized). To
mitigate this problem we performed an exhaustive manual search to identify a significant majority of these
absorbed firms and match them to their patents. Appendix A.1.3 for a description of this process.




                                                    16
4.1       Measuring decentralization of R&D: Patent assignments and

          patents from corporate R&D labs
Assignment. We use the share of patents that are assigned to its wholly-owned American
aﬃliates as our first measure of decentralization. This measure has the advantage of being
based on observed behavior, useful for large samples, and because it is not based on ad
hoc surveys, deployable in other settings. Still, its use as a measure of decentralization of
R&D raises several issues.
       It is possible that a non-incorporated business or division inside a firm have de facto
authority over its R&D and innovation, but, because it is not a distinct legal entity, not
have patents assigned to it. In other words, assignment of patents to aﬃliates may be a
suﬃcient, but not necessary condition for decentralization of R&D. Even so, our interviews
with R&D and IP managers suggest that the very fact that a unit is a distinct entity, rather
than merely a division of the parent, suggests that the unit enjoys some autonomy The
assignment of patents is a signal, that the unit enjoys a significant measure of autonomy.
For example, Genentech, though wholly-owned by Hoﬀman La Roche, directly contracts
on licensing the patents in its charge to outside firms. Assignment may also reinforce
the identification and long-term ties between a manager and the patents she manages, so
that opportunistic behavior becomes costly in terms of reputation (Gibbons, et al., 1999;
Alonso and Matoushek, 2007).5
       Mergers and acquisitions are an important source of variation in our data because
decentralized firms acquire other firms and the patents that come along with them. We
include in decentralization all patents of the aﬃliate on the grounds that the acquirer
could have chosen to reassign those patents to the parent company post acquisition. In-
deed, companies that are centralized will reassign patents from the aﬃliate to the parent.
Companies which choose not to reassign such acquired patents also tend to assign patents
                                         6
to the aﬃliate after acquisition.            Our results remain unchanged if we use only patents
   5
      A diﬀerent interpretation, which also supports the delegation of authority interpretation, is that units
which may be potentially divested in the future are also likely to be assigned the patents they generate.
For instance, one of the managers we interviewed pointed to the diﬃculties Motorola faced when divesting
its semiconductors manufacturing business (now called Freescale Semiconductors), in sorting out which
Motorola patents were going to be assigned to the divested business.
    6
      The share of reassigned patents is similar between M&A and internal patents. For M&A patents,
8% are reassigned (8,410 patents), where for internal patents, 7% are reassigned (32,834 patents). For
M&A-related reassignments, 23% are reassignments from aﬃliates to headquarters, where for internal


                                                     17
produced post-acquisition. However, we acknowledge that our assignment measure may
capture not simply how R&D is organized but also how IP management is organized.
   A related issue is that patent assignments may reflect merely the authority to manage
IP management rather than R&D. Our interviews suggest otherwise: R&D managers and
IP managers we interviewed agreed that when patents are assigned to units from projects
that the units managed (and paid for out of their R&D budgets).
   Patent assignments are sometimes driven by income tax strategies. Indeed, within our
sample, some firms were found to assign all patents to wholly owned subsidiaries located in
states with favorable tax conditions, such as lack of tax on royalty incomes. To mitigate
this, we conservatively classify all such assignments as if the patents were assigned to the
parent firm, even if they were assigned to an aﬃliate in the favorable state. Patent assign-
ment may also be driven by a desire to have patents assigned in the name of the relevant
business to make it easier to assert patents, obtain injunctions, and receive adequate dam-
ages. However, they could just as well be assigned to the parent for reputational reasons
(Agarwal, Ganco, & Ziedonis, 2009). Thus, patent assignments likely measure decentral-
ization of R&D with error. Although this is not classical measurement error, it is likely
that the estimated coeﬃcients suﬀer from attenuation bias. Another potential concern,
which is less salient in our context, is that it is logically possible that a unit may receive
patent assignments without enjoying the hypothesized autonomy. To better understand
the importantce of this conceren we conducted several interviews with IP managers, at-
torneys, and high level executive at firms across industries within our sample. All of these
discussion reinforced the interpretation that unit-assignment is strongly associated with
eﬀective delegation of authority in the R&D process. In fact, not one person interviewed
found this association surprising.
   Corporate R&D labs. We supplement the assignment measure with a diﬀerent measure
of the R&D structure. Using information on corporate R&D labs, we match whether the
inventors are located close to the corporate labs. One limitation faced by many studies
that utilize location as a measure concerns the multiple towns and cities that are often
within the same metropolitan region. Thus, relying solely on Zip code or city name, one
would miss that Boston and Cambridge facilities may in fact be within the same R&D
complex. This is even more problematic when we match to inventors, since inventors’
patents, about 91% of reassignments are from headquarters to aﬃliates.


                                                 18
addresses are more prone to variation within the area around an R&D lab (as they live in
suburbs, etc.). To counter this, we match our data to two diﬀerent databases, one which
converts city names to Zip codes, and one from the US Census Bureau which matches
Zip Codes to the US Oﬃce of Management and Budget’s Core-Based Statistical Areas
(CBSA areas). We use the Directory of American Research and Technology, which lists
such facilities for all publicly traded companies in America. This gives us the city and zip
code information for each firm’s R&D lab. Similarly, we obtain inventor information for
all patents from the USPTO database. Once we have identified the CBSA code for each
inventor and each lab, we identify every patent in our sample where at least one inventor
is located in the same CBSA as a lab (at the firm level). Our results are unchanged if we
define patents generated by corporate R&D labs as those where every inventor is located
in the same CBSA as a lab.
   Patents generated by corporate R&D labs should reflect the fruits of centralized re-
search because corporate R&D labs are typically part of a central R&D organization,
reporting into corporate headquarters through corporate R&D managers rather than to
heads of divisions. By contrast, patents not generated from corporate R&D labs should
reflect the R&D activities taking place in units, especially in the R&D, engineering and
manufacturing functions in the units. Thus, the share of patents generated by corporate
R&D labs is another measure of the decentralization of R&D. We find empirical support
in our data for this assumption, as the vast majority of patents produced by corporate
R&D labs are indeed assigned to the parent firm
   As with assignments, using corporate labs to measure R&D centralization could be
misleading if the firm’s central R&D is not associated with a registered corporate lab.
In particular, many firms do not have a registered corporate labs, pointing to the lumpy
nature of such facilities. Moreover, the R&D activities relevant to units may take place
in corporate R&D labs (or in collaboration with them). This makes sense because al-
though the theoretical discussion has contrasted centralized and decentralized R&D, many
firms are likely to form hybrid arrangements in their search for the best of both systems
(Siggelkow & Rivkin, 2006). Indeed, a significant share of patents assigned to aﬃliates
comes from corporate R&D labs, perhaps reflecting a hybrid arrangement, where research
is performed in a corporate lab but where the project is chosen, paid for, and perhaps
even managed (through a matrix reporting arrangement) by the unit. Based on our in-


                                            19
terviews, we conclude that in such cases the resulting patents would generally be assigned
to the relevant unit. In other words, these two empirical proxies — patents generated out-
side corporate labs and patent assignment to units measure related but diﬀerent facets of
R&D decentralization in an organization. In general, we find that the two measures pro-
vide qualitatively similar results, although there are diﬀerences in statistical and economic
significance, which we discuss in section 5.
   Accounting and financial data. Accounting data are from U.S. Compustat. We match
our firms using a string name process similar to the one we utilize to match patents to
our ownership structure data. Please see Appendix A.2.2 for details on the algorithms.
The book value of capital is the net stock of property, plant and equipment; Employment
is the number of employees. R&D is used to create R&D capital stocks calculated using
a perpetual inventory method with a 15% depreciation rate (Hall, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg,
2005). So the R&D stock, , in year  is  =  + (1 − )−1 where  is
the R&D expenditure in year  and  = 015. Patents stock,   , is calculated in an
analogous way. Patents stock in year  is   =  + (1 − ) −1 where  is the
citations-weights flow of patents in year . To control for patent quality we weight each
patent by the ratio between the number of citations it receives and one plus the average
number of citations received by all patents that were granted in the same year (one is
added to both numerator and denominator to avoid zero weights). Firm value is the sum
of the values of common stock, preferred stock and total debt net of current assets. The
book value of capital includes net plant, property and equipment, inventories, investments
in unconsolidated subsidiaries and intangibles other than R&D. Tobin’s Q (market value
over capital) was winsorized by setting it to 0.1 for values below 0.1 and at 20 for values
above 20.
   Table 1 provides summary statistics on our firm sample. Our sample’s average firm
is valued at $1.4 billion, has $3.6 billion in sales, $488 million in R&D stock, and holds
a stock of 132 cites-weighted patents. The share of patents that are assigned to aﬃliates
across firms is 36%. Using the patent as the unit of analysis, 18.1% of patents are assigned
to aﬃliates (as we shall see later, firms that patent a lot are less likely to assign patents
to aﬃliates, which explains the diﬀerence between patent and firm-level assignment). The
average patent receives 8.9 (or 11.3 when restricting the sample to patents that receive at
least one citation). 27% of patents are generated by corporate R&D labs.


                                               20
                              Insert Tables1 and 2 here


5     Econometric results
5.1    The nature of decentralized research
Table 2 reports the unconditional diﬀerences in the means of patents assigned to aﬃliates
and centrally assigned patents. The first column shows that centrally assigned patents
receive more citations, cite non-patent references (i.e., cite scientific publications) more
frequently, and are more general, than patents assigned to aﬃliates. We then divide
patents into those generated by corporate R&D labs and others. Although the same
pattern of relationships is evident in both samples, the diﬀerences between centrally as-
signed patents and decentralized are smaller in patents that corporate labs produce. For
instance, whereas the diﬀerence in the average number of citations received between cen-
trally assigned and decentralized patents is 0.23 in patents that corporate labs generate,
the diﬀerence doubles to 0.49 in patents produced elsewhere (i.e., outside corporate labs).
In other words, the nature of the research depends upon where in the organization it is
performed as well as for whom it is performed. This is consistent with the interpretation
is that patent generated by corporate R&D labs but assigned to aﬃliates represent a hy-
brid organization — one where the firm tries to get capture the spillovers from research by
coordinating research in labs but also tries to make R&D more responsive to the needs of
its businesses. This interpretation is explored more systematically below.
        Table 2 does not control for a variety of firm and industry specific variables. To
do so, we estimate a Probit model in which the dependent variable takes value 1 if the
patent is assigned to an aﬃliate (decentralized) and zero otherwise. Note well that we
undertake this as a convenient way of capturing the patterns in the data. Put diﬀerently,
table 2 would have suggested regressing characteristics such as the number of citations,
generality and originality on whether the patent is assigned to an aﬃliate and whether the
patent is generated by a corporate lab. Such a regression would have yielded an estimate
of the mean conditional on decentralization. Reversing the operation proves to be a more
convenient way of summarizing the patterns in the data, but the diﬀerence is merely
in exposition: The theory developed posits that certain types of research (incremental,
short term and product-focused) are more likely to be decentralized, and firms in complex


                                            21
industries, and focused firms are more likely to centralize research.
      Table 3 reports the estimation results (marginal eﬀects of a Probit model). Here the
general pattern of results is consistent with the predictions of all three theories. First,
there is a strong positive relationship between discrete technologies and decentralization.
We classify our sample patents to 7 main technology areas based on their International
Patent Classification code7 . Discrete technology areas are pharmaceuticals, biotechnol-
ogy, and chemicals, where complex technologies include telecommunications, electronics,
semiconductors, and information technology. As column 1 shows, there is a clear pattern
of lower decentralization probability for complex technologies.
      Second, our results suggest that patent quality and basicness is negatively related to
decentralization. We find that centrally assigned patents tend to receive substantially more
citations than decentralized ones. Based on the estimates of column 1, a one standard
deviation increase in the number of citations received lowers the probability that a patent is
assigned to an aﬃliate by 6.4 percentage points (159×(−0004)), or by 35% percent of the
average probability of aﬃliate assignment. Patent that are assigned to aﬃliates make fewer
citations to non-patent literature than centrally-assigned patents. 106,617 patents make at
least one non-patent citations, and 85% of these patents are centrally assigned. Similarly,
centrally assigned patents are more general and more original. Column 2 confirms that
these results continue to hold when we exclude those patents that receive no citations from
the estimation sample.
      Third, column 3 shows a positive eﬀect of technical diversity on decentralization prob-
ability, also consistent with Hypothesis 2. Note however that diversity is strongly related
to the extent of patenting — firms that patent are lot are also likely to be more focused in
their patenting. Thus, we cannot cleanly separate the eﬀect of size from diversity.
      As was also suggested in table 2, we find that (compare columns 6 and 7) that the
location of R&D in the organization conditions the foregoing relationships. Patents that
do not originate from corporate R&D labs and are assigned to aﬃliates (decentralized)
receive significantly fewer citations, are less likely to cite non-patent prior art, and are less
general and original. However, even patents that are generated by central labs and are
assigned to aﬃliates receive fewer citations compared to patents from central labs that are
centrally assigned. Similarly, compared to centrally assigned patents from central labs,
  7
      Patent that are not classified to any of the main categories are classified under Other.


                                                      22
aﬃliate assigned patents from central labs are less likely to cite non-patent prior art, and
are less general and original.
     The remaining specifications show that these patterns are robust. Column 4 controls
for additional firm eﬀects by controlling for the share of the firm’s patents in each of the
197 major MSAs. Column 2 shows that the patterns hold when we consider only patents
that receive citations (about 130,000 patents, or slightly more than a fifth of patents do
not receive any citations during the sample period). Column 5 shows that the patterns
hold when we restrict the sample of patents to those internally generated by the firm.
In unreported estimation we find that these results are robust when we estimate a linear
probability model with firm-fixed eﬀects (i.e., a within-firm specification). The inclusion
of firm fixed eﬀects raises the R2 substantially, indicating that patent assignment reflects
underlying organization structure. However, even with firm fixed eﬀects, the diﬀerences in
the nature of centralized and decentralized research are similar to those reported in table
3.

                                  Insert Table 3 here


5.2     Implications of decentralization for innovation
We focus on two measures, R&D investment and patenting. In contrast to the foregoing
analysis, R&D and patenting are studied at the level of the firm. Although we have
multiple observations per firm, as the foregoing results show, the organization of R&D
within a firm is stable over time. Thus, although we include multiple observations per
firm, we do not exploit within-firm variation over time in R&D or patenting.

5.2.1    R&D equation

Table 4 reports the estimation results. Consistent with H3, the results show that decen-
tralization is associated with lower investment in R&D. Column 1 shows that increasing
the share of aﬃliate assigned patents from 0 to its mean (0.33), is associated with a 10%
reduction in R&D (033 × 030). Column 2 shows that the existence of at least one corpo-
rate R&D lab is associated with a 17% increase in R&D, but the eﬀect of assignment to
aﬃliates is unchanged. Column 3 shows that increasing the share of lab generated patents
has a small and statistically insignificant eﬀect on R&D, and (comparing to column 4),

                                            23
this does not aﬀect the estimated coeﬃcient of the share of aﬃliate assigned patents. The
remaining specifications further explore the robustness of the results. Column 5 shows
that the share of patents acquired in M&A transactions does not condition R&D invest-
ments. Column 6 shows that the results are robust to including the share of the firm’s
patents in diﬀerent locations (MSAs), indicating that the eﬀects we are measuring, are
not driven by where firms locate their R&D activities. Columns 7-9 report a very similar
pattern for specifications where the dependent variable is (&). We control
throughout for size by using lagged sales, and for industry fixed eﬀects (4 digits SIC) and
year dummies. Insofar as assignment is only observed when the firm has distinct aﬃliates
(instead of divisions), we also control for the number of aﬃliates.
      Recall that we have formulated our hypotheses in terms of the patterns of association we
expect to observe. The patterns in table 4 are consistent with hypothesis 3. The existence
of a corporate R&D lab may signal either rich opportunities for technical advancement or
the potential for internal spillovers from research. The implication is higher levels of R&D
investment. However, controlling for the existence of such labs, greater decentralization
is associated with lower R&D investments. This may reflect under-investment by units
that research projects that bring limited benefits to them but with beneficial spillovers to
other parts of the firm.

                                          Insert Table 4 here


5.2.2      Patent equation

We next investigate the patent equation using the flow of patents produced per firm- per
                                                                                                            8
year and an equivalent specification for the flow of patents divided by R&D stock.
Columns 1-5 in Table 5 report the estimation results for the annual flow of patents. (in
logs). Column 1 shows a negative and significant relationship between the share of patents
assigned to aﬃliates and patent propensity. The coeﬃcient of share aﬃliate assigned
patents is -0.16, implying that an increase this share from 0 to the mean level is associated
with a reduction in patenting of about 5%. As with the R&D equation, controlling for
whether there is a corporate R&D lab is positive and significant — a lab is associated with
an increase of about 20% in patenting — consistent with the idea that the presence of a lab
  8
      All results are robust to alternative specifications, such as Negative Binomial for patents counts.


                                                      24
signals rich opportunities for technical advance. Once again, the estimated coeﬃcient on
patents assigned to aﬃliates is similar in size and significance whether we control for the
presence of a corporate R&D lab or not. As Column 2 also shows, the estimated coeﬃcient
of the share of patents generated from labs is both small and statistically insignificant.
In all these specifications, we control for industry eﬀects (4 digit SIC), and year eﬀects,
along with size (lagged sales, in logs), R&D stock (lagged by a year), and by the number
of aﬃliates.
   This pattern is robust to controlling for patents acquired through M&A (Column 3),
controlling for the location of the firm’s R&D activities (controls for MSA in Column
4) or weighting patents by citations (Column 5). Columns 6-9 report the equivalent
specifications flow of patent, divided by R&D Stock. Column 5 shows a negative and
significant relationship between decentralization and patent propensity, similarly robust
to location controls and controls for M&A patents (Column 8) and weighting patents by
citations. The coeﬃcient on share decentralized is -0.187, which implies that increasing
this share from zero to the mean level is associated with a reduction in patents per dollar
of R&D by about 6%. This may appear to be a small eﬀect but recall that decentralized
R&D is associated with lower R&D investments. Insofar as there are diminishing returns to
R&D, a reduction in R&D should have resulted in an increase in patenting per R&D dollar.
Put diﬀerently, the eﬀect of decentralization on the propensity to patenting inventions is
likely larger than the estimated 5-6%.
   In contrast to the results on the nature of decentralized research, R&D and patent-
ing behavior seems to be more sensitive to the assignment of patents to aﬃliates rather
than to the share of patents generated from corporate labs. This is consistent with our
interpretation that, roughly speaking, assignment is measuring who (in the organization)
is paying for the corresponding R&D, rather than who (or where in the organization) the
R&D is being performed. Characteristics of research, however, depended both on who
pays for the R&D as well as where the R&D is being performed, as evidenced by table 3.

                                  Insert Table 5 here




                                            25
5.3       Implications of decentralization for market value and growth
5.3.1      Market value

Hypothesis 4 posits mixed results for the impact of centralization on market value, which
depend on the nature of R&D, and whether or not spillovers are likely.                     More clearly,
it posits that the marginal value of decentralized R&D will be greater. To this end, we
estimate a simple version of the value function approach proposed by Griliches (1981)9 .
The interpretation of a market value regression is not straightforward. The one we follow
here is that this is the value placed upon the stock of the various assets of the firm. Once
again, we do not exploit within-firm variation over time because the organization of R&D
within a firm varies very little over time.
       Table 6 reports the estimation results for the market value equation. The reported
standard errors are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and allow for serial correlation
within firms. We include controls for number of aﬃliates, assets, R&D stock and the total
stock of patents. Column 1 reports coeﬃcient on the share of patents that are assigned
to aﬃliates. 0.245, implying that increasing the share from zero to its mean value of 0.33
would be associated with an increase in market value of about 8.5%. The coeﬃcient on
overall patents stock is positive and significant as well, with an estimated elasticity of
              10
about 5%.          In column 2 we add controls for share of corporate lab-originated patents
and a dummy for whether the firm had at least one central lab. Once again, having at least
one corporate lab is associated with an increase in value of about 14%, perhaps signaling
the value placed by investors on the technical opportunities the firm enjoys. The share
of lab generated patents, however, is negative, implying that decreasing this share from
its mean of 0.27 to 0 would be associated with an increase in value of about 2.5%. These
results are consistent with the mixed implications of the theory developed in which no
   9
     See also Jaﬀe (1986), Hall et al (2005) or Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004).
  10
     In unreported specifications, we include a set of three separate indicator variables that capture the
non-linear eﬀect of decentralization. For each firm we assign a value of 1 to only one of these dummy
variables based on which pattern best describes the firm’s patents: all patents are centrally assigned
(share decentralized is zero); share decentralized is between zero and 0.2; share decentralized is between
0.2 and 0.8; share decentralized is above 0.8. Using the zero-share decentralization subset as our base
category, we find that the value-decentralization relationship is driven mostly by firms where at least 20%
of their patents are decentralized. The coeﬃcient on dummy for zero to 0.2 decentralization share is not
statistically significant (a coeﬃcient of 0.110 and a standard error 0.068). The coeﬃcient on dummy for
decentralization share higher than 0.8 is 0.173 (a standard error of 0.063), while the coeﬃcient estimate
for 0.2-0.8 decentralization range is 0.256 (a standard error of 0.068).



                                                    26
organizational form universally dominates the other. They are, however, consistent with
the specific prediction that the marginal decentralized project creates value whereas the
marginal centralized project merely covers its cost (and perhaps destroys value insofar as
it reflects the scientific interests of the firm’s researchers rather than the economic interests
of the firm). As a comparison between Columns 1, 2 and 3 shows, these results are not
sensitive to whether we include both measures of decentralization (assignment and lab
generated patents) or each measure individually. Similarly, these results are not sensitive
to controlling for the location of the firm’s R&D activities, as was also the case for R&D
and patenting. However, Column 4 shows that, unlike the case for R&D and patenting,
patents acquired through M&A are part of the reason that patents assigned to aﬃliates
are associated with higher market values. This suggests decentralization may have other
benefits, such as the ability to access external R&D.
        Recall that we had interpreted the share of patents assigned to aﬃliates as mea-
suring who pays for the R&D project and the share of lab generated patents as measuring
who performed the research. Thus, we interpret a corporate lab generated patent is as-
signed to an aﬃliate as reflecting the situation where the R&D project is funded (and
likely also chosen) by an aﬃliate but executed by a central R&D lab. This “hybrid” orga-
nization of R&D could be expected to ameliorate the lack of coordination and neglect of
spillovers characteristic of decentralized R&D, while not losing the connection to business
needs that may aﬄict centralized R&D. Column 8 reports the results of a specification
where we divide lab generated patents into those that are assigned to aﬃliates and those
that are centrally assigned. Whereas centrally assigned patents generated from labs have
a negative coeﬃcient of -0.09 (with a standard error of 0.04), lab generated patents that
are assigned to aﬃliates have a positive and statistically significant coeﬃcient. To explore
this distinction further, we split the sample into firms with at least one corporate R&D
lab and those without. Comparing Columns 6 and 7, we see that assignment to aﬃliates
is more strongly associated with value in firms with a corporate R&D lab than in firms
without a lab. The coeﬃcient on assigned patents is nearly 0.4, more than three times
in size for firms with a corporate R&D lab than for firms without such labs. Columns 9
and 10 show similar results when estimating Tobin’s Q specification, namely that assign-
ment to aﬃliates is positively associated with market value, especially for lab generated



                                               27
patents.11

                                       Insert Table 6 here


5.3.2      Sales growth

We proceed to explore the impact of decentralization of R&D on firm sales growth. Though
we had not formulated an explicit hypothesis on sales growth, the discussion had strongly
suggested that decentralization should be associated with higher sales growth for two rea-
sons. First, decentralized R&D would support existing products and services, improving
sales. Second, unit managers enjoying greater focus by autonomy (including autonomy on
R&D and IP management) would be able to engage in “division building” for instance by
rejecting licensing opportunities that would create value for the company but hurt their
own sales. More generally, such managers would be able to restrict R&D projects that
threaten to cannibalize sales of their existing products, a strategy that might be harmful
in the long run (a conjecture not supported by the foregoing R&D regressions), but would
certainly produce higher sales growth. in the short run.
       Table 7 reports the estimation results. In all specifications, we report standard errors
robust to arbitrary heteroscadisticity and clustered at the firm level to allow for correlation
in errors within a firm. As well, we control for size (assets and sales), R&D stock, and
the stock of patents (all lagged), and industry (4 digit SIC) and year eﬀects Columns 1
examines the decentralization-growth relationship. Consistent with our findings for market
value, the coeﬃcient on share decentralized is positive and is highly significant (0.037 and
a standard error of 0.010).), implying that. increasing the share from zero to the mean
value would be associated with an increase in growth by about 1 percentage point. In
  11
     We check the robustness of our findings to changes in patent assignment over time. We determine
whether a patent is assigned to an aﬃliates or headquarters by examining the assignee name that appears
on the patent document when it was granted. However, assignees can change over the patent life-cycle.
Reasons for reassigning a patent include a merger or an acquisition, or a managerial decision within-firms
of how to allocate IP assets across the organization units. Using data on reassignments, as coded by the
USPTO, we test the robustness of our key results. 41,244 patents in our sample are reassigned. Close
to 90% of these reassignments are assigning a patent from headquarters to an aﬃliate (36,180 patents).
There is no big diﬀerence in the share of reassigned patents between M&A and internal patents. For
M&A patents, 8% are reassigned (8,410 patents), where for internal patents, 7% are reassigned (32,834
patents). For M&A-related reassignments, 23% are reassignments from aﬃliates to headquarters, where
for internal patents, about 91% of reassignments are from headquarters to aﬃliates.
   We repeat our estimations by accounting for changes in reassignments. The same pattern of results
continue to hold, with no significant change in the main coeﬃcient estimates.

                                                   28
column 2 we include controls for share of central lab-originated patents and a dummy
for whether the firm had at least one central lab. The coeﬃcient on share of assigned
patents is identical after adding these controls. Whereas the existence of a corporate
lab is associated with higher growth, , the share of lab generated patents has a negative
coeﬃcient, about a third in size of the coeﬃcient of aﬃliate-assigned patents.,. As with
market value and diﬀerent from R&D and patenting, patents acquired through M&A are
positively associated with firm growth (Column 3). Introducing the controls for inventor
location (Column 4) reduces the coeﬃcient on the share of lab patents from -.013 (1%
significance) to -.006 with no statistical significance. Possibly, this is because our control
for location is the share of the firm’s patent in each MSA, which may be highly correlated
with the share of the firm’s patents produced by its corporate R&D labs.
    Comparing Columns 5 and 6, we see that assignment to aﬃliates has a much stronger
association with sales growth in firms that have corporate R&D labs compared to firms
that do not have such labs. Taken in conjunction with the positive association between
sales growth and the existence of such labs, we conclude, similar to the discussion with
market value, that this hybrid form seems to provide a useful via media between the two
extreme organizational forms of pure centralization and pure decentralization.


                                   Insert Table 7 here



6     Conclusion and suggestions for future research
This paper develops a new way of using patent data to measure the organization of R&D
within firms, and explores the relationship between firm organization and the extent and
nature of research activity, as well its association with performance as measured in sales
growth and market value.
    We use data 1,290 American publicly-listed corporations, with 2,615 Patent-receiving
aﬃliates, as well as characteristics of 594,903 patents that belong to these corporations.
One of our key measure is whether a patent is assigned to the parent corporation or to
an aﬃliate. The assignment of intellectual property to a wholly owned aﬃliate cannot
have legal significance. However, it likely reflects a de facto delegation of authority to the
aﬃliate in how the R&D is managed, a suggestion which is supported by our interviews

                                             29
with managers. This interpretation is also consistent with the very high share of patents
generated by corporate R&D labs, typically part of the central R&D organization in large
firms, assigned to the parent firm rather than to aﬃliates.
   We find that patents assigned to aﬃliates are less likely to cite scientific papers, less
general in scope, and receive fewer citations, especially when these patents are not gener-
ated in corporate R&D labs. Firms that extensively decentralize patents are more likely
to rely upon mergers and acquisitions to acquire patents, and likely to be more diversified.
   We next turn to the relationship between decentralization and outcomes. We find that
firms that decentralize R&D invest less in R&D, and given their R&D investment, produce
fewer patents. The may reflect the eﬃcacy of decentralized R&D, or the more incremental
nature of decentralized R&D, or merely diﬀerence in incentives to patent. However, de-
spite being associated with lower investments in R&D and patents, decentralized R&D is
associated with higher market value and sales growth, suggesting that whereas centralized
research may be technically and scientifically superior, the private economic benefits are
less clear cut.
   Given that the nature of research and the choice of organizational forms are jointly
determined, and related to unobserved factors such as technological opportunities, one
cannot infer causal impacts of organizational form on performance. For instance, the data
strongly suggest that the existence of a corporate R&D lab is associated with higher R&D
and patenting, but also with higher market value and sales growth.
   Nonetheless, the results are informative about the factors that condition the organi-
zation of R&D. Our findings are consistent with a view that decentralized R&D, though
more attentive to the immediate needs of the business, is also less likely to result in fun-
damental advances in technology. Conversely, centralized R&D, though perhaps better
for managing pioneering research that draws upon scientific advances, is susceptible to
wasteful expenditures on scientifically interesting projects with limited value for the firm.
Consistent with this, our findings also suggest that hybrid organizations, where R&D is
performed centrally but the projects are those that the individual units and aﬃliates are
willing to pay for, may be a useful compromise between the two pure forms. Over and
above these findings, this project contributes by revealing a new way of using patent data
to proxy for diﬀerences in organizational structure.
   Future research should focus on teasing out some of the specific mechanisms through


                                             30
which the diﬀerent relationships documented in this paper operate. We outline some po-
tentially promising starting points. First, we find a negative relationship between firm’s
market value and centralization. One mechanism that can drive this relationship is cap-
ture by corporate scientists, who may value “pro-publication” incentives (Merton, 1973).
As Cockburn, Henderson & Stern have argued, these scientists may derive pecuniary ben-
efits(e.g. promotion)and non-pecuniary benefits (e.g. reputation) form increasing their
public rank within their peer hierarchy. This may skew the focus of their R&D activities
towards increasing these private benefits, possibly at the expense of enhancing shareholder
value. Interestingly, Cockburn, et.al. suggest that this mechanism may be potentially ben-
eficial to the firm, given that these costly pro-publication organizational arrangements may
be seen as the “ticket of admission” which increases firms absorptive capacity (Cohen &
Levinthal, 1990), and thus “pays itself oﬀ in terms of higher R&D productivity.” Our
data suggest that on average this is an investment that may not pay oﬀ, or may exhibit
diminishing returns. Future empirical work should test this mechanism more directly,
for example, by incorporating firm publications data and confirming whether corpora-
tions that publish more of their research output in leading academic journals are indeed
more likely to be centralized, and capture on average lower market returns on their R&D
investments.
   Second, if decentralization adds value by allowing divisions to better exploit local in-
formation (Jensen and Meckling, 1992), and minimize delay that is associated with trans-
mission of information to corporate headquarters (Radner, 1993); (Van Zandt 1999), we
would expect this benefit to be especially strong in higher-velocity environments (Bour-
geois & Eisenhardt, 1988)such as more dynamic and complex industries, and less valuable
in static and discrete ones, where presumably responding fast to new information plays a
less important rule. Here, the variation between industries, as well as firm’s responses to
sharp and discontinuous environmental changes could be exploited to assess the relative
value of decentralization. Closely related to this is the dimension of local information
which stems from geography. One may expect firms to vary in the extent to which local
information is geographically dispersed. If decentralized firms are less geographically con-
centrated, one could test whether the value-decentralization relationship is stronger for
firms that operate in more geographically dispersed markets.
   A separate mechanism is the management of mergers and acquisitions (e.g. target


                                            31
selection and post-merger integration). A substantial variation in our data is the extent
to which acquired new firms are kept independent, rather than being subsumed and inte-
grated into the parent organization. The patterns of assignment of patents to and from
headquarters following acquisitions suggests that deliberate decisions drive this allocation
of rights, and future works should look more closely at the decision of firms to keep ac-
quired aﬃliates independent. The mechanisms mentioned above should play an important
part in this analysis. For example, scientist-intensive companies may be biased towards
full integration. Similarly, they may benefit from acquiring firms with more “basic” tech-
nologies that are further away from commercialization. Along these lines, an interesting
interpretation of the patterns we find in this paper is that some firms may favor structures
which reduce the transaction costs associated with the buying and selling other firms.
That is, headquarters may develop capabilities in acquiring businesses where part of the
value may come from an eventual disposition. To the extent that the typical goal is to ul-
timately sell the units they invest in, these firms may face a trade-oﬀ between maximizing
synergies and spillovers during the hold period, versus increasing flexibility to divest later.
Future research should investigate the extent to which a decentralized structure allows
firms to more easily and eﬀectively divest divisions. The intuition here is that keeping IP
from commingling with headquarters by maintain the assigning of patents to units may
make future divestitures more eﬃcient. This may make the unit’s IP assets more clearly
defined, so that they do not have to be negotiated over during a sale transaction.
   A separate issue that we have not explored, but can be potentially important, is the
notion that assignment of intellectual property rights to aﬃliates has a causal eﬀect on
performance. The are several reasons to suspect the presence of this causal eﬀect. Con-
sistent with the property rights theory of the firm (Grossman & O. D. Hart, 1986; O.
Hart & Moore, 1990), assigning ownership rights may have a real and substantial eﬀect of
incentives, and thus behavior in both ex-ante R&D investment decisions, and ex-post com-
mercialization strategies. While assignment of IP within the organization does not have a
clear legal interpretation, it may still aﬀect incentives through more subtle mechanisms,
such as pride of ownership (Estrin, Jones, & Svejnar, 1987) and relational contracting
(Baker, Gibbons, & Murphy, 2002). Moreover, assigning IP to aﬃliates may be impor-
tant from a contracting standpoint. Divisions, unlike aﬃliates, cannot independently
contract with outsiders. IP assignment to aﬃliates may reduce the cost of technology


                                              32
transactions by allowing outsiders to directly interact with the relevant unit, rather with
the entire corporation headquarters. Testing the causal eﬀect of assignment is indeed a
substantial challenge. A stating point could be to distinguish between specialized and
diversified corporations. Presumably, specialized corporations are associated with greater
intra-organization transactions between units and more frequent reallocation of resources.
We would expect that in these organizations the incentives benefits associated with assign-
ment would play a more important role than in diversified organizations where boundaries
between the IP of diﬀerent units in the organizations are more clearly defined. Additional
tests could look at industry profitability shocks as exogenous triggers to resources reallo-
cation. The assignment hypothesis would then predict that units that own the IP they
generate would be less sensitive to shocks aﬀecting the organization as a whole, than units
where IP is controlled by headquarters.
   We hope that future research could shed light on these central mechanisms.




                                            33
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, C. Lelarge, J. Van Reenen, and F. Zilibotti. 2007. “Tech-
    nology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 122, 1759-1800.

 [2] Agarwal, R., M. Ganco, and R.H. Ziedonis. 2009. “Reputations for toughness in patent
    enforcement: Implications for knowledge spillovers via inventor mobility.” Strategic
    Management Journal 30: 1349-1374.

 [3] Aghion, P. and J. Tirole. 1997. “Formal and real authority in organizations.” Journal
    of Political Economy 105, 1-29.

 [4] Alcácer, Juan. 2006. “Location Choices Across the Value Chain: How Activity and
    Capability Influence Collocation.” Management Science 52(10): 1457-1471

 [5] Almeida, P„ and Kogut, B. 1999. “Localization of Mobility of Engineers Knowledge
    in Regional and the Networks.” Management Science 45(7): 905-917.

 [6] Alonso, R., W. Dessein, and N. Matouschek. 2008. “When Does Coordination Require
    Centralization?.” The American Economic Review 98, 145—179.

 [7] Alonso, R., W. Dessein, and N. Matouschek. 2008. “Centralization versus Decentral-
    ization: An Application to Price Setting by a Multi-market Firm.” Journal of the
    European Economic Association 6, 457-467.

 [8] Argyres, N. S., and B. S. Silverman. 2004. “R&D, organization structure, and the
    development of corporate technological knowledge.” Strategic Management Journal
    25(89): 929-958.

 [9] Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., and Gambardella, A., 2001. “Markets for Technology and
    their Implications for Corporate Strategy.” Industrial and Corporate Change 10(2):
    419-451.

[10] Arrow, K. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources of Inventions.”
    In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
    Press.

                                           34
[11] Baker, G. and T. Hubbard. 2003. “Make Versus Buy in Trucking:Asset Ownership,
    Job Design, and Information.” American Economic Review 93, 551-572.

[12] Baker, G., R., Gibbons, and K.J. Murphy. 1999. “Informal authority in organiza-
    tions.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15(1): 56.

[13] Baker, G. and T. Hubbard. 2004. “Contractibility And Asset Ownership: On-Board
    Computers and Governance In U. S. Trucking.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119,
    1443-1479.

[14] Baker, G., R. Gibbons, and K. Murphy. 2002. “Relational Contracts and the Theory
    of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 39-84.

[15] Belenzon, S., T. Berkovitz, and P. Bolton. 2010. “Intracompany Governance and
    Innovation.” Working Paper.

[16] Belenzon, S. and A. Patacconi. 2010. “Firm Size and Innovation: Evidence from
    European Panel Data.” Working Paper.

[17] Bhaskarabhatla, A., A Note on IBM’s Defensive Publications 1958-1998, Unpublished
    2010

[18] Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. 2008. “Measuring and explaining decen-
    tralization across firms and countries.” Working Paper.

[19] Bolton, P. and M. Dewatripont. 1994. “The Firm as a Communication Network.” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 809—839.

[20] Bradley, S.W., H. Aldrich, 2010. “Resources, Environmental Change, and Survival:
    Asymmetric Paths of Young Independent and Subsidiary Organizations.” Strategic
    Management Journal (September 2008).

[21] Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. Hitt. 2002. “Information Technology, Work-
    place Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence.” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 117, 339-376.

[22] 419-451. Available at: http://icc.oupjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1093/icc/10.2.419.


                                           35
[23] Brusoni, S., Prencipe, A., and Pavitt, K., 2001. “Knowledge Organizational Coupling
    , and the Boundaries of the Firm : Why Do Firms Know More Than They Make ?”
    Administrative Science Quarterly.

[24] Bourgeois, L. J., & Eisenhardt, K. M. 1988. Strategic Decision Processes in High
    Velocity Environments: Four Cases in the Microcomputer Industry. Management
    Science, 34(7), 816-835. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.34.7.816.

[25] Caroli, E. and J. Van Reenen. 2001. “Skill-Biased Organizational Change? Evidence
    from a Panel of British and French Establishments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    116, 1449-1492.

[26] Casciaro, T., and Piskorski, M.J. 2005. “Power imbalance, mutual dependence, and
    constraint absorption: A closer look at resource dependence theory.” Administrative
    Science Quarterly 50(2): 167—199

[27] Chandler, A. 1977. The Visible Hand: the Managerial Revolution in American Busi-
    ness, Harvard University Press, 1977.

[28] Child, J. (1984). New technology and developments in management organization.
    Omega International Journal of Management Science, 12(3), 211-223.

[29] Cockburn, I., Henderson, R., and Stern, S., 1999. “The diﬀusion of science driven
    drug discovery: organizational change in pharmaceutical research.” NBER Working
    Papers Series.

[30] Cohen, W.M., and Levinthal, D.A. 1990. “Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on
    learning and innovation.” Administrative science quarterly 35(1): 140-155.

[31] Colombo, M. and M. Delmastro. 2004. “Delegation of Authority In Business Organi-
    zations: An Empirical Test.” Journal of Industrial Economics 52, 2004, 53-80.

[32] DeSanctis, G., and J.T. Glass and I.M. Ensing. 2002. "Organizaional Design for
    R&D." Academy of Management Executive 16(3).

[33] Dessein, W. 2002. “Authority and communication in organizations.” Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 69, 811-838.


                                            36
[34] Estrin, S., D. Jones, and J. Svejnar. 1987. “The Productivity Eﬀects of Worker Par-
    ticipation: Producer Cooperatives in Western Economies.” Journal of Comparative
    Economics 11, 40-61.

[35] Feinberg, S. E., and A.K. Gupta. 2004. “Knowledge spillovers and the assignment of
    R&D responsibilities to foreign subsidiaries.” Strategic Management Journal 25(89):
    823-845.

[36] Furman, J.L. 2003. “Location and organizing strategy: Exploring the influence of
    location on the organization of pharmaceutical research.” Advances in Strategic Man-
    agement 20: 49—88.

[37] Galunic, D. C., and K. M. Eisenhardt. 2001. “Architectural Innovation and Modular
    Corporate Forms.” The Academy of Management Journal 44(6): 1229.

[38] Ghemawat, P. 1987. “Investment in lumpy capacity.” Journal of Economic Behavior
    & Organization 8(2): 265—277.

[39] Grossman, S. J., and O. D. Hart. 1986. “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
    Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration.” Journal of Political Economy 94(4): 691

[40] Griliches, Z. 1990. “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey.” Journal of
    Economic Literature 28, 1661-1707.

[41] Gupta A. and V. Govindarajan. 2000. “Knowledge flows within multinational corpo-
    rations.” Strategic Management Journal 496, 473-496.

[42] Hall, B., A. Jaﬀe, and M. Trajtenberg. 2005. “Market Value and Patent Citations.”
    The RAND Journal of Economics 36, 16-38.

[43] Hall, B. and R. Ziedonis. 2001. “The Determinants of Patenting in the U.S. Semicon-
    ductor Industry, 1980-1994.” Rand Journal of Economics 32, 101-128.

[44] Hannan, M.T., and J. Freeman. 1984. “Structural inertia and organizational change.”
    American sociological review 49(2): 149—164.

[45] Hart, O. and J. Moore. 1990. “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm.” Journal
    of Political Economy 98, 1119- 1158.

                                           37
[46] Jaﬀe, A. 1986. “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D: Evidence from
    Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value.” The American Economic Review 76,
    984-1001.

[47] Henderson, R., and K. Clark. 1990. “Architectural innovation: the reconfiguration
    of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms.” Administrative
    science quarterly.

[48] Henderson, R, and I Cockburn. 1996. “Scale, scope, and spillovers: the determinants
    of research productivity in drug discovery.” The Rand journal of economics 27(1):
    32-59.

[49] Hill, S., R. Martin, and M. Harris. 2000. “Decentralization, Integration and the Post-
    Bureaucratic Organization: The Case of R&d.” Journal of Management Studies 37(4):
    563-586.

[50] Hitt, M., and R. Hoskisson, 1990. “Mergers and acquisitions and managerial commit-
    ment to innovation in M-form firms.” Strategic Management 11: 29-47.

[51] Hounshell, D.A., and Smith, J.R., "Science and Corporate Strategy: Du Pont R&D
    1902-1980." Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1988

[52] Jaﬀe, A.B., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson. 1993. “Geographic localization of
    knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations.” The Quarterly journal of Eco-
    nomics 108(3): 577—598.

[53] Jensen, M. C. 1999. “Agency Cost Of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
    Takeovers.” SSRN Electronic Journal 76(2): 323-329

[54] Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling. 1992. “Specific and General Knowledge and
    Organizational Structure.” In Contract Economics, eds. L. Werin and H. Wijkander.
    Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, p. 251-274.

[55] Kanter. R. 1985. “Supporting innovation and venture development in established
    companies.” Journal of Business Venturing 1, 47—60.

[56] Kastl, J. D. Martimort, and S. Piccolo. 2009. “Delegation and R&D Spending: Evi-
    dence from Italy.” Working Paper.

                                            38
[57] Kay, N. 1988. “The R&D function: corporate strategy and structure.” In Technical
    Change and Economic Theory, eds. G. Dosi et al. London.

[58] Kline, S.J., and N. Rosenberg. 1986. “An overview of Innovation.” In The Positive
    Sum Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth, National Academy of
    Sciences, p. 275-305.

[59] Kogut, B. 1991. “Country capabilities and the permeability of borders.” Strategic
    Management Journal 12(S1): 33-47.

[60] Lahiri, N. 2010. GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF R & D ACTIVITY : HOW
    DOES IT AFFECT INNOVATION QUALITY? Academy of Management Journal,
    53(5), 1194-1209.

[61] Lerner, J., and J. Wulf. 2007. “Innovation and Incentives: Evidence from Corporate
    R&D.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(4): 634-644.

[62] Leiponen, A., and C. E. Helfat. 2010. “Location, Decentralization, and Knowledge
    Sources for Innovation.” Organization Science: 1-18.

[63] Mowery, David C, Joanne E Oxley, and Brian S Silverman. 1996. “Strategic alliances
    and inter-firm knowledge transfer.” Strategic Management Journal 17: 77-91.

[64] Matouschek, N. and P. Ramezzana. 2007. “The Role of Exclusive Contracts in Facil-
    itating Market Transactions.” The Journal of Industrial Economics 55, 347-371.

[65] Mintzberg, H. (1979). The Structuring of Organizations. Englewood Cliﬀs (p. 512).
    Prentice-Hall.

[66] Mookherjee, D. and M. Tsumagari. 2004. “The organization of supplier networks:
    eﬀects of delegation and intermediation.” Econometrica 72, 1179-1219.

[67] Nelson, R.R., and S.G. Winter. 1982. Wn Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
    Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[68] Nobel, R., and J. Birkinshaw. 1998. “Innovation in multinational corporations: con-
    trol and communication patterns in international R&D operations.” Strategic Man-
    agement Journal 19(5): 479-496.

                                           39
[69] Patacconi, A. 2009. “Coordination and delay in hierarchies.” The RAND Journal of
    Economics 40, 190-208.

[70] Penner-Hahn, J., and J. M. Shaver. 2005. “Does international research and devel-
    opment increase patent output? An analysis of Japanese pharmaceutical firms.”
    Strategic Management Journal 26(2): 121-140.

[71] Podolny, J. M., and J. N. Baron. 1997. “Resources and Relationships: Social Networks
    and Mobility in the Workplace.” American Sociological Review 62(5): 673.

[72] Radner, R. 1993. “The organization of decentralized information processing.” Econo-
    metrica 61, 1109-1146.

[73] Radner, R. and J. Marschack. 1972. Economic Theory of Teams, New Haven: Yale
    University Press.

[74] Reagans, Ray, and E.W. Zuckerman. 2001. “Networks, diversity, and productivity:
    The social capital of corporate R&D teams.” Organization Science 12(4): 502—517.

[75] Reger, G.. 1999. “How R&D is coordinated in Japanese and European multination-
    als.” R & D Management 29(1): 71-88.

[76] Riordan, M. 2008. “Competitive eﬀects of vertical integration.” Handbook of Antitrust
    Economics, 145—82.

[77] Roberts, P. W., and S. McEvily. 2004. “Product-line expansion and resource canni-
    balization.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 57(1): 49-70.

[78] Rosenkopf, L., and P. Almeida. 2003. “Overcoming local search through alliances and
    mobility.” Management Science 49(6): 751—766.

[79] Rotemberg, J. and G. Saloner. 1994. “Benefits of Narrow Business Strategies.” The
    American Economic Review 84, 1330-1349.

[80] Siggelkow, N., and D.A. Levinthal. 2003. “Temporarily divide to conquer: Central-
    ized, decentralized, and reintegrated organizational approaches to exploration and
    adaptation.” Organization Science 14(6): 650—669.


                                           40
[81] Siggelkow, N., and J. W. Rivkin. 2006. “When Exploration Backfires: Unintended
    Consequences of Multilevel Organizational Search.” The Academy of Management
    Journal 49(4): 779.

[82] Singh, J., 2008. “Distributed R&D, cross-regional knowledge integration and quality
    of innovative output.” Research Policy 37(1): 77-96.

[83] Szulanski, G. 2009. “Exploring Internal Stickiness: Impediments to the Transfer of
    Best Practice Within the Firm.” Strategic Management Journal 17, pp. 27-43.

[84] Teece, D. 1996. “Firm organization, industrial structure, and technological innova-
    tion.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 31, 193-224.

[85] Van Zandt, T. 1999. Decentralized information processing in the theory of organiza-
    tions. IEA CONFERENCE VOLUME SERIES (Vol. 124, p. 125—160).

[86] Von Hippel, E. 1998. “Economics of product development by users: The impact of"
    sticky" local information.” Management science 44(5): 629—644.

[87] Williamson, O. E. 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications.
    New York: Free Press.




                                           41
A     Appendix
This section details the construction of the data platform used in this project. The central
datasets consist of a patent-level panel and a firm-level panel, which are linked via the
unique patent id numbers. Each of these panels is built up iteratively, by incorporating
data from the following sources: (i) patent level information from the United States Patent
and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), (ii) ownership structure data from Icarus and Amadeus
by Bureau Van Dyke (BVD), (iii) Merger and acquisition data from Thomson Reuters
SDC Platinum and Zephyr by Bureau Van Dyke, (iv) accounting information from U.S.
Compustat, and (v) extensive manual searches of on-line resources, such as corporate and
governments websites, and search engines.

A.1     Ownership Structure
Assignee information is available from the USPTO, but many of the patent assignments
are made to aﬃliate firms. Furthermore, firms vary in their choice to utilize aﬃliates
for their assignments, resulting in noisy (at best) or biased (likely) patent and citation
counts at the firm level. The linchpin of this project is the identification of an ultimate
owner (“UO”) for a large portion of the companies reported as patent assignees by the
USPTO. Here we follow the methodology employed by Belenzon and Berkowitz (2010).
We obtain ownership structure data from the Icarus and Amadeus databases by Bureau
Van Dyke (BVD). The Amadeus ownership database includes detailed information of
the percentage of ownership between shareholders and their subsidiaries. We develop an
ownership algorithm that constructs the internal structure parent and aﬃliate groupings
based on their inter-company ownership links.
    The algorithm follows three steps: (i) completes missing ownership links, (ii) generates
lists of all subsidiaries and parents for each company, and (iii) constructs the ownership
chains bottom-up. To illustrate our methodology, it would be useful to consider the
following example. Suppose Figure A.1 correctly describes the ownership structure of a
conglomerate. The ultimate owner firm at the apex of the group controls 7 public and
private firms. Amadeus provides detailed data on direct ownership links. Thus, our raw
data include the links  → ,  →  ,  → , and  → . Note that the percentage of
ownership for the link  →  has to be larger than 20 (because firm  is public), where for
the percentage of ownership for all other links has to be larger than 50 (because the other
subsidiaries are private). Because there is no information about indirect ownership links,
the link  →  is missing from the raw data. The first step of the algorithm is to complete
missing links. As we observe the ownership relations  →  and  → , our algorithm
infers the ownership relation  →  . Note that at this stage of the algorithm we still
do not know whether the ownership relation is direct or indirect (and if it is indirect,
how many layers separate firm  from firm ). The second step of the algorithm is to
construct two lists for each firm: shareholders and subsidiaries. This step saves valuable
running time, which is especially important when dealing with large scale ownership data.
The following table is generated:




                                            42
     Firm Shareholder Subsidiary
              -        , 
              -          
              -          
                        
            ,          -
                        -
                        -
    Note that from step 1, we already know that firm  is a shareholder of firm . The
third and final step of the algorithm is to construct the structure of the group based on
the above ownership relations. Because of the missing links problem, our algorithm does
not assume that an ownership relation is direct; the only input the algorithm receives is
the existence of the ownership relation. We start with a firm that has no subsidiaries
from the list generated in step 2. We illustrate the procedure for firm , which is the
most interesting in this example. Firm  is placed at the bottom of the ownership chain.
Next, we move to the shareholder list of firm . It includes firms  and . Starting
arbitrary with , place  above . Proceeding to firm , there are three possibilities
for its location: (i)  is above  and above ; (ii)  is above , but below ; (iii) 
is above , but not below neither above  (diﬀerent ownership chain). For (i) to be the
right structure,  has to appear in the shareholder list of firm . From step 2, we rule
this out. For (ii) to be the right structure,  has to appear on the subsidiary list of firm
. From step 2, we rule this out. For (ii) to be the right structure, D has to appear on the
subsidiary list of firm A. From step 2, this holds. Finally, for (iii) to be the right structure,
A cannot appear on either the shareholder or subsidiary lists of firm D. From step 2, this
is ruled out. At the end of this procedure, we have determined for each ownership chain
the highest shareholder firm - we call this firm the leading shareholder.

A.1.1    Dealing with M&A
A central issue in our analysis is the post-merger management of acquired firms. The
decentralization variation in our data comes mostly from two sources: the degree of post-
acquisition integration of aﬃliates (with a lower bound being those kept independent), and
the speed at which patents are generated centrally in relation to existing aﬃliates. For each
acquired firm we determine whether it remained independent post-acquisition, or whether
it was dissolved. We take several steps in determining whether a firm is independent. First,
we check whether the firm appears in Amadeus or Icarus as an independent company.
Second, we manually check each company listed in the first step whether it continues to
operate independently from the parent company. We check their corporate websites to
confirm that their legal disclaimers and investor relations information references a parent
company.
    Dissolved acquisitions are much more problematic. Because we match patents to firms
based on the 2008 ownership structure, we lose historical acquisitions that were fully
integrated in the parent company and ceased to exist as separate legal entities. Though
we do capture post-acquisition patents as those are likely to be assigned to headquarters,
we may nonetheless over measure decentralization (because all historical patents that we

                                               43
do not match are centralized). To mitigate this problem we take two steps. We match all
firms in SDC Platinum where the acquiring firm appears in our sample. We then add to
our data all patents that belong to acquired firms that no longer appear in the 2008 data.
SDC platinum is likely to miss smaller acquisitions, so we also did an extensive search
of public sources (such as Lexis-Nexis,EDGAR and general web searches) to generate a
list of all acquisitions for the top 500 patenting corporations in our sample. As this is an
iterative process, the resolution of M&A issues was not completed until the final stages
of all our patent and firm matching (i.e. this last step would have been taken after the
completion of A.2.1 below). For acquisitions that do not appear in SDC we classify its
patents as follows: if the firm is active in 2008 (thus, it is matched to one of the firms in
our firm universe) then we classify it as an aﬃliate of the acquiring corporation. However,
in case there is no match between this firm and our firm universe, we classify all of its
patents to the acquiring firm headquarters.
    Overall, we matched 50,931 patents to SDC and Zephyr. An underlying assumption
of this matching is that an aﬃliate exists in 2008. If the aﬃliate was historically dissolved
it will not appear in our firm universe, hence, its patents will not be included in our
sample. In order to overcome this problem, we take two steps. First, for the largest 500
patenting corporations in our sample we manually collect data, from public sources, on
their historical acquisitions. This list allows us to identify those firms that were acquired
and fully dissolved. Second, we generate a list of the top 1,000 American assignees (as
indicated by the address of the assignee) that were not matched to our data. The remaining
unmatched firms have less than 40 patents over their lifetime, so it is reasonable to assume
that they are not patent-intensive firms. For each unmatched firm remaining in our sample,
we manually investigate whether it was acquired by any of our sample parent corporations,
or by any firms that themselves were acquired by our parent corporations. These two steps
lead us to identify 53,761 patents, which we proceed to classify as centrally assigned. In
total, we identify 104,692 as being acquired through a merger or an acquisition. Of these
patents, 55,702 (53%) are assigned to aﬃliates, and the remaining patents are assigned to
headquarters.
    For each acquired firm we determine whether it remained operational post-acquisition.
We take several steps in determining whether a firm is independent. First, we check
whether the firm appears in Amadeus or Icarus as an independent company. Second,
we manually check each company listed in the first step whether it continues to operate
independently from the parent company. We check their corporate websites to confirm
that their legal disclaimers and investor relations information references a parent company.
Dissolved acquisitions are much more problematic. Because we match patents to firms
based on the 2008 ownership structure, we lose historical acquisitions that were fully
integrated in the parent company and ceased to exist as separate legal entities. Though
we do capture post-acquisition patents as those are likely to be assigned to headquarters,
we may nonetheless over measure decentralization (because all historical patents that we
do not match are centralized). To mitigate this problem we performed an exhaustive
manual search to identify a significant majority of these absorbed firms and match them
to their patents. Appendix A.1.3 for a description of this process.




                                             44
A.2     Matching patent data
We standardize a name cleaning algorithm that is run both on the UO dataset and the 2007
NBER Patent and Citations Dataset in order to match observations by company name.
We utilize the assignee codes contained in NBPATS only as quality checks, or for guidance
in manual searches, however we concentrate on matches using the aﬃliate company names
and our ultimate owner company names from UO. The algorithm utilizes both automated
rules and manual inputs to reduce most firm names to a one or two word string variable.
Extensive testing was performed to yield the highest rates of matching, while minimizing
multiplicity errors (which occur when two distinct names are rendered equal by deleting
distinguishing words). Like previous work in name matching, we capitalize all letters, and
remove extraneous characters and strings such as “&,” “THE,” “ASSOCIATES,” etc. We
compile a list of 175 most common such “junk” words (i.e. non-essential for uniquely
identifying companies). Our list is more targeted to American firms (our focus) than
those lists developed by the NBER Patent Data Project. Furthermore, one refinement
over previous such name matching projects is our use of a process whereby junk words
are truncated in a right-to-left fashion. This increases the match yield significantly, as
we are able to remove, for example, the word “INTERNATIONAL” from “PIONEER HI-
BRED INTERNATIONAL, INC,” (because it occurs on the right side) while allowing it to
remain in “INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION.” To illustrate,
the truncation would proceed as follows:
    1. Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc.
    2. PIONEER HI-BRED INTERNATIONAL, INC. (capitalize)
    3. PIONEER HI BRED INTERNATIONAL INC (remove punctuation)
    4. PIONEER HI BRED INTERNATIONAL (remove last word if “junk”)
    5. PIONEER HI BRED (remove last word if “junk.” Stop)
    Here, the algorithm stops when it reaches a “non-junk” word. For “INTERNATIONAL
BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,” it would have stopped after truncating the
word “CORPORATION.”
    We can further see the power of this “right-to-left”approach by looking at the way
that the sub string “HI” above is treated under a diﬀerent set of conditions. Consider the
name “VERIZON INC/HI” (it is common in Compustat to include state identifiers):
    1. Verizon Inc./HI
    2. VERIZON INC./HI (capitalize)
    3. VERIZON INC HI (remove punctuation)
    4. VERIZON INC (remove last word if “junk.”)
    5. VERIZON (remove last word if “junk.” Stop)
    Here, the sub string “HI” is properly removed, whereas removing it from Pioneer Hi-
Bred would have resulted in a corruption of the identifier.
    One of the tradeoﬀs in matching is always between high yield and multiplicity errors.
For example, one can see how too aggressive an algorithm can render “American Express,”
“American Airlines,” and “American Standard” into “AMERICAN.” Our choice was to
err on the side of higher multiplicity, but to rely on manual checks to correct any mis-
coded companies. By always keeping track of the original, uncleaned names, we added
extra steps to check any duplicates (i.e. cases where the same cleaned name corresponded
to more than one original name). At this stage, extensive manual eﬀort was expended

                                           45
to resolve ambiguities by performing actual checks of patent images and web searches.
Ultimately, we match over 846,000 patents to our UO file.

A.2.1   Matching to Compustat
Having matched patents to firms to ultimate owners, we proceed to match as many ulti-
mate owners as possible to a CUSIP (in order to tap into Compustat accounting informa-
tion). Because only publicly traded companies are listed by Compustat, this eﬀectively
serves as a filter to eliminate government and institutional entities that may have mis-
takenly made it into our sample by this point. We utilize the standardized matching
algorithm used in A.2.1, with some modifications to account for idiosyncratic Compustat
“junk words.”

A.2.2   Corporate R&D labs
An important measure in our analysis is whether a patent is generated at a corporate lab or
not. For our purposes, this is a binary outcome, as we are not interested in distance (once
a patent is not lab-generated, we do not care how far from headquarters it came from, just
as we do not care how far away the lab was from headquarters). We identify the research
facilities for the majority of our sample by utilizing the Directory of American Research
and Technology, which lists such facilities for all publicly traded companies in America
that are considered research-oriented. This gives us the city and zip code information for
each firm’s R&D lab facility. Because the directory does not capture every firm in our
sample, we compliment this with a manual search that spanned 987 firms. Using publicly
available sources such as corporate websties and financial filings, we identify the location
for these firm’s labs.
    Next, we obtain inventor information for all patents from the USPTO database, which
is given in string format that provides city or town name and state, for example "Joliet,
IL." The first step is to match inventor location to a database of zip codes by utilizing a
commercial zip code database obtained from www.zip-codes.com. This entailed significant
automated and manual matching due to very diﬀerent naming conventions utilized by the
two data sources. For example, the USPTO city name field contains numerous noise terms
such as "Late of" or "Both of," as well as variations of names, such as the following for
Sterling Heights, MI and St. Paul, MN:
    Sterlin Heights
    Sterling
    Sterling Hts.
    Sterling Hei
    Sterling Height
    Sterling Heights
    Sterling Hgts
    Sterling Hgts.
    Sterling Hts
    Sterling Hts.
    St. Pau.
    St. Paul

                                            46
    St. Paul ,all of
    St. Paul, all of MN
    St. Paul, both of MN
    St. Paul, of all
    St. Paul.
    Once we had zip codes for every inventor for every patent, and every corporate lab for
every firm, we proceeded to match them by CBSA code. One limitation faced by many
studies that utilize location as a measure concerns the multiple towns, cities, and zip codes
are often within the same metropolitan region. Thus, relying solely on Zip code or city
name, one would miss that Boston and Cambridge facilities may in fact be within the
same R&D complex. This is even more problematic when we match to inventors, since
inventors.addresses are more prone to variation within the area around an R&D lab (as
they live in suburbs, etc.). To counter this, we matched our inventor and lab data data to
the US Oﬃce of Management and Budget’s Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSA areas),
which is accessible at www.census.gov/population/www/metroareas. This database gives
us the CBSA code associated with each Zip Codes.
    After identifying the CBSA code for each inventor and each lab, we identify every
patent in our sample where at least one inventor is located in the same CBSA as a lab (at
the firm level). Thus, this patent-level indicator variable lab_match takes on the value
of one for patents where we assume that the inventor was aﬃliated with one of the firm’s
R&D labs. Our assumption is that if the patent came from an inventor located in close
proximity to a corporate lab, is very likely that she would have been involved with the lab
in generating that invention.

A.2.3    Dealing with M&A
A central issue in our analysis is the post-merger management of acquired firms. The
decentralization variation in our data comes mostly from two sources: the degree of post-
acquisition integration of aﬃliates (with a lower bound being those kept independent), and
the speed at which patents are generated centrally in relation to existing aﬃliates. For each
acquired firm we determine whether it remained independent post-acquisition, or whether
it was dissolved. We take several steps in determining whether a firm is independent. First,
we check whether the firm appears in Amadeus or Icarus as an independent company.
Second, we manually check each company listed in the first step whether it continues to
operate independently from the parent company. We check their corporate websites to
confirm that their legal disclaimers and investor relations information references a parent
company.
    Dissolved acquisitions are much more problematic. Because we match patents to firms
based on the 2008 ownership structure, we lose historical acquisitions that were fully
integrated in the parent company and ceased to exist as separate legal entities. Though
we do capture post-acquisition patents as those are likely to be assigned to headquarters,
we may nonetheless over measure decentralization (because all historical patents that we
do not match are centralized). To mitigate this problem we take two steps. We match all
firms in SDC Platinum where the acquiring firm appears in our sample. We then add to
our data all patents that belong to acquired firms that no longer appear in the 2008 data.
SDC platinum is likely to miss smaller acquisitions, so we also did an extensive search

                                             47
of public sources (such as Lexis-Nexis,EDGAR and general web searches) to generate a
list of all acquisitions for the top 500 patenting corporations in our sample. As this is an
iterative process, the resolution of M&A issues was not completed until the final stages
of all our patent and firm matching (i.e. this last step would have been taken after the
completion of A.2.1 below). For acquisitions that do not appear in SDC we classify its
patents as follows: if the firm is active in 2008 (thus, it is matched to one of the firms in
our firm universe) then we classify it as an aﬃliate of the acquiring corporation. However,
in case there is no match between this firm and our firm universe, we classify all of its
patents to the acquiring firm headquarters.
    Overall, we matched 50,931 patents to SDC and Zephyr. An underlying assumption
of this matching is that an aﬃliate exists in 2008. If the aﬃliate was historically dissolved
it will not appear in our firm universe, hence, its patents will not be included in our
sample. In order to overcome this problem, we take two steps. First, for the largest 500
patenting corporations in our sample we manually collect data, from public sources, on
their historical acquisitions. This list allows us to identify those firms that were acquired
and fully dissolved. Second, we generate a list of the top 1,000 American assignees (as
indicated by the address of the assignee) that were not matched to our data. The remaining
unmatched firms have less than 40 patents over their lifetime, so it is reasonable to assume
that they are not patent-intensive firms. For each unmatched firm remaining in our sample,
we manually investigate whether it was acquired by any of our sample parent corporations,
or by any firms that themselves were acquired by our parent corporations. These two steps
lead us to identify 53,761 patents, which we proceed to classify as centrally assigned. In
total, we identify 104,692 as being acquired through a merger or an acquisition. Of these
patents, 55,702 (53%) are assigned to aﬃliates, and the remaining patents are assigned to
headquarters.

A.3      Reassignments
Our measures of assignment structure builds on the assignee name that appears on the
patent document when it was granted. Patent assignment can change over time. To test
the robustness of our results to changes in assignment, we develop comprehensive data
on patent reassignment. Reassignment data are taken directly from the USPTO website
(using a specialized "spider" program), and then merged to our final patent sample. We are
interested in two reassignment types: (i) assigning a patent that was originally assigned
to headquarters to an aﬃliates, and (ii) reassigning to headquarters a patent that was
originally assigned to an aﬃliate.1213 To determine reassignment type we match old and
new assignees to our firm name sample. Some patents undergo reassignments over their
lifetime for reasons that are not germane to our study. For example, patents are very often
reassigned to correct errors in the initial document, or for purposes of collateralization for
  12
     For example, we find evidence of the first type of reassignment in many patents held by Boston
Scientific, which were assigned to aﬃliates such as Advanced Bionics and Sci Med Life Systems years after
Boston Scientific bought them. As well, we see patents going from acquired aﬃliate to headquarters, for
example Matrix Semiconductor assigning 157 of its 421 patents to parent company Sandisk.
  13
     A third type of reassignment is inter-firm. Because the current paper deals with intra-firm allocation
of IP rights, we exclude inter-firm reassignment from our sample.



                                                    48
lenders (which results in multiple reassignments, as when the status of the loan changes).
Ultimately, 41,244 patents in our sample are meaningfully reassigned. Close to 90(36,180
patents), supporting our view of assignments as being associated with a long-term eﬀective
delegation of authority. Furthermore, although not discussed in detail in the text, our
results are robust to adjusting for reassignments.




                                           49
                                                                                                                      Ethicon 35%

                                 Others                               Depuy Spine 1%
               Aeropharm 1%   (5 firms) 1%                                             Neutrogena        Ortho Clinical 1%
        Therasense 2%                                       Codman 1%                     1%
                                                                                                       Others 4%
                                                            Closure 2%
                                                            Biosense Webster
   Advanced                                                        2%
 Cardiovascular
                                                            Biosense 2%
    Systems
      29%                                                   J&J Consumer 3%
                                                            J&J Vision 4%
                                                            Depuy Orthopaedics
                                                                   4%
                                                            Lifescan 5%

                                                            Alza 5%



                                                                      HQ:
                                                 HQ:                                                               Ethicon Endo 13%
                                                                Johnson Johnson
                                               Abbott                                               Ortho Mcneil
                                                                      8%
                                             Laboratories                                               8%
                                                 67%




           Abbott Laboratories                                                         Johnson & Johnson
Figure 1: Example of Centralized vs. decentralized patent assignments
                                    Table 1. Summary Statistics for Main Variables
                                                                                                   Distribution
                                                                                            th
Variable                                   # Obs.            Mean            Std. Dev.    10           50th          90th
                                                     Panel A: Firms (Firm-Year)

Share asssigned patents   t-1              16,104             0.33             0.42        0           0.03           1

Share lab patents t-1                      16,104             0.27             0.67        0            0             1

Market Value ($mm)                         16,104            1,430            7,104        4           126          2,936

Tobin's Q                                  16,104             1.15             2.13      0.14          0.58         2.34

Sales Growth                               16,031            0.105            0.358      -0.012       0.084         0.360

Sales t-1 ($mm)                            14,562            3,616            11,964      34           596          8,227

Assets t-1 ($mm)                           16,104            2,091            7,272       11           197          4,725

R&D Expenditures ($mm)                     16,104             109              472         0           5.3           183

R&D Stock t-1 ($mm)                        16,104             452             1,819        0            22           814

Patents Stock t-1                          16,104             153              611        0.6           14           266

Patents flow, count                        16,104              25               99         0            2            48

Patents flow, weighed by cites             16,104              20               88         0            1            31
                                                          Panel B: Patents

Dummy for Decentralized                    595,710            0.18             0.39        0            0             1

Dummy for lab generated                    595,710            0.34             0.47        0            0             1

Generality                                 404,632            0.57             0.32        0           0.66           1

Originality                                433,449            0.27             0.28        0           0.22         0.67

Citations per Patent                       595,710            8.90            15.90        0            4            22

Citations per Patent (>0)                  430,237           11.30            17.10        1            6            26

Citations to Non-Patent Lit.               595,710            0.78             3.89        0            0             2

Citations to Non-Patent Lit. (>0)          106,578            4.30             8.30        1            2             9

Notes: This table provides summary statistics for key variables used in the econometric analysis. Market Value includes
common stock, preferred stock and debt, net of current assets. Tobin’s Q is the ratio between Market Value and Assets.
R&D Stock is computed using the perpetual inventory method with a depreciation rate of 15%. Patents Stock is
citations-weighted and is computed using the perpetual inventory method with a depreciation rate of 15%. Share
assigned patents divides a firm's total number of affiliate-assigned patents by its total number of patents. Generality is
the HHI measure of concentration of the citations a patent receives across three-digit U.S. class. Originality is the HHI
measure of concentration of the citations a patent makes across three-digit U.S. class. Citations to Non-Patent Lit. is the
number of citations a patent makes to non-patent literature.
                            Table 2. Patent Characteristics by Assignement and R&D Location
                                                         All                               Affiliate R&D                         Central R&D
                                                           Affiliate minus                          Affiliate minus                      Affiliate minus
Variable                                        Obs.         HQ assigned                Obs.         HQ assigned              Obs.        HQ assigned

Number of citations                           595,710          -0.414**               394,389           -0.491**            201,321           -0.225**

Number of citations (>0)                      430,237          -0.557**               281,387           -0.869**            148,850            0.101

Citations to Non-Patent Lit.                  595,710          -0.226**               394,389           -0.283**            201,321            -0.132

Citations to Non-Patent Lit. (>0)             106,578          -0.366**                73,171           -0.464**             33,407            -0.198

Generality                                    404,632          -0.018**               263,085           -0.019**            141,547           -0.015**
Notes: This table reports mean comparison tests for affiliate assigned and HQ assigned patents by the location of R&D. Share assigned patents divides
a firm's total number of affiliate-assigned patents by its total number of patents. ** denotes that the difference in means is significant at the 1 percent
level.
                                          Table 3. Affiliate patent assignment
                     Dependent variable: Dummy for affiliate assignment. Probit Estimation (marginal effects)
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)
                                                                                          Excluding
                                                     At least one               MSA       Pre-M&A From central Not from
                                                         cite                  controls    Patents    lab      central lab

ln(1+Citations Received )                 -0.016**    -0.018**      -0.017**   -0.013**    -0.013**    -0.003**    -0.025**
                                           (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)   (0.0009)


ln(1+Citations to Non-Patent Lit. )       -0.016**    -0.017**      -0.016**   -0.017**    -0.008**    -0.007**    -0.020**
                                           (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.001)

Patent Generality                         -0.018**    -0.019**      -0.016**   -0.018**    -0.018**    -0.011**    -0.201**
                                           (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.002)

Patent Originality                        -0.010**    -0.011**      -0.010**    -0.003      -0.003     -0.009**    -0.014**
                                           (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)

Firm Diversity (HHI)                                                -0.077**
                                                                     (0.005)



Technology areas dummies:

Biotechnology                             0.017**       0.012        0.002      -0.003      -0.003      0.016**    0.017**
                                           (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)

Chemicals                                 -0.019**    -0.018**      -0.014**    -0.005      -0.006     -0.019**    -0.018**
                                           (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)

Telecommunications                        -0.105**    -0.096**      -0.080**   -0.071**    -0.072**    -0.101**    -0.100**
                                           (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)

Electronics                               -0.109**    -0.102**      -0.095**   -0.079**    -0.079**    -0.081**    -0.092**
                                           (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.004)

Semiconductors                            -0.269**    -0.289**      -0.240**   -0.199**    -0.198**    -0.251**    -0.247**
                                           (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)

Information Technology                    -0.190**    -0.185**      -0.157**   -0.140**    -0.141**    -0.154**    -0.162**
                                           (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)

Engineering                               -0.031**    -0.023**      -0.041**   -0.016**    -0.017**    -0.030**    -0.028**
                                           (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)



% Affiliated                                18.4        18.9          18.4       18.4        12.0        14.5        20.4

R2                                        0.0379        0.037        0.043      0.111        0.052       0.060      0.052
Observations                              594,903      467,246      594,903    594,903     551,237      200,514    394,389

Notes: This table reports the estimation results of a Probit model that examines the determinants of decentralization. The
base technology area is Pharmaceuticals. We assign specific codes, and include respective dummy variables for patents that
receive (make) less than two citations. For these patents Generality (Originality) is not defined. All columns include an
unreported Other technology category. Firm Diversity (column 3) is computed as the HHI measure of concentration of
firm's patents across two-digit IPC. Standard errors (in brackets) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and allow for
serial correlation. **, * denote significance levels of 1 and 5 percent, respectively.
                                                    Table 4. R&D Equation
                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)          (9)

Dependent variable:                                        ln(R&D )                                         ln(R&D /Sales )
                                                                                       MSA                                 MSA
                                                                                      controls                            controls

Share assigned t-1            -0.303**   -0.292**     -0.298**             -0.337**   -0.220**   -0.323**      -0.317**   -0.241**
                               (0.063)    (0.062)      (0.062)              (0.064)    (0.056)    (0.061)       (0.061)       (0.056)


Dummy for a lab                          0.167**      0.204**    0.210**   0.205**     0.130                   0.183**        0.109
                                          (0.069)      (0.074)   (0.075)    (0.074)    (0.073)                  (0.071)       (0.070)


Share of lab patents                                   -0.056    -0.045     -0.053     -0.044                   -0.046     -0.041
                                                       (0.034)   (0.035)    (0.033)    (0.031)                  (0.032)       (0.030)


Share M&A patents t-1                                                       0.102
                                                                            (0.068)



ln(1 + No. Affiliates )        0.025      0.017        0.016      0.011     0.013      0.014      0.004         -0.004     -0.010
                               (0.021)    (0.021)      (0.021)   (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.021)    (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.020)


ln(Sales )t-1                 0.771**    0.760**      0.760**    0.762**   0.759**    0.747**    -0.186**      -0.196**   -0.203**
                               (0.022)    (0.023)      (0.023)   (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.022)    (0.021)       (0.022)       (0.021)




Four-digit SIC dummies          Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes

Year dummies                    Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes

Shares of patents by MSA
(197 region controls)            No        No           No         No        Yes        Yes         No            No           No



R2                             0.823      0.824        0.825      0.823     0.825      0.858      0.661          0.663        0.726

Observations                   11,168     11,168      11,168     11,168    11,168     11,168      11,165        11,165    11,165
Notes: This table reports the estimation results of the relation between R&D expenditure and decentralization. Share
assigned divides a firm's total number of affiliate-assigned patents by its total number of patents. Dummy for lab receives the
value of one for corporations that have at least one R&D lab, and zero for corporations that have no recorded R&D labs.
Shares of patents by MSA is a complete set of share variables of the firm patents distribution across 197 MSA regions.
Standard errors (in brackets) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and allow for serial correlation through clustering by
firms. **, * denote significance levels of 1 and 5 percent, respectively.
                                                 Table 5. Patents Equation
                            (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)

Dependent variable:                             ln(1+Patents)                                 ln[(1+Patents)/R&D stock]
                                                                 MSA       Weighed                                       MSA
                                                                controls   by cites                                     controls

Share assigned t-1        -0.164**   -0.154**      -0.108*      -0.180**   -0.154**   -0.187**    -0.176**   -0.122*    -0.203**
                           (0.056)    (0.055)       (0.057)      (0.057)    (0.055)    (0.057)     (0.056)    (0.058)     (0.059)


Dummy for a lab                      0.198**       0.196**      0.136*     0.198**                0.209**    0.206**    0.147*
                                      (0.068)       (0.068)      (0.068)    (0.068)                (0.069)    (0.069)     (0.068)


Share of lab patents                  0.030         0.025        0.050      0.030                  0.040      0.035       0.055
                                      (0.040)       (0.040)      (0.036)    (0.040)                (0.039)    (0.039)     (0.035)


Share M&A patents t-1                              -0.126                                                    -0.146*
                                                    (0.069)                                                   (0.069)



ln(1 + No. Affiliates )   0.069**    0.061**       0.066**      0.057**    0.061**    0.067**     0.059**    0.065**    0.053*
                           (0.024)    (0.023)       (0.023)      (0.024)    (0.023)    (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.023)     (0.025)


ln(Sales )t-1             0.145**    0.135**       0.137**      0.136**    0.135**    0.127**     0.116**    0.118**    0.108**
                           (0.022)    (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.019)    (0.021)    (0.025)     (0.024)    (0.024)     (0.021)


ln(R&D Stock )t-1         0.360**    0.353**       0.352**      0.329**    0.353**    -0.585**    -0.592**   -0.593**   -0.601**
                           (0.026)    (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.023)    (0.026)    (0.031)     (0.030)    (0.030)     (0.026)




Four-digit SIC
dummies                     Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes

Year dummies                Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Shares of patents by
MSA (197 region
controls)                   No         No            Yes          Yes        Yes        No          No         Yes         Yes



R2                         0.652      0.655         0.656        0.697      0.655      0.819       0.821      0.821       0.841

Observations              10,796     10,796        10,796       10,796     10,796     10,796      10,796     10,796     10,796

Notes: This table reports the estimation results of the relation between patenting activity and decentralization. Share
assigned divides a firm's total number of affiliate-assigned patents by its total number of patents. Dummy for lab
receives the value of one for corporations that have at least one R&D lab, and zero for corporations that have no
recorded R&D labs. Shares of patents by MSA is a complete set of share variables of the firm patents distribution across
197 MSA regions. In columns 4 and 8 the number of patents are weighed by the number of citations they receive. The
weight for patent is the ratio between the number of citations it received and the average number of citations received by
all patents that are granted in the same year as the focal patent. Standard errors (in brackets) are robust to arbitrary
heteroskedasticity and allow for serial correlation through clustering by firms. **, * denote significance levels of 1 and 5
percent, respectively.
                                Table 6. Sales Growth Equation
                                  Dependent variable: ∆ln(Sales )t-1
                                  (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)
                                                                       MSA         Have a      No central
                                                                      controls   central lab      lab

Share assigned t-1              0.037**      0.037**      0.022*      0.039**     0.043**        0.024
                                 (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.014)       (0.015)


Dummy for a lab                              0.019*       0.020*       0.013
                                              (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.011)

Share lab patents t-1                       -0.013**     -0.011**      -0.006
                                              (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)


Share M&A patents t-1                                    0.044**
                                                          (0.011)



ln(R&D Stock )t-1                0.004        0.004       0.004        0.004       -0.002        0.011
                                 (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.007)       (0.006)


ln(1 + No. Affiliates )         0.018**      0.018**     0.016**      0.020**     0.015**       0.028**
                                 (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.005)       (0.005)


ln(1+Patents stock )t-1          0.006        0.005       0.005        0.005      0.015**        -0.003
                                 (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)       (0.006)


ln(Sales )t-1                   -0.105**    -0.105**     -0.107**    -0.114**      -0.107*     -0.124**
                                 (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.021)      (0.022)     (0.048)       (0.024)


ln(Assets )t-1                  0.063**      0.064**     0.065**      0.069**      0.060        0.077**
                                 (0.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.042)       (0.022)




Four-digit SIC dummies            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes

Year dummies                      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes

Shares of patents by MSA (197
region controls)                  No           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes



R2                               0.107        0.108       0.109        0.122       0.140         0.125

Observations                     16,031      16,031       16,031       16,031      6,540         9,491

Notes: This table reports results for the OLS estimation of the relation between patent
decentralization and firm sales growth. Share assigned divides a firm's total number of affiliate-
assigned patents by its total number of patents. Dummy for lab receives the value of one for
corporations that have at least one R&D lab, and zero for corporations that have no recorded R&D
labs. Shares of patents by MSA is a complete set of share variables of the firm patents distribution
across 197 geographic regions. In columns 4 and 8 the number of patents are weighed by the number
of citations they receive. The weight for patent is the ratio between the number of citations it received
and the average number of citations received by all patents that are grated in the same year as the
focal patent. Standard errors (in brackets) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and allow for
serial correlation through clustering by firms. **, * denote significance levels of 1 and 5 percent,
                                                      Table 7. Market Value Equation
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)

Dependent variable:                                               ln(Market Value )                                           ln(Tobin's Q )
                                                                             MSA         With      No central
                                                                            controls   central lab    lab

Share assigned t-1              0.249**    0.244**                0.164**   0.234**     0.397**      0.121                  0.254**
                                (0.053)     (0.053)               (0.053)    (0.053)     (0.083)     (0.068)                 (0.050)


Dummy for a lab                            0.136**      0.138**   0.142**    0.132*                              0.100       0.058      0.016
                                            (0.058)     (0.058)   (0.058)    (0.064)                             (0.058)     (0.052)    (0.053)


Share lab patents t-1                      -0.084*      -0.090*   -0.076*    -0.064                             -0.099**   -0.079**    -0.094**
                                            (0.038)     (0.039)   (0.037)    (0.038)                             (0.040)     (0.033)    (0.035)


Share M&A patents t-1                                             0.241**
                                                                  (0.057)

Share assigned lab patents t-
1                                                                                                               0.246**                0.231**
                                                                                                                 (0.093)                (0.087)

Share assigned non-Lab
patents t-1                                                                                                      -0.001                 -0.001
                                                                                                                 (0.001)                (0.001)



ln(1 + No. Affiliates )         0.045**    0.041**      0.047**    0.031    0.057**      0.025       0.044      0.046**      -0.003     -0.001
                                (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.018)   (0.017)    (0.018)     (0.027)     (0.024)     (0.018)     (0.016)    (0.016)



ln(1+Patents stock )t-1         0.051**    0.045**      0.039**   0.045**    0.034*     0.080**      0.017      0.038*
                                (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)   (0.017)    (0.017)     (0.027)     (0.022)     (0.017)


ln(R&D stock )t-1                0.020      0.019        0.014     0.018      0.033      0.006      0.044*       0.016
                                (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.019)   (0.018)    (0.018)     (0.035)     (0.023)     (0.019)



ln(Assets )t-1                  0.813**    0.811**      0.813**   0.810**   0.796**     0.799**     0.800**     0.813**
                                (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)   (0.019)    (0.020)     (0.037)     (0.025)     (0.020)


(R&D stock/Assets) t-1                                                                                                      0.078**    0.077**
                                                                                                                             (0.015)    (0.015)


(Patents stock/Assets) t-1                                                                                                  0.004*      0.004*
                                                                                                                             (0.002)    (0.002)




Four-digit SIC dummies           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes

Year dummies                     Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Shares of patents by MSA
(197 region controls)             No         No           No        No        Yes         No          No          No          No          No



R2                               0.816      0.816        0.815     0.817      0.826      0.827       0.817       0.816       0.306      0.302

Observations                    16,104     16,104       16,104    16,104     16,104      6,548       9,556      16,104      14,448      14,448

Notes: This table reports OLS estimation results of the effect of patent decentralization on firm market value. The level of analysis is firm-
year. Share assigned divides a firm's total number of affiliate-assigned patents by its total number of patents. Standard errors (in brackets)
are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and allow for serial correlation through clustering by firms. **, * denote significance levels of 1
and 5 percent, respectively.
