NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FRAMING EFFECTS AND EXPECTED SOCIAL SECURITY CLAIMING BEHAVIOR
Jeffrey R. Brown
Arie Kapteyn
Olivia S. Mitchell
Working Paper 17018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17018

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration
(SSA) funded as part of the Financial Literacy Consortium. The authors also acknowledge support
provided by the Pension Research Council and Boettner Center at the Wharton School of the University
of Pennsylvania, and the RAND Corporation. The authors thank Mary Fu for her expert research assistance,
and Matthew Greenwald, Tania Gutsche, Lisa Marinelli, Lisa Schneider, and Bas Weerman for their
invaluable comments and assistance on the project. We also thank Steve Goss and Steve McKay of
SSA for their guidance. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors
and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, the National
Bureau of Economic Research, or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Arie Kapteyn, and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Framing Effects and Expected Social Security Claiming Behavior
Jeffrey R. Brown, Arie Kapteyn, and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 17018
May 2011
JEL No. D03,D12,D14,H55
ABSTRACT
Eligible participants in the U.S. Social Security system may claim benefits anytime from age 62-70,
with benefit levels actuarially adjusted based on the claiming age. This paper shows that individual
intentions with regard to Social Security claiming ages are sensitive to how the early versus late claiming
decision is framed. Using an experimental design, we find that the use of a “break-even analysis”
has the very strong effect of encouraging individuals to claim early. We also show that individuals
are more likely to report they will delay claiming when later claiming is framed as a gain, and when
the information provides an anchoring point at older, rather than younger, ages. Moreover, females,
individuals with credit card debt, and workers with lower expected benefits are more strongly influenced
by framing. We conclude that some individuals may not make fully rational optimizing choices when
it comes to choosing a claiming date.

Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu
Arie Kapteyn
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
arie_kapteyn@rand.org

Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Framing Effects and Expected Social Security Claiming Behavior
Jeffrey R. Brown, Arie Kapteyn, and Olivia S. Mitchell

I. Introduction
In the years since prospect theory first emerged onto the scene, economists have come to
understand that important economic decisions can be substantially altered by the way in which
information is framed. Perhaps the best-known example was offered by Tversky and Kahneman
(1981), who showed that presenting a public policy choice in terms of “lives saved” versus “lives
lost” dramatically shifted the proportion of the respondents who supported a given policy. More
generally, numerous experimental and real-world settings indicate that individuals make
decisions based not only on their consequences or outcomes – as would be predicted by
traditional economic theory – but also based on how the choices are framed.
Whereas a large literature has applied other insights from behavioral economics to
retirement and savings behavior (e.g., the influential work on automatic enrollment in retirement
plans by Madrian and Shea, 2001), researchers have only recently begun to explore the role of
framing in influencing important decisions related to retirement. Brown et al. (2008) show that
when financial products are presented in a frame that emphasizes consumption features, life
annuities are perceived to be more attractive than non-annuitized assets. In contrast, when such
products are presented in an investment-oriented frame, the majority of respondents prefer the
non-annuitized alternative. Agnew et al. (2008) also find that framing which highlights the
illiquidity aspect of annuitization makes individuals less likely to elect annuities.1

1

There is, of course, a rich literature on how framing influences a wide range of economic decisions including
Andreoni (1995), Bateman et al. (1997), and Shafir et al. (1997), among many others.

2

In this paper, we test whether framing can influence an important financial decision that
approximately 93% of all Americans will make as they enter into retirement:2 when to claim
Social Security benefits. In the U.S. Social Security system, eligible individuals are entitled to
claim benefits as early as age 62, but they can also defer the age at which they claim to as late as
age 70. Monthly benefit levels are adjusted for one’s claiming age, and these adjustments can be
substantial: for example, an individual who stops working at age 62 but waits to claim benefits
at age 70 will receive 76% more (real) dollars per month for the rest of her life, than if she
claimed benefits at age 62. This adjustment is said to be “actuarially fair,” in that the expected
presented value of the two streams of benefits will be equal for individuals with average
population mortality.3
Though the two benefit streams are designed to be equal in expected present value for the
average individual, they generally are not equivalent when viewed through an expected utility
framework. Heterogeneity of economic circumstances and/or preferences can lead to different
optimal claiming ages for different individuals (e.g., Coile et al. 2002; Hurd et al. 2004). For
example, liquidity-constrained individuals with a high disutility of labor and above-average
expected mortality rates may find it optimal to claim early. In contrast, risk-averse consumers
with non-annuitized financial wealth may find it optimal to delay claiming because delayed
claiming is effectively akin to purchasing additional amounts of inflation-indexed annuitized
income that will last for life, which the literature on annuities suggest would be welfare-

2

According to the Social Security Administration, 93% of all U.S. workers in 2010 were covered under the U.S.
Social Security system. (http://www.ssa.gov/pressoffice/basicfact.htm)
3
This paper abstracts from the question of whether additional years of work would change future benefits, as well as
the question of how delayed claiming might influence spousal and survivor benefits. This is because we are focused
here only on how individual claiming might vary with different frames. In a recent survey, 75% of respondents
indicated that they understand that benefits need not be claimed at the time they stop work (Greenwald et al. 2010b).

3

enhancing for many.4 Indeed, the large literature on the “annuity puzzle” suggests that at least
some part of the population is under-annuitized, and the limited extent to which people delay
benefits claiming is one part of that puzzle.
Rather than assuming that the choice of one’s claiming date is a purely rational
outcomes-based decision, we posit that individuals may be sensitive to the manner in which
claiming information is framed. To study this, we have devised an experiment which presents
individuals with alternative information formats about how benefits would be adjusted if they
were to claim benefits early versus later. These alternative frames are shown to participants in
the RAND American Life Panel (ALP), an internet-based survey.5 Panel participants were
randomized into one of 10 groups, and members of each group were presented the same
underlying claiming information but in different frames. It is important to emphasize that the
underlying financial information provided to participants – namely, the monthly benefit they
would receive at alternative ages – was unaffected by the frame: only how this information was
presented was altered. We then asked the participants at what age they would claim benefits
given each frame, and we compare results to determine if the frame seems to alter anticipated
claiming ages.
The first of the ten frames we designed serves as a baseline by depicting the information
as neutrally as possible. This frame is similar to the approach currently (since 2008) used by the
Social Security Administration in its public information on claiming.

The second frame

emphasizes a “breakeven” concept, i.e., it emphasizes the minimum number of years one would
need to live, in order for the nominal sum of the incremental monthly payments that arise from

4

The annuity literature is lengthy and rich, beginning with Yaari (1965), including important work by Friedman and
Warshawsky (1990) and Eckstein et al (1985) and recently including Davidoff et al. (2005) and Horneff et al. (2007,
2009).
5
https://mmicdata.rand.org/alp/index.php/Main_Page

4

delay to offset the income forgone during the period of delay. This approach essentially frames
the decision as a risky gamble while downplaying insurance aspects of the choice.

This

breakeven approach is consistent with how Social Security field representatives presented this
choice to potential claimants for many decades (at least until 2008 when they switched to a more
neutral frame). This approach is also widely used in the private sector financial advice and
planning industry (c.f., Charles Schwab, 2010; GG&G 2011).
The remaining eight frames show respondents combinations of differences along three
dimensions: (i) consumption versus investment; (ii) gains versus losses; and (iii) older versus
younger reference ages. The first of these is motivated by the work of Brown et al. (2008) where
they found important differences in the reported attractiveness of life annuities, depending on
whether these were described using “consumption language” or “investment language.” The
second dimension uses “gain” versus “loss” terminology to portray the actuarial adjustment for
later versus earlier claiming. The third dimension varies the initial age used to anchor individuals
in the presentation.
In all frames, respondents are provided with a sliding scale showing monthly benefit
amounts at all ages between 62 and 70 (in monthly increments). The individual can use a
computer mouse to slide along the scale and watch the benefits change with each claiming age.
The initial starting point for the claim age indicator matches the reference age provided in each
frame. After viewing a frame, individuals are asked to use the sliding scale to pinpoint the age at
which they think they are most likely to claim benefits. (Screen shots of the frames and the
slider are presented in Appendix A).
We find several important differences across frames. The single largest effect is that
using the breakeven analysis leads to substantially earlier expected claiming dates than any of

5

the other nine frames. For example, exposure to the breakeven frame leads people to report an
expected claiming age that is 12-15 months earlier (depending on specification) than under the
baseline frame. The magnitude of this result is quite large compared to prior estimates of how
changes in economic variables influence retirement dates.6
Smaller, but still significant, differences obtain across other frames. Overall, joint tests
indicate that presentation of gains leads to later claiming than losses. We also find evidence of
an “anchoring” effect with regard to age. For example, we find that showing respondents a later
age from which they can then evaluate benefit changes tends to have the effect of getting them to
claim later. We find that presenting respondents with a consumption gain frame anchored at age
66 yields the highest claiming age, though several others also generate significantly later
claiming ages than the neutral frame (e.g. the investment gain frame with anchoring at 66, and
both the consumption loss and investment loss frame at 70.)
These findings are important for our understanding of economic behavior and also for
practical policy purposes. At an academic level, we provide further evidence that even highvisibility, high-stakes financial decisions – in this case, when to claim Social Security benefits –
are sensitive to how the information is presented. One interpretation of our results is that they
cast doubt on a simple economic model of fully rational decision-making by showing that
individual decisions are influenced by factors other than ultimate consumption outcomes. At a
practical policy level, our study indicates that the Social Security Administration (SSA), as well
6

For example, Coronado and Perozek (2003) find that each additional $100,000 of unexpected gains from stocks is
associated with retiring only two weeks earlier than expected. Lumsdaine and Mitchell (1999) review the literature
on the economic determinants of retirement behavior and conclude that changes in pension and Social Security
benefits have small economic impacts on the choice of retirement age, as do Gustman and Steinmeier (2004; 2008).
The present analysis focuses on Social Security benefit claiming decisions, as distinct from retirement decisions, and
one might expect the claiming elasticity to be larger than the retirement elasticity. A few analysts (Benitez-Silva and
Frank, 2008; Honig and Reimers 1996) examine interactions between claiming and work patterns, but they are
interested in rewards to continued employment, whereas here we explore determinants of the claiming decision
independent of the return-to-work decision.

6

as other public or private sector actors, can present information to participants in ways that can
strongly influence behavior -- even when the actual information content is unchanged. This is
particularly relevant for an agency such as the SSA that prides itself on providing relevant
information without providing advice. Our findings suggest that individuals are very likely to
adjust their claiming behavior, depending on how the information is presented.
In what follows, Section II provides a very brief primer on how Social Security benefit
claiming works, including a discussion of the actuarial adjustment process. In Section III, we
discuss our research methodology including details about the RAND American Life Panel. In
Section IV, we explain the motivation underlying our choice of the 10 frames that we tested.
Results are discussed in Section V, and we provide a short conclusion in Section VI.

II. Social Security Benefits and Claiming
How Social Security benefits are adjusted based on the claiming date
A covered worker who has contributed to the Social Security system for sufficiently long
(roughly 10 years to be fully insured)7 confronts a range of choices regarding when he can file
for, or claim, his Social Security benefits. Age 62 is the earliest that one can claim as a retired
worker, and this is also known as the Early Retirement Age (ERA). The rules also specify a
Normal Retirement Age (NRA)8 at which “full” or unreduced benefits can be paid. The NRA is
currently age 66 (for those born 1943-54, rising to 67 for people born 1960 and later).

7

Technically, an individual is considered fully insured once he has earned 40 “quarters of coverage. In 2010, an
individual earns a quarter of coverage – up to a maximum of 4 per calendar year – for each $1,120 of covered
earnings. See http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/COLA/QC.html for more information.
8
This is also sometimes referred to as the Full Retirement Age (FRA)

7

The SSA computes benefits by selecting a worker’s highest 35 years of earnings and
wage-indexing them so that nominal earnings are adjusted to “near-current wage levels.”9 Next,
the agency computes the worker’s Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME) over the 35-year
period by averaging all indexed annual values (including zeros, if any) and dividing by 12. Then
the basic benefit or Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) is computed as a nonlinear function of the
worker’s AIME; this is the base amount from which benefits are calculated. If the worker claims
benefits at the NRA, his benefit equals 100% of his PIA. However, if he claims at some younger
age, his benefit amount is reduced by 5/9 percent per month for the first 36 months of early
benefit receipt and 5/12 percent per month for additional months of early claiming, and the
reduction continues for the rest of his life (Frolik and Kaplan, 2010). For instance, at age 62 he
would receive a PIA reduced by 25%.10 Conversely, if he were to leave work but delay claiming
beyond the NRA, his benefits are increased by 8% per year of age beyond the NRA for the
remainder of his life; this is the Delayed Retirement Credit (DRC). 11 In other words, the age
one stops working need not equal the age at which one claims benefits.12
The intent of the early retirement reduction and delayed retirement credit adjustments is
to recognize, on average, early claimants will receive benefits for a longer period than those who
delay claiming. These adjustments therefore seek to be roughly actuarially neutral, so that, on
average, people who take a lower benefit early would expect to receive about the same total
amount in benefits over their lifetimes, compared to those who wait for the higher monthly
benefit but start receiving it later. In other words, the choice of claiming age affects the monthly
9

This is computed as the year in which a worker turns age 60; for more information, see
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/ProgData/retirebenefit1.html
10
Taken from http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/quickcalc/earlyretire.html. Benefits payable to spouses and survivors are
also adjusted based on the covered worker’s claiming age, but we abstract from this in the present study (for more
discussion see Coile et al. 2002 and Mahaney and Carlson 2008).
11
In addition, Social Security benefits are annually adjusted for cost-of-living.
12
This difference is widely appreciated; see Greenwald et al. (2010). In practice, the majority of workers (over 90%)
claim when first eligible at age 62; see Hurd and Rohwedder (2004) and Coile et al. (2002).

8

annuity stream, but for the population on average, it does not alter the expected total lifetime sum
of benefits received.
Other Factors Influencing the Claiming Decision
The prior discussion of the effect of claiming age on benefits, while accurate, is a
simplification of the broader claiming decision. In reality, there are a number of complex factors
that go into the consideration of an optimal claiming date. In particular, this paper is focused
specifically on the claiming decision, rather than the broader impact of benefit amounts on labor
force participation. Technically, the claiming decision is fully independent of one’s labor force
participation status: people need not claim upon leaving the labor force, and they need not leave
employment to claim. In practice, of course, there are obvious connections between retirement
and Social Security claiming decisions. For example, if individuals continue to work while
delaying claiming, their monthly benefit may rise both because of the actuarial adjustment and
because of the additional years of earnings potentially increasing their PIAs. Additionally, lowwealth, liquidity-constrained individuals may not have the resources to provide for their
consumption after retirement if they do not claim Social Security, and thus the claiming decision
may be tightly linked with broader labor force participation considerations.
Another reason that labor force participation and claiming are intertwined in practice is
the Social Security “earnings test.” As described by the Social Security Administration, if one
continues to work after claiming benefits, and if one is younger than the Normal Retirement Age,
“$1 in benefits will be deducted for each $2 you earn above the annual limit.”13 Importantly, the
reduction in benefits that results from the application of the earnings test is returned to the

13

http://ssa-custhelp.ssa.gov/app/answers/detail/a_id/236/~/effects-of-working-and-receiving-social-securityretirement-benefits. For 2010, the annual limit is $14,160. In the year one reaches the normal retirement age, the
reduction is $1 for every $3 above a higher limit, up until the month one reaches the NRA. .

9

beneficiary in the form of higher future benefits, although it is unclear how widely this feature is
understood by those affected.14
While each of these factors – and others – is quite important to consider when evaluating
an optimal retirement age, we abstract from these additional considerations in our experimental
design. Doing so has a distinct advantage of keeping the experimental frames as clean and
simple as possible. Equally importantly, this simplification does not present a problem for our
analysis, for reasons that we will describe in more detail in the next section.

III. Study Design
Focus Groups
Prior to launching our quantitative survey, we conducted a large number of focus groups
in the Chicago, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. areas. These focus groups
served two distinct purposes. The first, and the one most relevant to this paper, is that we used
these groups to ensure that the language used in the frames ultimately tested in the online survey
(discussed in Section IV below) was clear and salient to the participants. Indeed, the focus
groups were quite useful in this regard, and they helped us to develop frames that respondents
considered distinct along the margins that we wished to test, while maintaining their symmetry
along other dimensions. The second purpose of the focus groups was to gain an understanding of
a broader set of issues related to how individuals view the role of Social Security in retirement.15
The American Life Panel

14

We also abstract from the possibility that an insured individual’s claiming decision may affect the after-tax
maximum family benefit received by the entire household.
15
While those findings are not discussed in the present paper, interested readers may find a summary of the
qualitative findings in Greenwald & Associates (2010a).

10

After testing our frames (discussed in more detail in Section IV, below), we fielded a
survey through the RAND American Life Panel (ALP). The ALP is a sample of approximately
3,000 households who are regularly interviewed over the Internet. An advantage relative to most
other Internet panels is that the ALP is mostly based on a probability sample of the US
population.16

Currently, the panel comprises over 3000 active panel members of whom

approximately 5% respond to the questionnaires using a WebTV.17
Experimental Design
The experimental design consists of several separate waves of data collection. We
initiated the survey with a “pre-wave” in June of 2010, in which respondents were asked a single
question about when they expected to claim Social Security:

16

ALP respondents have been recruited in one of three ways. Most were recruited from individuals age 18+ who
were respondents to the Monthly Survey (MS) of the University of Michigan's Survey Research Center (SRC). The
MS is the leading consumer sentiment survey that incorporates the long-standing Survey of Consumer Attitudes and
produces, among others, the widely used Index of Consumer Expectations. Each month, the MS interviews
approximately 500 households, of which 300 households are a random-digit-dial (RDD) sample and 200 are
reinterviewed from the RDD sample surveyed six months previously. Until August 2008, SRC screened MS
respondents by asking them if they would be willing to participate in a long term research project (with approximate
response categories “no, certainly not,” “probably not,” “maybe,” “probably,” “yes, definitely”). If the response
category is not “no, certainly not,” respondents were told that the University of Michigan is undertaking a joint
project with RAND. They were asked if they would object to SRC sharing their information about them with RAND
so that they could be contacted later and asked if they would be willing to actually participate in an Internet survey.
Respondents who do not have Internet were told that RAND will provide them with free Internet. Many MSrespondents are interviewed twice. At the end of the second interview, an attempt was made to convert respondents
who refused in the first round. This attempt includes the mention of the fact that participation in follow-up research
carries a reward of $20 for each half-hour interview. A subset of respondents (approximately 500) was recruited
through a snowball sample; here respondents were given the opportunity to suggest friends or acquaintances who
might also want to participate. Those friends were then contacted and asked if they wanted to participate. A new
group of respondents (approximately 500) has recently been recruited after participating in the National Survey
Project, created at Stanford University with SRBI. This sample was recruited in person, and at the end of their oneyear participation, they were asked whether they were interested in joining the RAND American Life Panel. Most of
these respondents were given a laptop and broadband Internet access. Recently, the American Life Panel has begun
recruiting based on a random mail and telephone sample using the Dillman method (see e.g. Dillman et al, 2008)
with the goal to achieve 5000 active panel members, including a 1000 Spanish language subsample. If these new
participants do not have Internet access yet, they will also be provided with a laptop and broadband Internet access.
These panel members are not part of the sample used in this paper.
17
Respondents from the Michigan monthly survey without Internet were provided with so-called WebTVs
(http://www.webtv.com/pc/), which allows them to access the Internet using their television and a telephone line.
The technology allows respondents who lacked Internet access to participate in the panel and furthermore use the
WebTVs for browsing the Internet or email.

11
“We would next like to ask you a question about a different topic. As you know, in the United
States people can start claiming Social Security benefits between the ages of 62 and 70. At what
age would you expect to start collecting these Social Security benefits?”

This question was asked to provide a baseline which we could then compare against responses to
future frames, and also to help us evaluate whether our frame randomization which occurred
thereafter was not biased with regard to the outcome of interest.18
As is described in detail in Section IV below, we test 10 different question frames. In
three waves spaced at least two weeks apart, respondents are shown six different frames (two
distinct frames per wave). These frames are randomly assigned in the following way: for each
respondent we drew six numbers randomly without replacement from the set {1,2,…10}. These
numbers determined which frames were shown to each respondent and in which order. For
example, if we drew the vector (5, 7, 3, 9, 10, 6) for a given respondent, then that respondent is
shown frames 5 and 7 in the first wave, frames 3 and 9 in the second wave, and frames 10 and 6
in the third wave. The frames are only shown to respondents who had not already claimed a
benefit and who have worked at least 10 years (so that we can compute a projected Social
Security benefit).
Our outcome of interest is the respondent’s intended claiming age. This raises a natural
question of whether expectations about claiming are correlated with subsequent claiming
behavior. Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) suggests that this is, indeed,
the case: for many years the HRS has asked respondents about each person’s expected claiming
age every wave, making it possible to correlate these responses with ultimate claiming behavior.
For HRS respondents age 62-70, we calculate the simple correlation between an indicator of
18

While most respondents (95%) provided an answer in the age 62-70 range, some did not. When respondents did
not answer in this age range, a follow-up question asked why not. Responses outside the 62-70 interval were often
given by younger respondents who believe that, by the time they will be eligible, the Social Security claiming age
will have moved to higher ages, or they believe they will not receive any Social Security benefit at all and express
this by responding outside the range.

12

whether the individual is receiving benefits in a given wave, and an indicator for whether the
individual predicted that that he or she would be claiming benefits by this wave, based on
interview responses in prior waves. These two variables are strongly and positively correlated,
with coefficients ranging from 0.46 in wave 1 to over 0.6 in waves 6-7. Linear probability
models of benefit receipt in wave 8 on predictions of prior waves have an R-squared of about
0.6.19

IV. The Frames
In what follows, we explain the rationale for the choice of our experimental frames, as
well as our expectations about how alternative framing would affect the claiming decision. (The
actual text of frames tested appears in Appendix A.)
Our baseline case is intended to be an approximation of Social Security’s current
“neutral” stance on claiming ages. This is differentiated from what we call here the “breakeven”
approach, which was used by SSA for many decades and which continues to be used by many
financial advisors in the private sector. Next we discuss the three dimensions along which we
vary our experimental frames, including: (i) the use of consumption language versus investment
language, (ii) framing actuarial adjustments for earlier and later claiming as gains versus losses,
and (iii) the use of alternative anchoring ages (including ages 62, 66 and 70).
a. Baseline Case: Symmetric Treatment of Gains and Losses (Anchored at Age 66)
Our baseline case is modeled on the Social Security Administration’s current approach
(in use since 2008) to discussing claiming ages (although we have simplified and shortened the
presentation considerably for survey purposes). In essence, this approach seeks to simply and
clearly lay out “the facts” in a neutral manner, with a symmetric treatment of earlier and later
19

Further results available on request to the authors.

13

claiming. This approach is consistent with the SSA’s emphasis on providing information but not
advice to participants, in that it seeks to avoid biasing individuals in any particular direction.
Rather, it simply states the impact on benefits of claiming at various ages. Because this frame is
intended to be neutral, and because it reflects the current public perspective of SSA on claiming
ages, we use this frame as the baseline against which other frames are compared.
b.“Breakeven Analysis” (Anchored at Age 62)
Previous to 2008, one of the tools used by the SSA when providing information on the
impact of claiming at various ages was to use a so-called “breakeven” analysis. Under this
approach, individuals were told what their benefits would be if they claimed at an early age such
as 62, versus at some later age, such as 63. They were then informed that, by delaying claiming
from 62 to 63, they would “forfeit” a year of benefits.20 In return for the deferral, they would
receive a higher monthly benefit from age 63 on. But the breakeven presentation emphasized
that people would not “come out ahead” unless they lived until at least to age X, where X was
defined as the age at which the cumulative benefit payment amounts were equal. This approach
combines some elements of both the negative annuity framing explored by Agnew et al. (2008)
and the investment frame explored by Brown et al. (2008), both of which have been shown to
reduce the perceived desirability of annuitization.
While this breakeven analysis may have been instructive to many, it is also true that the
framing of this approach implicitly places zero value on the insurance aspect of delaying

20

SSA field offices have long been equipped with a software program that claims representatives can use to
compute breakeven dates for individuals who inquired about how benefits changed with the claiming date (known
by SSA as “month of election,” or MOEL). Numerous conversations we have held with SSA field office
representatives suggest that this breakeven analysis was widely used prior to 2008. Indeed, the use of the breakeven
analysis was codified in the training manuals for employees: as recently as 2007, the training manual for Title II
Claims Representatives (i.e., SSA employees who help citizens claim benefits, among other responsibilities)
included a discussion of documentation required for “Month of Election” cases. It states “if the claimant chooses
the later of the two possible MOELs, he will forfeit the benefits he could have received with the earlier MOEL”
(emphasis added).

14

claiming. In essence, it provides a simplistic financial calculation which emphasizes that later
claimers would be “behind,” until they reach a far distant breakeven date. As a result, this
approach places little emphasis on the additional value that individuals who defer could receive
for the rest of their lives beyond the breakeven date. This practice is akin to considering only the
actuarial aspect of the decision, without taking into account the broader utility rewards of an
annuity, which arise from risk aversion and protection against longevity risk. Indeed, in direct
contrast to highlighting the insurance aspects of Social Security, this approach frames the
decision to delay claiming more as a gamble, the outcome of which depends upon when one dies.
It is worth noting that this breakeven approach is not unique to the Social Security
Administration; in fact a widely referenced article by the Schwab Center for Financial Research
(2010)21 also discusses the claiming decision using a breakeven analysis. Our hypothesis is that
this breakeven approach is likely to bias individuals toward claiming benefits earlier, than would
a more neutrally worded frame.
c. Consumption versus Investment
As noted earlier, a prior study by Brown et al. (2008) showed that how individuals view
the value of life annuities relative to other financial products depends on whether annuities are
presented in a “consumption frame” or an “investment frame.” That is, when consumers are
conditioned to think in terms of investments (e.g., when the presentation uses investment
terminology such as “invest” and “return”), the life annuities are made to appear unattractive.
This is because life annuities are then perceived as paying low returns, being illiquid, and
possibly even seeming “risky” (because the amount an annuitant gets back depends on how long

21

For further information see
http://www.schwab.com/public/schwab/research_strategies/market_insight/retirement_strategies/planning/when_sho
uld_you_take_social_security.html

15

he lives). By contrast, in a consumption frame (e.g., a frame that emphasizes one’s ability to
consume throughout life), a life annuity tends to be viewed as a very attractive form of protection
against running out of money.
While Brown et al. (2008) found powerful effects of framing on the attractiveness of life
annuities relative to non-annuitized products, that analysis did not provide evidence on whether
these alternative frames also have an effect on the desirability of “earlier” versus “later”
annuitization. But given the magnitude of the effects they found (roughly 70% of respondents
preferring a life annuity to a savings account in a consumption frame, versus about 20% in an
investment frame), this distinction is potentially quite important to the Social Security claiming
context. It is worth noting that the breakeven frame is itself a quite negative form of an
investment frame, one that emphasizes the risk of not living long enough to recoup the foregone
benefits. The investment language used in these additional frames focuses on “returns,” without
explicitly pointing out the “risk” of not breaking even. This will allow us to determine whether it
is the breakeven analysis per se, or the investment-oriented language more generally, that
influences claiming behavior.
d. Gains versus Losses
The asymmetry in how individuals treat gains versus losses is one of the best-known
results (at least among economists) from the psychology literature on choice. Most prominently,
Kahneman and Tversky (1981) found that individuals exhibited an asymmetry between gains and
losses. Specifically, they found in a situation of choice under uncertainty that people sometimes
exhibit a preference for a certain gain of $ p * X to an uncertain gain of $X with probability p,
while at the same time preferring an uncertain loss of $X with probability p, to a certain loss of
$p* X .

16

Relating this to the context of benefit claiming, it is possible to express actuarial
adjustments in terms of a gain (e.g., delaying claiming by one year will increase your benefit by

$X per month) or a loss (e.g., claiming one year earlier will reduce your benefit by $X per
month). Accordingly, we expect that this gain/loss distinction may have important interactions
with the consumption/investment distinction.

As noted by Brown et al. (2008), additional

annuitization may look very attractive in a consumption frame, while it may look less attractive
in an investment frame. It is also, therefore, possible that gains and losses will be interpreted
differently in each of these contexts.
e. Age Anchors
As discussed at length by Mussweiler et al. (2004), “anchoring effects pervade a variety
of judgments, from the trivial (i.e., estimates of the mean temperature in Antarctica) … to the
apocalyptic (i.e., estimates of the likelihood of nuclear war) … In particular, they have been
observed in a broad array of different judgmental domains, such as general-knowledge questions,
price estimates, estimates of self-efficacy, probability assessments, evaluations of lotteries and
gambles, legal judgment, and negotiation.”22 In our context, a very natural and salient anchoring
point is the age that is first presented in each frame. Given that we are exploring both gains and
losses, some variation in anchoring ages is useful. For example, while one can easily discuss
gains in a frame anchored at age 62, it is not possible to anchor a loss frame at 62 because 62 is
the earliest claiming age, and thus there is no way to characterize a loss from claiming earlier
than this. Similarly, it is easy to anchor losses at age 70 (the maximum claiming age), but not
gains. For this reason, in the experimental treatments that we describe next, the gain frames are

22

We have excluded the references included in the original quote. For these, as well as a full description of
findings, see: http://social-cognition.uni-koeln.de/scc4/documents/PsychPr_04.pdf.

17

anchored at 62, and the loss frames at 70. In order to distinguish the gain/loss hypothesis from
age anchoring, we also include both gain and loss frames that are anchored at age 66.
f. The Ten Different Frames
Putting these various permutations together results in 10 distinct frames, described more
completely in the Appendix. Below we refer to these frames as follows:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)

Baseline (neutral)
Breakeven
Consumption Gain from Age 62
Consumption Gain from Age 66
Consumption Loss from Age 66
Consumption Loss from Age 70
Investment Gain from Age 62
Investment Gain from Age 66
Investment Loss from Age 66
Investment Loss from Age 70

g. How our Experimental Design Handles Complexity and Heterogeneity
As discussed above, there will be heterogeneity in the optimal claiming date based on
differences in economic situations as well as preferences. Heterogeneity also results from the
numerous “real-life” complicating factors that would rationally influence the choice of an
optimal claiming date, including labor force participation issues, the earnings test, and spousal or
child benefits. Fortunately, our experimental design does not require that we know the optimal
claiming date for any individual. Furthermore, our design allows us to dramatically simplify the
scenarios that individuals face, including focusing on a single individual and avoiding a
discussion of the earnings test.
There are three reasons that our design does not require that we specific all relevant
information. First, our experimental design is premised on the idea that if an individual is
making a rational optimizing decision, that optimal decision will be based on how (possibly

18

unobservable) factors important to that individual map into utility outcomes. Because our
framing experiment holds the relevant outcomes fixed in all cases, and only changes the way the
claiming process is framed, optimizing individuals would be insensitive to frame changes.
While the omission of a discussion of the earnings test, for example, might lead to answers that
differ from those that the respondent would give if such information was provided, it is important
to emphasize that the same information is provided or omitted in all frames, and we are
examining differences across frames in how the same information is presented.
Second, we randomize individuals into the ten treatment groups. Thus, there are no
concerns about self-selection based on differences in the salience of the complicating factors that
we have simplified away.
Third, because we expose individuals to multiple frames, we are able to conduct some
analyses including individual fixed effects, meaning that we are implicitly controlling for all
unobservable differences across individuals.
In essence, our identifying assumption is that any biases introduced into the expected
claiming age by our omission of some factors are independent of how the information that we are
providing is framed.

V. Results
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the ALP sample used in the experiment; we also
provide average expected claiming ages reported by respondents about six weeks before the start
of the experiment (the June 2010 question discussed in Section III). Here and in the remainder
of the paper, claiming ages are expressed in terms of the number of months after the date when

19

the respondent turns 62. Thus for example a “claiming age” of 36 means age 65 and zero months
(which is 36 months after one’s 62nd birthday.)
Table 1 here
A few points are worth noting from the third column of Table 1. First, women indicate
that they plan to claim Social Security benefits about four months later than men. Planned
claiming ages also rise with education and income: in both cases, those in the highest category
say they intend to claim benefits about 15-16 months later than the lowest category. Planned
claiming ages are also slightly later for younger respondents. Thus those younger than age 50 say
they plan to claim about two to four months later than respondents over age 55. This is likely an
underestimate of the population difference, since our sample is restricted to individuals not yet
retired (so anyone over 55 who self-described himself as retired is not included).

These

summary statistics are offered for general interest, though it is worth noting that, because we
randomize exposure to the frames, we would not anticipate that these baseline differences will
have any impact on results across frames. Further, in specifications that include individual fixed
effects, these differences will be directly controlled.
Figure 1 shows average expected claiming ages arrayed by frame across the six
presentations. One can see quite clearly that the breakeven frame yields – by far – the earliest
intended claiming age. There is also a suggestion of a difference between gain and loss frames,
where the gain frames yield a somewhat later claiming age than the loss frames. Below we verify
these results using multivariate regression models.
Figure 1 here
Table 2 presents average claiming ages for the various frames administered to the ALP
broken down by treatment, and Figure 2 shows the same information in the form of a bar chart.

20

Once again, the breakeven frame generates by far the lowest claiming age. For example, in wave
1.1 (the first treatment in the first wave), the breakeven frame generates a claiming age that is
between 22 and 26 months earlier than the claiming age generated by the frames that take 66 as
an anchoring age.
Table 2 and Figure 2 here

We are aware that there could be some “spillover” from the first to the second treatment
within a wave. That is, when reading the second frame presented in a wave, the respondent might
remember what he answered when shown the first frame, and possibly even offer the exact same
age. Our data do indeed reveal many instances where respondents’ first and second answers
within a wave are identical. Below we analyze this pattern more formally. Spillovers help
explain for instance why the claiming age associated with the breakeven frame is higher in 1.2
(wave 1, exposure 2), 2.2 and 3.2 than in 1.1, 2.1 and 3.1, respectively.
Table 3 and Figures 3-6 report intended claiming ages (now averaged across all waves)
by frame and demographics and show that there are some differences (below we test for
significance more formally). Women tend to be somewhat more responsive to the difference
between gain frames and loss frames than men, deferring intended claiming ages more when
benefit enhancements are emphasized. Younger people and less educated individuals appear to
be more responsive to framing than older people and respondents with a college degree. The last
column in Table 3 shows the variance of the average claiming ages across the ten frames, which
we interpret as a measure of how sensitive respondents are to the different frames. The variance
proves to be considerably larger for less-educated respondents than for respondents with a
college degree, suggesting that respondents with less education are more susceptible to framing
effects. The age pattern is not quite monotonic, but it does suggest more susceptibility to framing
among the young versus the older respondents.

21

Table 3 and Figures 3-6 here
It is useful to summarize these differences using multivariate regression analyses, with
results appearing in Table 4. In all five columns, the dependent variable is the number of months
after age 62 that the respondent indicates he intends to claim his Social Security benefits. The
first three columns of Table 4 present results from regression analyses pertaining to the first
wave. In the first two columns, we regress the number of months a respondent indicates he will
claim post-62 on nine treatment dummies, one for each frame, with the omitted category being
the baseline frame (which uses an anchoring age of 66 and describes the effects of changing
claiming ages in symmetric terms). In the first column, the dependent variable is the answer to
the first frame in the first wave (i.e. wave 1.1), while in the second column, the dependent
variable is the response to the second frame in the wave (wave 1.2). As noted before, it is
possible that responses to the second frame in a given wave could be influenced by responses to
the first frame, so in the third column of Table 4, we use as the dependent variable the answer to
the second frame exposure and also control for which frame the respondent saw in the first
frame. These “lagged” dummy variables are statistically significant (p=.02) though a comparison
of the second and third columns suggests that the estimates of the treatment effects are not much
affected.
Table 4 here
When combining results across waves, it is important to account for correlations across
observations that refer to the same respondents. A natural solution is to include individual fixed
effects, and results are given in columns 4 and 5 of Table 4. Accordingly, column 4 combines
the results of all six waves, while column 5 once again includes dummies for preceding
treatments for waves 1.2, 2.2, and 3.2. That is, when the dependent variable refers to wave 1.2,

22

the treatment in wave 1.1 is included as an extra explanatory variable; similarly for wave 2.2, the
treatment in 2.1 is included as an explanatory variable, and similarly for waves 3.2 and 3.1.23
The finding of most interest in Table 4 is that several of the treatment frame coefficients
differ significantly from that of the neutral frame where the anchoring age is 66. The models
confirm that the breakeven SSA frame leads to substantially earlier claiming: compared to the
neutral frame, the breakeven frame appears to induce claiming around 15 months earlier. This is
an enormous impact, one that should be of substantial interest to policymakers who seek to offer
the best unbiased advice possible to the working public.
It appears that the gain frame with anchoring at 66 yields the highest claiming age,
though several others also generate significantly later claiming ages than the neutral frame –
specifically the loss frames with anchoring at 70. We also note that the gain frames appear to
lead to later claiming than do loss frames. The difference between the gain frames at 66 and the
loss frames at 66 is statistically significant (p=.01).
An alternative way to disentangle the effects of anchoring ages, gain vs. loss, and
consumption vs. investment, is provided in Table 5. Here we present the results of a fixed-effect
analysis with the control variables now redefined to represent framing dimensions (e.g., gain
versus loss, or anchoring ages) rather than individual frames. As before, the second column
regression includes dummies for the preceding treatments when the dependent variable refers to
waves 1.2 and 2.2.24 The joint tests reported in Table 5 show that the gain and loss frames have
different effects, depending on when an individual first says he is intending to claim. That is,
gain frames lead to later claiming ages than loss frames. The null hypothesis that consumption

23

The coefficients on these lagged treatments are not reported, but they operate in the expected direction and are
highly significant (p=.00).
24
These “lagged treatment effects” are highly significant (p=.00), although the estimates in which we are most
interested are very similar with or without them.

23

and investment frames have equal effects cannot be rejected. Anchoring ages 66 and 70 are both
associated with significantly later claiming ages, compared to anchoring at age 62. The
difference between 66 and 70 is not significantly different from zero, however.
Table 5 here
Two additional tables permit us to test whether sub-groups of people respond differently
to the manner in which benefits claiming is framed. Table 6 provides one approach, wherein we
adopt the same fixed-effects model as in Table 5 but also add four additional variables, namely
interaction terms between the breakeven frame and sex, the individual’s predicted benefit level if
he claimed at age 62, a third variable indicating whether a respondent reports having credit card
debt, and a fourth variable which is a measure of financial literacy. Since the neutral frame is the
reference category, one may interpret the coefficient on the interaction variables as the effect of
the factor on the difference between the neutral frame and the breakeven frame.
Table 6 here
In the first column, we see that compared to men, women are prompted to claim six
months earlier when they see the breakeven frame versus the neutral frame, and the effect is
statistically significant. (It will be recalled that these are fixed-effects estimates, so individualspecific factors are differenced out.)

The second column shows the impact of interacting

respondents’ anticipated monthly Social Security benefits at age 62 (the mean of that variable is
$1,275). The statistically significant estimate implies that if the monthly benefit level were to rise
from $1,275 to $2,275, this would narrow the gap between the neutral and the breakeven frame
by 8 months. The third column shows that individuals with credit card debt are significantly
more sensitive to the difference in framing between neutral and breakeven (the difference widens
by about 4.5 months). One possible interpretation of this is that individuals with credit card debt

24

find financial management more challenging, and are thus more affected by framing. Finally, in
the fourth column we show the interaction between the financial literacy measure and the
breakeven frame. The financial literacy variable simply counts the number of correct answers to
a sequence of 17 financial literacy questions.25 The interaction is not statistically significant,
although potentially of quantitative significance. For instance if a respondent moves from 50%
correct to 100% correct, the gap between the neutral frame and breakeven narrows by 7.25
months. (The mean percent correct is 68 in the sample).
Finally, Table 7 offers a more complex set of additional interaction terms, again using a
fixed-effects framework obviating the need for non-time-varying controls. Multicollinearity
results from including such a large set of interactions, though the joint test of the interaction
terms reported at the bottom of the table indicates that the significant differences persist by age
and sex (at least at the 10% level), even in this more complex case. And the anchoring age
interactions are also quite significant.
Table 7 here

VI.

Conclusions
We draw two primary conclusions, one of them of interest to academics, and the other of

practical interest to policymakers and financial advisers. The academic conclusion is that
individuals appear to be behaving in a manner that is inconsistent with purely rational economic
optimizing behavior. Were individuals focusing solely on consumption outcomes as standard
life-cycle models posit, then such decisions would be unaffected by how information is framed.

25

The 17 questions measure knowledge in five domains: compound interest (4 questions), inflation (2 questions),
risk diversification (3 questions), tax treatment of DC savings (4 questions), and employer matches of DC
contributions (4 questions).

25

Instead, our evidence strongly suggests that how the claiming information is framed has a
substantial influence on expected claiming behavior.
The practical lesson to draw from these findings is that the manner in which information
is provided to plan participants can shape behavior. Indeed this research suggests that Social
Security’s historical emphasis on “breakeven analysis” may have inadvertently encouraged
several generations of American workers to claim benefits earlier than they would have
otherwise, had the information been presented in a different frame. It is especially important to
understand these effects because – unlike the benefit rules themselves – the framing of
information is under the control of the SSA staff and administration, rather than something
requiring Congressional legislation to alter.
While we have provided evidence from the HRS that expected claiming ages are
correlated with actual claiming ages in later waves, we nonetheless recognize that one would
ideally study the effects of framing on actual claiming behavior. In principle, it is possible to
experimentally test the impact of framing on actual claiming decisions, especially now that many
retirement benefit claims are processed using internet-based on-line claiming. Such “real world”
experiments might be a promising avenue for future analysis.

26

References
Agnew, Julie, Lisa Anderson, Jeff Gerlach, and Lisa Szykman. (2008). “Who Chooses
Annuities? An Experimental Investigation of Gender, Framing and Defaults.” The American
Economic Review, 98 (2): 418-422.
Andreoni, James. (1995). “Warm-Glow Versus Cold-Prickle: The Effects of Positive and
Negative Framing on Cooperation in Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1):. 121
Au, Andrew, Olivia S. Mitchell, and John W.R. Phillips. (2005). “Saving Shortfalls and Delayed
Retirement.” MRRC Working Paper 2005.94
Bateman, Ian, Alistair Munro, Bruce Rhodes, Chris Starmer, Robert Sugden. (1997). “A Test of
the Theory of Reference-Dependent Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2): 479505.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, and Frank Heiland. 2008. "Early Claiming of Social Security Benefits and
Labour Supply Behaviour of Older Americans." Applied Economics. 40:23.
Brown, J., J. Kling, S. Mullainathan, and M. Wrobel. (2008). “Why Don't People Insure Late
Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-Annuitization Puzzle.” The American
Economic Review, 98: 304-309.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, and James Poterba. (2002). “The Role of Real Annuities and
Indexed Bonds in an Individual Accounts Retirement Program.” In Innovations in Financing
Retirement., eds. Z. Bodie, B. Hammond, and O. S. Mitchell. Philadelphia, PA: Univ. of
Pennsylvania Press: 175-197.
Coile, Courtney C., Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber, and Alain Jousten. (2002) “Delays in
Claiming Social Security Benefits.” Journal of Public Economics 84(3): 357-385.
Coronado, Julia L. and Maria G. Perozek. (2003). “Wealth Effects and the Consumption of
Leisure: Retirement Decisions During the Stock Market Boom of the 1990s.” FEDS Working
Paper No. 2003-20, May. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=419721 or
doi:10.2139/ssrn.419721.
Davidoff, Tom, Jeffrey Brown, and Peter Diamond. (2005). “Annuities and Individual Welfare.”
American Economic Review, 95: 1573-1590.
Dillman, D.A., J.D Smyth, and L.M. Christian. (2008). Internet, Mail, and Mixed-Mode Surveys:
The Tailored Design Method, 3rd edition. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Eckstein, Zvi , Martin S. Eichenbaum, Dan Peled. (1985). “The Distribution of Wealth and
Welfare in the Presence of Incomplete Annuity Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
100(3): 789-806

27

Friedman, Benjamin, and Mark Warshawsky (1990). “The Cost of Annuities: Implications for
Saving Behavior and Bequests.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1): 135-154
Frolik, Lawrence A. and Richard L. Kaplan. (2010) Elder Law in a Nutshell. 5th edition. St
Paul, MN: West Publishing. p. 292.
Gray, Gray & Gray (GG&G) (2011). “The Effect of When you Start Collecting Social Security.”
http://www.gggcpas.com/tools/gggcalcs/sscal4.htm
Greenwald, Mathew & Associates. (2010a). “Claiming Social Security Benefits and
Understanding Peer Effects: A Summary Report of Ten Focus Groups.” RAND Report to the
SSA for the Financial Literacy Center, September.
Greenwald, Mathew, Arie Kapteyn, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Lisa Schneider. (2010b). “What Do
People Know about Social Security?” RAND Report to the FLC/SSA, September.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas L Steinmeier. (2004). “The Social Security Retirement Earnings
Test, Retirement, and Benefit Claiming.” NBER Working Paper 10905, November.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas L. Steinmeier. (2008). “How Changes in Social Security Affect
Retirement Trends.” NBER Working Paper 14105.
Horneff, Wolfram, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ivica Dus. (2007). “Following the
Rules: Integrating Asset Allocation and Annuitization in Retirement Portfolios. Insurance:
Mathematics and Economics. 42: 396-408.
Horneff, Wolfram, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Michael Stamos. (2009). “Asset
Allocation and Location over the Life Cycle with Survival-Contingent Payouts.” Journal of
Banking and Finance, (33)9, September: 1688-1699.
Hurd, Michael, James P. Smith, Julie M. Zissimopoulos. (2004). “The Effects of Subjective
Survival on Retirement and Social Security Claiming.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19(6):
761-775.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. (1981). “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology
of Choice.” Science, 211(4481), January 30: 453-458.
Lumsdaine, Robin and Olivia S. Mitchell. (1999). “New Developments in the Economics of
Retirement”. In Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. Orley Ashenfelter & David Card.
Amsterdam: North Holland: 3261-3308.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis F. Shea (2001).“The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4):1149-1187.

28

Mahaney, James I. and Peter C. Carlson. (2008). “Rethinking Social Security Claiming in a
401(k) World.” In Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving, eds. J. Ameriks & O.S.
Mitchell. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 141-167.
Mitchell, Olivia S., James Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, and Jeffrey Brown. (1999). “New
Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities.” American Economic Review,
December: 1299-1318.
Mussweiler, Thomas, Birte Englich, and Fritz Strack. (2004) “Anchoring Effect.” In Cognitive
Illusions - A Handbook on Fallacies and Biases in Thinking, Judgment, and Memory, ed. R.
Pohl. London: Psychology Press: 183-200.
Reimers, Cordelia, and Marjorie Honig. 1996. “Responses to Social Security by Men and
Women: Myopic and Far-Sighted Behavior.” Journal of Human Resources, 31-2: 359-382.
Shafir, Eldar, Peter Diamond and Amos Tversky. (1997). “Money Illusion.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 112(2): 341-374.
Yaari, Menachim. (1965). “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer.” Review of Economic Studies, 32: 137-150.

29

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics on the ALP Sample
Frequency
Percentage
Mean Claiming Age
(months>62)
GENDER
1 Male
598
41.6
39
2 Female
839
58.4
43
1437
100
AGE
18-40
388
27
42
41-50
405
28.2
42
51-55
275
19.1
38
>55
369
25.7
40
1437
100
EDUCATION
HS or less
232
16.1
35
Some college/ associate degree
577
40.2
39
College degree
628
43.7
50
1437
100
HH INCOME
<35000
302
21.1
31
35000-74999
592
41.2
43
>75000
541
37.7
47
Note: Table contains demographics for respondents to Wave 1. Mean claiming ages are based on
slightly fewer observations, due to missing claiming ages. Means are weighted

Table 2. Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Wave
Frame
Wave 1.1 Wave 1.2 Wave 2.1Wave 2.2 Wave 3.1 Wave 3.2
Breakeven
39.6
47.9
41.6
45.0
44.1
46.9
66 neutral, c
54.5
57.6
58.5
60.8
61.1
64.2
62, gain, c
58.7
65.5
60.5
65.9
60.1
64.5
66, gain, c
62.7
63.3
61.2
64.0
59.4
64.1
70, loss, c
57.2
57.5
56.1
55.3
62.7
52.3
66, loss, c
65.3
61.5
57.7
63.3
53.6
59.3
62, gain, i
58.4
63.3
57.0
67.3
57.4
64.8
66, gain, i
63.1
62.2
60.3
65.9
66.1
60.4
70, loss, i
57.7
57.9
54.4
57.4
53.2
52.9
66, loss, i
62.2
61.5
59.2
61.1
61.7
57.1
Notes: Ages are expressed in months past age 62.
frames; “gain” or “loss” indicate if loss or gain frames were used;
“c” indicates a consumption frame, while “i” indicates an investment fram

30
Table 3. Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Respondent Characteristics

Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted data. See Table 2 for additional
definitions.

GENDER
Male
Female
AGE GROUP
18-40
41-50
51-55
>55
EDUCATION
HS or less
Some college/
associate
degree
College degree
HH INCOME
<35000
35000-74999
>75000
OVERALL
Average
Standard
Deviation
Frequency

Breakeven

66
neutral,
cons

62,
gain,
cons

FRAME
66,
70,
gain, loss,
cons cons

66,
loss,
cons

62,
gain,
inv

66,
gain,
inv

70,
loss,
inv

66,
loss,
inv

Variance

45.7
42.8

59.9
58.5

61.1
63.7

62.8
62.4

56.2
56.9

60.3
60.2

60.7
61.7

60.5
64.9

55.1
55.8

59.3
61.4

24.4
40.0

44.5
46.1
40.4
43.9

63.2
63.1
59
49.7

63.7
64.5
60.4
60.8

67.3
65.3
59.9
56.3

63.2
60.4
55.4
47.6

64.4
63.5
58
53

62.7
63.6
62.1
56

68
67.2
62.9
53.3

58.8
59.4
53.4
50.1

65.4
63.3
58.6
53.6

44.9
34.7
42.2
23.2

38.5

55.4

60.2

60.6

52.7

57.8

55.9

57.9

55.6

59

40.9

40.8
48.8

55.8
63.2

61.9
64.2

60
65.5

56.8
58.1

59.5
61.6

61.1
63.2

59.8
67.5

51.9
58.7

57.1
64

39.0
28.0

44.3
43.2
44.9

58.9
58.7
59.6

63.6
61.7
62.9

60.7
63
62.9

56.5
56
57.3

58.6
60.6
60.6

59.2
60.9
62.6

62.2
62.2
64.3

57.4
54.1
56.1

60.7
61.2
59.6

28.4
35.6
31.6

44.1

59.1

62.6

62.5

56.6

60.2

61.3

63

55.5

60.5

31.5
744

29.5
736

28.9
838

30.3
777

29.9
754

31.2
769

28.6
811

30.1
807

30.3
719

30.4
779

31
Table 4. Framing Regressions: Dependent Variable is Expected Claiming Age
Note: Dependent variable is expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted data. Reference
frame is Age 66, neutral (see text). Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. See Table 2 and text for additional definitions.

-9.695
(2.62)**
7.918
(2.26)*
5.711
(1.60)
-0.074
(0.02)
3.957
(1.09)
5.713
(1.63)
4.683
(1.26)
0.351
(0.09)
3.903
(1.04)
57.557
(22.34)**
1417
0.02
0.51

Wave 1.2,
lagged
dummies
included
-10.333
(2.79)**
8.542
(2.43)*
6.467
(1.82)
0.581
(0.16)
4.947
(1.37)
6.078
(1.73)
5.229
(1.41)
1.700
(0.45)
4.501
(1.20)
53.121
(14.18)**
1417
0.05
0.465

-15.696
(16.03)**
1.053
(1.12)
3.736
(3.88)**
2.740
(2.81)**
1.300
(1.35)
0.359
(0.38)
3.321
(3.50)**
1.948
(1.98)*
1.060
(1.10)
58.643
(85.40)**
7734
0.09
0.45

All waves,
fixed effects,
lagged dummies
included
-15.932
(16.21)**
1.031
(1.09)
3.988
(4.13)**
2.920
(2.98)**
1.641
(1.70)
0.460
(0.48)
3.623
(3.80)**
2.326
(2.35)*
1.282
(1.33)
57.903
(81.98)**
7734
0.10
0.538

0.916

0.778

0.735

0.657

0.698

0.911

0.909

0.764

0.416

0.545

0.395

0.988

0.904

0.801

0.708

0.452

0.620

0.666

0.011

0.015

0.804

0.839

0.849

0.016

0.013

0.944

0.971

0.944

0.827

0.903

0.969

0.884

0.862

0.010

0.009

1665

1665
0.00

FRAME

Wave 1.1

Wave 1.2

Breakeven

-14.969
(4.29)**
4.150
(1.19)
8.191
(2.44)*
2.674
(0.78)
10.791
(3.03)**
3.823
(1.11)
8.546
(2.47)*
3.113
(0.79)
7.652
(2.12)*
54.540
(22.22)**
1436
0.05
0.92

62_gain_c
66_gain_c
70_loss_c
66_loss_c
62_gain_i
66_gain_i
70-loss-i
66-loss-i
Constant
Observations
R-squared
p gain at 62
cons=inv
p gain at 66
cons=inv
p loss at 70
cons=inv
p loss at 66
cons=inv
p cons at 66
gain=loss
p inv at 66
gain=loss
p joint
cons=inv
p joint
gain=loss
Number of id
p previous
dummies zero

0.02

All waves,
fixed
effects

32

Table 5. Framing contrasts (Fixed Effect Models, All Waves: Dependent Variable is Expected
Claiming Age)
Note: Dependent variable measured in number of months after age 62, unweighted data. Reference frame
is Age 66, neutral (see text). Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. See Table 2 for additional definitions.
Table 5: Framing contrasts, fixed effects, all waves
All waves
All waves, lagged
dummies included
Breakeven
-12.876
-12.881
(10.94)**
(10.90)**
cons_loss
1.435
1.695
(1.59)
(1.87)
cons_gain
3.807
4.031
(4.23)**
(4.47)**
inv_loss
0.927
1.222
(1.03)
(1.35)
inv_gain
3.250
3.557
(3.64)**
(3.98)**
anchor_62
-2.822
-3.070
(4.30)**
(4.65)**
anchor_70
1.167
1.159
(1.70)
(1.67)
Constant
58.643
57.914
(85.41)**
(82.04)**
Observations
7734
7734
Number of id
1665
1665
R-squared
0.09
0.10
p cons_loss=gain
0.00
0.005
p inv_loss=gain
0.004
0.005
p gain_cons=inv
0.395
0.474
p loss_cons=inv
0.456
0.489
p anchor62=70
0.000
0.000
p joint gain=loss
0.002
0.002
p joint cons=inv
0.525
0.607
p previous dummies
0.00
zero

33

Table 6. Fixed Effect Models With Interactions, All Waves: Dependent Variable is Expected
Claiming Age
Note: Dependent variable measured in number of months after age 62, unweighted data. Reference frame
is Age 66, neutral (see text). Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. See Table 2 for additional definitions.
FRAME
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Breakeven
-9.633
-23.383
-10.681
-16.790
(6.79)**
(7.60)**
(7.78)**
(5.70)**
Loss_c
1.432
1.412
1.425
1.120
(1.59)
(1.57)
(1.58)
(1.19)
Gain_c
3.796
3.781
3.798
3.660
(4.23)**
(4.21)**
(4.23)**
(3.91)**
Loss_i
0.927
0.918
0.912
0.916
(1.03)
(1.02)
(1.01)
(0.97)
Gain_i
3.253
3.227
3.257
3.110
(3.65)**
(3.62)**
(3.65)**
(3.33)**
anchor_62
-2.808
-2.807
-2.831
-2.837
(4.28)**
(4.28)**
(4.32)**
(4.13)**
anchor_70
1.171
1.180
1.169
1.160
(1.71)
(1.72)
(1.71)
(1.62)
Female* breakeven
-5.928
(4.08)**
Benefit62* Breakeven
0.008
(3.70)**
Cred. card debt* Breakeven
-4.485
(3.10)**
Fin. literacy* Breakeven
0.055
(1.50)
Constant
58.645
58.660
58.652
58.550
(85.52)** (85.52)**
(85.48)** (81.57)**
Observations
7734
7734
7734
6994
Number of id
1665
1665
1665
1445
R-squared
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09

34

Table 7. Fixed Effect Models With Interactions, All Waves: Dependent Variable is Expected
Claiming Age
Note: Dependent variable measured in number of months after age 62, unweighted data. Reference frame
is Age 66, neutral (see text).Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%. See Table 2 for additional definitions.
Breakeven
Loss_c
Gain_c
Loss_i
Gain_i
anchor_62
anchor_70
Female*Breakeven
Female*Loss_c
female*Gain_c
female*Loss_i
female*Gain_i
Female*anchor_66
Female*anchor_70
agecat2*Breakeven
agecat2*Loss_c
agecat2*Gain_c
agecat2*Loss_i
agecat2*Gain_i
agecat2*anchor_66
agecat2*anchor_70
agecat3*Breakeven
agecat3*Loss_c
agecat3*Gain_c

(1)
-12.876
(10.94)**
1.435
(1.59)
3.807
(4.23)**
0.927
(1.03)
3.250
(3.64)**
-2.822
(4.30)**
1.167
(1.70)

(2)
-14.072
(3.28)**
-4.397
(1.36)
-0.138
(0.04)
-5.194
(1.60)
-1.695
(0.52)
-5.863
(2.42)*
0.740
(0.30)
-5.748
(2.41)*
0.474
(0.26)
-0.525
(0.29)
2.621
(1.43)
0.990
(0.55)
-0.782
(0.58)
-0.910
(0.47)
3.187
(1.04)
-0.311
(0.13)
0.046
(0.02)
0.229
(0.09)
0.135
(0.06)
-2.931
(1.70)
-0.582
(0.23)
2.394
(0.70)
-0.545
(0.20)
0.178

35

agecat3*Loss_i
agecat3*Gain_i
agecat3*anchor_66
agecat3*anchor_70
agecat4*Breakeven
agecat4*Loss_c
agecat4*Gain_c
agecat4*Loss_i
agecat4*Gain_i
agecat4*anchor_66
agecat4*anchor_70
Constant

58.643
(85.41)**
7734
1665
0.09
0.00
0.004
0.395
0.456
0.000
0.002
0.525

Observations
Number of id
R-squared
p Loss_c=gain
p Loss_i=gain
p Gain_c=inv
p Loss_c=inv
p anchor62=70
p joint gain=loss
p joint cons=inv
p income interactions
p education interactions
p age interactions
p sex interactions
p anchor66=70
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

(0.07)
-1.243
(0.47)
1.340
(0.53)
-1.582
(0.83)
1.687
(0.60)
5.881
(1.81)
-1.686
(0.66)
0.977
(0.38)
1.133
(0.44)
-0.748
(0.30)
-2.272
(1.23)
-1.717
(0.65)
61.715
(25.55)**
7723
1663
0.10

0.53
0.743
0.275
0.777
0.674
0.122
0.098
0.003
0.056

Figure 1. Average Expected Claiming Ages by Frame

Months after Age 62

Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted.

72
60
48
36

Average

24

Figure 2. Average Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Wave

Months After Age 62

Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted.

72.0
60.0

Wave 1.1

48.0

Wave 1.2
Wave 2.1

36.0

Wave 2.2

24.0

Wave 3.1
Wave 3.2

.

37

Months After Age 62

Figure 3. Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Respondent Sex
Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted.

84
72
60
48

Male

Female

36
24

Months After Age 62

Figure 4. Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Respondent Age
Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted.

84
72
60

18-40

41-50

51-55

>55

48
36
24

38

Figure 5. Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Education (unweighted)

Months After Age 62

Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted.

84

HS or less

72
60
48
36

Some college/
associate degree

24

College degree

Figure 6. Expected Claiming Ages by Frame and Respondent Income ($)

Months After Age 62

Note: Expressed as number of months after age 62, unweighted.

84
72
60
48

<35000
35000-74999
>75000

36
24

39

Appendix A: The Ten Frames
Frame 1: Baseline (Neutral)

40

Frame 2: Breakeven

41

Frame 3: 62, gain, consumption

42

Frame 4: 66, gain, consumption

43

Frame 5: 70, loss, consumption

44

Frame 6: 66, loss, consumption

45

Frame 7: 62, gain, investment

46

Frame 8: 66, gain, investment

47

Frame 9: 70, loss, investment

48

Frame 10: 66, loss, investment

