                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       REMEMBERING TO PAY? REMINDERS VS. FINANCIAL INCENTIVES FOR
                            LOAN PAYMENTS

                                          Ximena Cadena
                                         Antoinette Schoar

                                       Working Paper 17020
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17020


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We thank Jillian Larsen for outstanding project management and field work during implementation
of the project and help with the data analysis. We also thank UML for their help and insights in the
implementation of this study and their active interest in the research. We thank the IFC for financial
support and ideas42 for funding and operational support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ximena Cadena and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Remembering to Pay? Reminders vs. Financial Incentives for Loan Payments
Ximena Cadena and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 17020
May 2011
JEL No. D03,G21,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

We report the results from a field experiment with a micro lender in Uganda to test the effectiveness
of privately implemented incentives for loan repayment. Using a randomized control trial we measure
the impact of three different treatments: Borrowers are either given a lump sum cash reward upon
completion of the loan (equivalent to a 25% interest rate reduction on the current loan), a 25% reduction
of the interest rate in the next loan the borrower takes from the bank, or a monthly text message reminder
before the loan payment is due (SMS). We find that on average the size of the treatment effect is similar
across all the treatment groups: borrowers in the treatment groups have a 7-9% increase in the probability
of paying on time and the average days late drop by 2 days a month. The results suggest that simple
text messages which help borrowers to better manage their repayment dates have similar effects as
large changes in the cost of capital of 25% of interest. The impact of the cash back incentives are stronger
for customers with smaller loans and less banking experience, the reduced future interest rate seemed
to be most effective for customers with larger loans, while the SMS text messages were particularly
effective for younger customers.


Ximena Cadena
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge Street
Room K 350
Cambridge, MA 02138
xcadena@iq.harvard.edu

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
    1. Introduction

Financial markets in developing countries are often hampered by a severe lack of even basic
financial infrastructure such as functioning credit bureaus, uniform disclosure rules or the ability
to use collateral. These limitations substantially increase the cost of lending for banks since the
overall applicant pool that lenders face is more opaque and the ex post enforcement of loans
becomes more difficult as well, see for example Rajan and Zingales (1998), Djankov et al (2007)
or Karlan and Morduch (2010) for differences in the access to finance across countries. The lack
of market wide financial infrastructure blunts any enforcement or screening mechanisms that
operate through downside incentives, if borrowers who defaulted on one bank can easily access
other lenders.2 To ensure timely repayment, banks have to rely more heavily on self-enforcing
private arrangements such as contracts that operate via upside incentives.

But poor payment behavior of borrowers in developing countries might also be the result of
limited financial planning on the part of small businesses paired with a difficult operating
environment for small and even larger businesses. Firms face many external shocks to their
operations on a day to day basis, for example infrastructure problems such as power outages,
macro risks or even political problems. These shocks can affect the underlying volatility of cash
flows and increase bankruptcy risk. But these small businesses often have only rudimentary
financial management and accounting practices to manage these risks3. The lack of internal
financial controls exaggerates the impact of shocks, if managers are unable to properly respond
by adjusting the capital structure or planned investment programs.

In this study we contrast the importance of these different hypotheses for poor payment
discipline of small businesses in developing countries and the types of interventions that can help
to reduce late payments. We compare interventions that provide firms with steeper financial
incentives for timely repayments to those that make it easier for firms to keep track of upcoming
payments such as SMS reminders. If small businesses strategically delay repayment since they
know that lenders have only limited enforcement mechanisms, then the provision of incentives

2
  See Hertzberg et al (2011) for an interesting example of a market wide change in the disclosure rules for credit
bureaus in Argentina which allowed all the lenders to a firm public access to the firm’s payment status with its
other lenders.
3
  Karlan and Valdivia (2009) or Drexler, Fischer and Schoar (2011) show the impact that lack of financial literacy can
have on small business owners.

                                                                                                                    2
for on-time payments should reduce the benefits of this behavior. Sending clients SMS
reminders, however, should not have any impact under this hypothesis. In contrast, these results
should be reversed if late payments are predominantly a function of the inability of small
business to manage their finances: Here steeper incentives would not help, since payment
failures are not based on a rational cost-benefit analysis of borrowers but are a function of their
inability to manage the finances of the business. In this context SMS reminders could have an
impact on ensuring better payment behavior if they help firms to improve their cash
management. It is important to note that we have a specific form of strategic behavior in mind
here: People willingly delay their payments since they are trading off the cost of incurring late
fees on their existing loan against other possibly higher interest forms of finance (or not having
access to finance all together). These incentives cannot help in the case of customers who have
decided to default on their loans altogether.

We work with a bank in Uganda, UML, which predominately lends to small businesses in the
semi-organized sector. To understand the role of dynamic incentives for loan repayment versus
SMS reminders we set up three different treatment arms and a control group which received only
the standard UML loan and no treatment. In the first treatment borrowers are promised to receive
a 25% reduction in the monthly interest rate ex post, if they make all their monthly payments on
time. It is paid as a onetime reward at the conclusion of the loan. We call this treatment “cash
back”. This constitutes a very large reduction in the cost of capital and should thus provide
strong incentives for borrowers to repay on time. The exception could be fast growing firms with
very high return on capital. If these firms are credit constraint they might be willing to pay late
and bear the higher interest cost, since the returns from investing are even higher than the
savings from paying on time.

In the second treatment we provide longer term and more back loaded incentives in order to
isolate the incentive effect on fast growing firms. We call this treatment arm “future interest
reduction”. Customers are given a 25% reduction in the interest rate of their next loan (again a
reduction from 4% to 3% monthly) if current loan payments are all made in time. For an average
growth in loan size of 5% the benefit of this treatment is comparable to the one for the cash back




                                                                                                 3
treatment. But this incentive should be most effective for businesses that foresee a stronger
growth trajectory and thus will require larger loans going forward.4

Finally, in the third treatment we compare these financial incentives to an intervention where
borrowers receive SMS reminders every month three days before the payments are due. The idea
is that if borrowers live very busy and unstable lives, SMS alerts might prevent them from
missing payments due to oversight. Cell phone use is widespread in Uganda and only about 1%
of the borrowers in this treatment group did not accept to be part of it because they did not own a
cell phone. And lastly we have a control group that does not receive any additional treatment
from the usual loan provisions of the bank.

We find that all of the three different treatments have a similar impact in terms of magnitudes on
the number of days that borrowers pay late or the likelihood to have a perfect repayment profile
relative to the control group. On average the borrowers in the treatment groups see a 7-9%
increase in the probability of paying perfectly and the average number of days late drop by 2
days. These results allow us to benchmark the economic benefits of the different treatments
against each other. It is interesting to see that the SMS treatment which is almost costless for the
bank to implement has the same economic effect on late payments as a 25% reduction in the
interest rate. A large fraction of borrowers previously seem to have paid late not for strategic
reasons but because they were unable to keep track of their payment schedule without the help of
simple reminders. These findings support the idea that small businesses in developing countries
suffer from lack of financial management which might affect their payment behavior.

We then analyze whether the different treatment arms have heterogeneous treatment effects
across subgroups of borrowers. Interestingly, we see that borrowers with smaller loans (smaller
than the median $450) respond more strongly to cash back and SMS treatments, which could
suggest that these borrowers look for more immediate benefits. In contrast, borrowers with larger
loans respond more strongly to the promise of future interest reductions but do not show much
sensitivity to cash back or SMS reminders. It seems that borrowers with larger loans are on faster
4
  Under reasonable assumptions about the firms’ discount rate the net present value of the future interest rate
reduction is 15% higher than the savings from the cash back at the time of the reward. Using the average loan
amount and term, we calculated the average cash back reward. Then using the same figures, we projected the
interest payments for the next loan assuming a 20% grow in the loan amount under the regular interest rate (4%
monthly) and the reward one (3% monthly). We compare the savings from the cash back to the net present value
of the flow of savings on interest for the duration of the future loan.

                                                                                                                  4
growth trajectories and therefore respond more strongly to the benefit of a future interest rate
reduction than small borrowers. In addition, our results do not seem to be purely driven by
tighter credit constraints for small borrowers (i.e. they cannot respond to the future interest rate
reduction since they have a very immediate need for capital), since the smaller firms also
respond strongly to the SMS reminders.

We also rule out that small versus larger loans only proxy for other factors such as the
experience pattern of the borrowers, since often clients with larger loans could be on a third or
fourth loan renewal cycle while clients with smaller loans might still be in the first or second
cycle. However, we find that the correlation between loan size and loan cycle is only 14%. In
addition we find that less experienced borrowers, who are on their first or second loan cycle,
respond more strongly to the incentive treatments. Moreover, the subgroup of younger borrowers
(below 30 years of age) responds significantly stronger to SMS reminders than older borrowers.
We believe that this result indicates a difference in familiarity with mobile technology across
generations.

There is a growing number of papers that test the impact of credit on firm growth and document
large but heterogeneous returns to capital. De Mel, McKenzie and Woodruff (2008) document
the impact of a cash-grant program on small businesses in Sri Lanka and find very high returns
on capital but also large heterogeneity between borrowers. Similarly, Karlan and Zinman (2010)
show large returns on a loan expansion experiment in South Africa. Evidence based on quasi
experimental work suggests that credit expansion in the banking sector has a large impact on
firm growth; see for example Banerjee and Duflo (2004), Cole (2009) or Udry and Anagol
(2006). Several papers have also shown the impact of the cost of capital or the structure of the
loan on the take up of credit and the ex ante selection effects on borrower types, e.g. Karlan and
Zinman (2011) or Fischer (2010). But in contrast there are no papers that study the impact of ex
post financial incentives or SMS reminders to help borrowers manage their loan payments.

A large and rapidly growing literature outside of finance and economics has focused on the
impact of reminders and SMS text messages in particular on changing people’s behaviors. The
majority of these papers focus on health related interventions such as immunization, smoke
cessation, out patience attendance, maternal health, exercise and weight loss, etc. (for a review
see Kaplan, 2006). The results documented in these studies show very mixed success. Also, in

                                                                                                  5
Political Science, Dale and Strauss (2009) show that SMS text messages that are impersonal yet
unlikely to be ignored are effective on getting people to vote. The authors conducted a
nationwide experiment during the 2006 elections in the US and showed that the use of SMS
reminders resulted in a 3 percentage points increase in the likelihood of voting.

The use of SMS messages has only recently become of interest in the consumer finance
literature. Some studies have used reminders and text messages to test the impact on the savings
behavior of individuals. Kast et al. (2010) find that using text messages as reminders and
feedback mechanisms increases savings rates for low income customers in Chile. Karlan et al.
(2010) report the results of three different field experiments in Bolivia, Peru and the Philippines
that use text messages to encourage savings. The paper test the prediction of their model that
shocks to attention can change intertemporal choices by bringing attention to future expenditure
opportunities. They find that reminders in the form of SMS text messages in Bolivia and
Philippines, or letters in the case of Peru increased savings on average by six percent and
improve people’s probability of achieving savings goals by three percentage points. While the
paper compares the effects of reminders to other treatments related to the salience of savings and
future expenditures, they do not compare them to any monetary incentive.

Our paper adds to this literature in two dimensions. First, we look at the impact of SMS on loan
repayments rather than savings targets. This difference is important since late payments of loans
is often interpreted as a strategic choice by a borrower who delays repayment since he knows
that enforcement is difficult or because he is capital constraint and has outside opportunities for
the money which exceed the interest rate in case of late payments. Our results suggest that for a
significant fraction of the borrowers this interpretation does not apply, since they seem to simply
mismanage their payment dates and pay back in time if prompted by an SMS. Second, our
intervention was designed with the objective of comparing the impact of the SMS reminders with
pecuniary incentives so that we can shed some light on the “price-equivalent” effect of the
treatment. This approach is similar to Bertrand et al. (2010) that found that some psychological
features of advertising letters could affect loan demand as much as a reduction of 25% in the
interest rate. Similarly, we find that SMS reminders have a comparable impact on the repayment
behavior of borrowers to a 25% reduction of current or future interest rates in case the borrower
has a perfect repayment history in the current loan.


                                                                                                 6
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The second section presents the experimental set
up, the third section provides details on implementation and in the four section we describe the
data sources and data collection procedures. The fifth section discusses the results of the study
and finally section six concludes.

    2. Experimental Set up

The experiment was conducted with Uganda Microfinance Limited (UML), a Microfinance
Institution, which has 27 branches in different locations across Uganda and became a regulated
deposits taking institution in 2005. In 2008 UML had over 25,000 customers, a loan portfolio of
$24 Million and a default rate of 4%. Although most of UML’s business loans are collateralized,
it is very hard to seize the assets after a customer has defaulted. In addition, since Uganda did not
have a Credit Bureau at the time, UML did not have the ability to incentivize timely repayment
based on the threat of affecting a borrower’s credit history.

In collaboration with the bank we conducted focus groups and client interviews to understand the
viability of different incentive schemes for borrowers. We decided on three treatments to
randomly assign to loan customers:

   Cash Back: Customers selected to participate in the Cash Back incentive, would receive at
    the end of the loan period a cash back payment equivalent to 25% of the interest that they
    paid on their loan if they have paid all their loan installments on time. Interest rate for these
    customers was 4% monthly, so in practice this incentive meant approximately a reduction to
    a 3% monthly rate conditional on perfect repayment and only realized at the end of the loan
    period. At the end of the loan period, bank staff would review all payments for the duration
    of the loan and verify that all of them were made on time, and that the loan was not prepaid
    before completion of 50% of the balance. The customer was invited to the branch to receive a
    check for the amount equivalent to 25% of the total interest was paid, and a paper certificate
    of being a good and valued customer and an on-time payer.


   Future Interest Rate Reduction: Customers selected to receive this incentive would receive a
    preferential interest rate of 3% in their future loan with UML when they repaid their current
    loan perfectly on time for every installment for the duration of the loan, and as with the Cash

                                                                                                   7
    Back incentive, to get the reward, the loan could not be prepaid before completion of 50% of
    the balance. In monetary terms, this incentive is in general stronger than the cash back one.
    Using standard assumptions for discount rates and average values for loan size and term, the
    net present value of the interest rate reduction incentives is higher than the cash back savings
    for any business expecting to receive a future loan that is at least 5% larger than the current
    one.    However, if customers exhibit hyperbolic discounting and value the present
    disproportionately, the promise of a future reward may not be as compelling as the
    expectation of a surer one for their current loan in the near term.




   SMS reminders: Customers selected for this treatment would agree to provide their mobile
    number and would receive standard financial conditions for their loans, but will get a
    monthly text message three days before their payment day, thanking them for banking at
    UML and reminding them about the importance of paying on time. We had three possibilities
    for the message depending on the customer’s characteristics and preferences. At the time of
    disbursal, customers assigned to the SMS reminder treatment could decide if they wanted
    their message in English, in Luganda, or in symbols designed for those who could not read
    either of those 2 languages. We hired a local company, SMS Media to send messages to
    about 450 customers on a monthly basis for the duration of their loans. Success delivery rate
    was 97%, 2% of messages arrived late and 1% did not arrive due to network difficulties.

All customers selected for any of the treatments signed a written contract with detailed
information explaining the incentive they would receive. They also received detailed explanation
in person about the incentive they were offered and the fact that it was for a pilot project so it
was a special offer that would only be valid for that particular loan, and they had the opportunity
to ask questions. In the case of the Cash Back and the Future Interest Rate Reduction, it was very
clear, both in the written copy that they received as well as during the meeting for disbursement
that they would have to perfectly pay on time every installment and not prepay the loan before
completion of 50% of the balance to get the reward.




                                                                                                  8
       3. Implementation

To test the impact of incentives we selected the Micro Corporate Credit (MCC) loan customers
getting loans with a term of up to 12 months. These are individual business loans targeted
towards micro and small businesses, intended to be invested for productive use, such as for
working capital or a capital investment. Businesses are only eligible for this product if they have
been operating for a minimum of one year, and generally the individual must have some form of
collateral to cover at least 80% of the principal loan amount, such as household chattels, a
vehicle, a land sales agreement, etc. There is a fixed interest rate on this product of 4% per
month, and there are only very rare exceptions to this interest rate. We selected this product, the
MCC, because it was a small business loan, with relatively short maturity terms and with a high
volume of monthly loan disbursements in urban and rural areas. At the time of implementation,
about 50% of the loan portfolio at UML was MCC loans. The other 50% included group loans,
mortgages, school loans, and consumption loans for salaried customers.

We selected five branches to implement the pilot project: three urban branches (Kajjansi,
Kyengera and Nakawa) and two rural branches (Kiboga and Mityana). Selected branches had
been operating for at least three years, had a rapid flow of customers and monthly disbursements,
had necessary branch support and sufficient staff for adequate implementation and would offer
an appropriate physical location for constant monitoring and to hold private meetings with
customers at the time of disbursement.5

Project implementation started in all five branches during the last week of April 2008. We
produced project materials and trained branch staff on project procedures including the use of a
randomization software to randomly assign all customers approved for an MCC loan to one of
the three incentives or a control group at the time of disbursement. We decided to randomize at
the loan officer desktop because it was the most efficient way of including all approved
customers in the study minimizing the interference with regular procedures at the bank. We
design a small piece of software that would work within Excel and would allow for easy
randomization of customers. The loan administrator would simply have to input the client name,
ID number, loan amount and interest rate, then click a button that said “get loan type.” The


5
    Incentive assignment was confidential since different rewards were offered to different people.

                                                                                                      9
program would then generate a response that indicated whether the client should be assigned to
group 1, 2, 3 or 4, and would make an unalterable record of the entry. The program was installed
in the loan administrator’s computer at each of the branches. The procedure was designed in a
way that we could make sure that each customer was assigned to a random group and loan
officers did not have any power to change or adjust the selection process, so that the assignment
was in fact completely random. The random assignment was designed such that the control
group, the Cash Back, and the Future Interest Rate Reduction each had a 22% chance of being
drawn while the SMS Reminder group had a 34% chance. Since we expected the SMS reminder
to have a smaller impact than the monetary incentives, we increased the sample size to increase
the statistical power to assess the size of the impact. Customers assigned to the control group
received their loan with standard conditions and received no incentives for repayment, all data
was collected for them to compare their repayment behavior to that of the participants assigned
to one of the treatments (incentives). For the duration of the implementation period, until mid-
August 2008, every day, at selected branches, all approved MCC loan customers with a loan
term up to 12 months came to the branch to meet with the loan administrator, receive the
reimbursement and got assigned to one of the groups for the pilot test.

   4. Data sources and sample

Sample construction: To analyze the repayment behavior across different treatment groups we
constructed repayment data from different data extracts from the IT system at the bank, and
complemented it with personal and business characteristics obtained from the loan application
and loan appraisals forms and entered electronically by a team at Uganda Bureau of Statistics
hired for this project. Building repayment data sets was a complicated process. During the
period of analysis for the incentives for repayment program, UML went from being a Regulated
Deposit Taking Institution in the Ugandan financial sector to being a Commercial Bank and
became part of Equity Bank. The transition meant a lot of changes in procedures at UML
including a change on banking software from Bakers Realm to Finacle. The migration process
created a lot of problems and ultimately made impossible to track repayment in a consistent and
flawless way using only loan accounts. Therefore we had to use information from the customers’
deposit accounts and extract information for each of the loan payments that a customer made. In
order to make a loan payment, customers are required to make a deposit to their savings account,


                                                                                              10
and then that money deposited into the savings account will be transferred to their loan account
which then is credited as a payment. This allowed us to reconstruct all the payments that
borrowers had made over the term of their loans.

We obtained data from March 2008 until June 2009. We were able to build a data set to compare,
on a monthly basis, cumulative payments made by each customer required for the duration of the
loan. Because of the organizational strains on the bank from the transition to a deposit taking
institution we terminated our experiment by June 2009. We therefore only include loans that had
a final installment in June 2009 or before. This earlier cut of reduced our sample size from 1,467
subjects to 1,246. To ensure data quality we also drop customers that had additional concurrent
loans. The resulting number of loans for the analysis is 1121.

Outcome Variables: We construct several indicators for repayment behavior for each of the
customers in the program. These indicators include (1) number of installments paid on time for
the duration of the loan (nonconsecutive), (2) number of installments paid on time consecutively
before incurring any late payment (this variable is different from the first indicator since it takes
into account the fact that once a customer pay late one installment may lose the incentive to
continue paying on time, since the monetary incentives in the program are only for customer who
paid perfectly on time every installment), (3) average days late across all the installments. We
also have details of the loan characteristics such as the amount, term, cycle, and the location of
the branch that issued the loan. Finally for most customers we also have details on their personal
and business characteristics from the loan application and appraisal forms. These include gender,
marital status, age, household size, if they are home or business owners, time in business, and
repayment capacity.

Summary Statistics: Table 1 presents a summary of all the relevant variables for the analysis.6
Panel A shows borrower and loan characteristics. The average loan size is about $800, although
more than half of the borrowers have loans smaller than $500, the median is $450. The length of
the loan maturity is concentrated around 7 months in fact 48% of loans in the sample had a 6
month maturity. The majority of borrowers have little experience with this type of loan, 75% of
them are in their first or second loan series (cycle). 35% of the borrowers are women and 78%


6
    Appendix Table A1 includes a description of all variables.

                                                                                                  11
are married. The average customer is 38 years old and lives in a household of 5 people. 58%
own a home and while all of them have businesses that have been operating for 8 years on
average, only 36% own the premises or the location in which the business operate. During the
loan appraisal process, loan officers calculate the repayment capacity of the customer as the
monthly surplus of the business discounting household expenses, on average $309. In Panel B of
Table 1 we summarize selected repayment outcomes. 34% of people in the sample paid perfectly
on time every installment of their loans, however, on average, people paid 62% of their
installments on time. The repayment behavior differs substantially between borrowers, on
average customers pay 8 days late every month however some customers never paid late while
others were consistently late in all their payments.

Finally, Panel C in Table 1 displays the distribution of customers between different treatments
(and the control group) and different branches. Consistent with the randomization design, the
two treatments with monetary incentives for repayment had approximately 22% of the customers
(245 and 241 for Cash Back and Future Interest Rate Reduction respectively). A larger fraction
of borrowers, 34% (or 383 borrowers) were assigned to the SMS treatment. The reminding 22%
of customers belong to the control group. The distribution between different braches aims to
capture a large set of different branch types within the bank. Among other things we selected
branches that had significant banking activity of MCC loans. Kajjansi, Kyengera and Nakawa
are urban branches located in different neighborhoods around Kampala and together accounted
for 55% of the loans, while Kiboga and Mityana, located in rural communities 2.5 and 1.5 hours
drive away from Kampala respectively, accounted for 45% of the sample.

Random Assignment: The random assignment was successful in creating groups that are
comparable on all observable dimensions at baseline. In Table 2 we present the means for loan
and customer characteristics summarized in Table 1 for each one of the treatment (and control)
groups in columns (1) to (4). Columns (5) to (7) show the p-values for the difference in means (t-
test) and the difference in proportions tests. We cannot reject the null hypothesis of equality in
any of the cases when we compare each of the treatment groups with the control group with a
confidence level of 99%. However, when comparing different treatment groups we get some
statistically significant differences in underlying characteristics. Although this may happen by
chance when running several statistical tests it is worth noticing that loans assigned to the Cash


                                                                                               12
Back group are smaller than those assigned to the Future Interest Rate Reduction group. The
difference is statistically significant at the 5% significance level. The same is true for household
size; the difference between the group assigned to Future interest rate reduction and SMS
reminder is significant at the same level.

   5. Treatment Effects

We estimate the effects of each of the treatments compared to the control group on different
proxies for repayment outcomes. We select three outcome proxies that capture different
dimensions of the borrower’s repayment behavior. “Perfect Repayment” is a dummy variable
which equals one if the customer paid on time in every single installment and zero otherwise.
Monetary incentives provided in treatment groups A and B rely on a perfect payment profile.
The second dependent variable we include is “Percentage of installments paid on time”. This
variable provides a more continue snapshot of a borrower’s attempt of staying on time with their
payments. Even if a borrower in the end did not have a perfect payment record and thus would
not have received the reward, it shows us whether a borrower made an attempt of trying to do the
right thing, even if they had to miss a few payments in the end. Finally, we look at the “Average
number of days late per installment, which provides the most detailed image of a borrower’s
payment behavior. It tells us whether some customers were completely oblivious to their
payment dates while others only fall late by a small margin.

We now estimate the impact of the three different treatments on these proxies for repayment
outcomes. The general form of the equation is:

                                                                                        (1)

Where Cash Back is a dummy that equals 1 for borrowers assigned to the cash back treatment
and zero for all others, similarly for Future Interest Reduction and SMS treatments. In some
specifications we control for loan characteristics ( ) including loan size and loan series and for
the most complete ones we also add controls for borrower characteristics ( ) like gender, age,
and household and business characteristics.

The variables of interest are a set of dummy variables for each of treatment groups. We also
include branch fixed effects in all estimations to account for differences in management and


                                                                                                 13
customer types across braches which may affect repayment. These include for example the
ability of bank staff to induce good repayment practices, the quality of service at the branch, and
the location or accessibility of the branch (including being urban or rural branch). We also
include month of disbursement fixed effects. Since the project was implemented from April to
August, we want to account for any changes in the economy that may impact loan repayment in
the period.

In Table 3 we show the results from the main regressions. Columns 1 to 4 show results from a
probit model with “perfect repayment” as the dependent variable. In column 1 we present results
for the basic model that only includes treatment dummies as well as a set of branch and
disbursement month fixed effects. The coefficients for all three treatment dummies are positive
and statistically significant. The coefficients for the Cash back, Future Interest Reduction and
SMS reminders incentives are 0.262, 0.225, and 0.274, respectively. The interpretation of these
magnitudes imply that customers assigned to Cash back incentives had a probability of repaying
perfectly that is 8.56 percentage points higher than customers in the control group. Customers
assigned to Future reduced interest rate were 7.27 percentage points more likely to pay every
installment on time than those in the control group, while interestingly, those without any
monetary incentives but receiving SMS reminders had a probability of perfect repayment 9
points higher than the control group7. While each of the treatment groups has significantly better
repayment behavior than the control group, we do not find a statistically significant difference
between the different treatment groups. This means that we cannot rule out that the effect of the
treatments is of similar magnitude. Columns 2 and 3 replicate the same estimation results but
including loan characteristics and loan plus personal and business characteristics respectively.
The impact of the treatment is robust to the inclusion of different sets of control variables.
Coefficients for the treatment dummies across specifications are very similar and all in the range
of 0.2 and 0.3 and statistically significant at the 5% or 10% significance level. The number of
observations drops from 1121 to 1117 in column 2 and to 855 in column 3 because of the
availability of covariates. In column 4 we reproduce the same regression as in column 2 but we
drop the sample size to that used in the specification with the full set of control variables (as in
column 3) in order to show that the results are not driven by changes in sample size. In fact

7
  Wald chi‐squared tests for equality of coefficients for the three different treatments indicate that we cannot
reject the null hypothesis of the coefficients being equal to each other.

                                                                                                                   14
coefficients are very similar, for Cash Back, Future Interest Reduction and SMS treatment they
are 0.240, 0.316 and 0.254 respectively. The same robustness checks were run for all the other
outcome variables and specifications, and the results are unchanged.

In columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 we now repeat the specification from columns (1) and (2) but
using the percentage of installments paid on time as the dependent variable. The Cash Back
incentive is the only one that has a significant effect on repayment and only when not including
personal and business characteristics in the regression. People in the Cash Back treatment group
had a percentage of installments paid on time 6 percentage points higher than customers in the
control group, people in the Future Interest Reduction and the SMS treatments had a percentage
of timely-paid installments that were about 4 percentage points higher that the control group, but
the difference was not statistically significant. Finally, columns 7 and 8 show results when using
the average days late per installment as a dependent variable. Customers assigned to the Cash
Back incentive reduced by about 2 days their average lateness in repayment, a 22% reduction on
average. The effects for the other treatments were between 0.7 and 1.1 reductions in days late,
although not statistically significant at conventional levels.

   5.1.Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

It is interesting to note that in particular the size of the loan and the loan series variables when
included in the regressions showed significant effects on repayment outcomes. Bigger loans
seem to be performing worse than smaller loans although more experienced customers (with
higher loan series) seem to repay better than less experienced ones. To further explore the
interaction between the treatment effects and loan and customer characteristics, we turn to
examine heterogeneous treatment effects. We conjecture that loan size could be an important
covariate since it might be a proxy for the success of the business or the ambitions of the
founder. In turn this could affect their willingness to respond to the different treatments, if they
are already managing the business better than other firms. Similarly, we pick the series of the
loan as a proxy for the experience of the borrower. It is possible that people who are starting
their banking experience are more prone to respond to incentives, while more experienced
customers may be already set in their ways and thus may be difficult to influence. In Tables 4 to
7 we explore these hypotheses further focusing on the more complete specifications that control
for loan, personal and business observable characteristics.

                                                                                                 15
In Table 4 we divided our sample in two groups according to loan size. Customers with median
loan size and below (less than 1 Million UGX or $450) are part of the “small” sample.
Customers with bigger than median loans, are classified as “big”. The results show that the
effects of the incentives on repayment were only significant for customers with relatively small
loans. In general, the size of the coefficients for the incentives is higher and they are more
significant for the sample of small loans relative to the whole sample. For example, the impact of
the Cash Back incentive on the amount of days late improves by more than one day (the
coefficient goes from -1.67 to -2.84, and it is 0.31 and not statistically significant for the bigger
loans, see columns 5 and 6). The Cash Back incentive resulted in borrowers with a percentage of
timely-paid installments 10 percentage points higher than similar customers in the control group
(columns 3 and 4). It is interesting to note that for the probability of perfect repayment (columns
1 and 2) the significance of the Reduced Future Interest incentive is exclusively for bigger loans,
the coefficient is 0.384 –probably customers who expect to get bigger loans in the future are
particularly interested on receiving preferential rates going forward-, while the SMS Reminders
seem to only work on customers with smaller loans. The effective results for the SMS reminders
on improving the probability of perfect repayment seem to be driven by customers with smaller
loans. The coefficient is more than 100 times as the coefficient for bigger loans.

In Table 5 we now repeat the same analysis by dividing the sample into customer’s with and
without experience with the MCC loan. The average and median customer is in the second loan
series, and the effectiveness of the incentives seems to be a feature of customers with relatively
little experience (loan series 1 and 2). Although the differences are not as big as between
customers with small and big loans, it is clear that the size of the coefficients and the significance
levels of all treatment dummies are higher for less experienced borrowers. In columns 1 and 2
for the probability of perfect repayment the coefficients for the treatment dummies are very
similar and range between 0.31 and 0.34 all significant at the 5% significance level for the
inexperienced customers, while for the experienced customers coefficients range between 0.21
and 0.27 and are not statistically significant at standard levels. In columns 3 to 6 we see that only
the Cash Back incentive has significant effects on improving the percentage of installments paid
on time and reducing the number of days late, both for inexperienced customers (coefficients are
0.07 and -2 respectively). It is important to note that the sample size for the more experienced
customers is small. In Table 6 we examine heterogeneous effects for customers dividing the

                                                                                                   16
sample by age. The younger customers in columns 1, 3 and 5 are 30 years old or younger (25%
percentile) and the older customers in columns 2, 4 and 6 are older than the average (36 years
old). We see that in general for this reduced sample sizes significance of the incentives
coefficients drops. However, Table 6 allows us to identify a very significant difference on the
impact of the SMS reminders on younger customers. The coefficient for the perfect repayment
outcome is five times bigger than for older customers (0.697 versus 0.137 in columns 1 and 2
respectively), and is highly significant.8

To further analyze the profile of the customer with the most sensitivity to the incentives we
worked on dividing the sample in new subsamples with all possible combinations of loan size,
loan experience and age. For that purpose we created 4 different subgroups for each of three
categories: size and age, size and experience and age and experience9. Using our three main
dependent variables, this resulted in 36 regressions that allowed us to identify the group of
younger customers with relatively small loans as the driver of the main results. We report a
simplified version of the results in Table 7 where the odd columns show the regressions for the
sample of younger customers with small loans and the even columns put together the samples of
younger customers with big loans and older customers with small and big loans. The coefficients
for the impact on the probability of paying perfectly of Cash Back and SMS incentives are about
3 times bigger than for the whole sample and are highly significant. The incentives actually
reduced the average amount of days late by 4 days for the younger customers with small loans
(compared to two days for the whole sample), while the effects were small and insignificant for
the rest.

    6. Conclusions

The results of this study suggest that financial incentives in the form of either a cash back
promise or a lower interest rate for the next loan cycle had a similar impact in terms of
magnitude on customer repayment behavior than an SMS reminder service prior to each payment
due date. Customers who received one of these treatments relative to the control group, had on
average an 8% increase in the probability of paying all their installments on time and the average

8
  In fact, this is the only case for the different heterogeneous effects that we run in which a Wald test of equality of
coefficients in seemly unrelated estimations allow us to reject the null hypothesis.
9
  For example, for age and size of the loan we had 4 groups: young and small, young and big, older and small, older
and big

                                                                                                                     17
days late drop by 2 days per month. Interestingly the SMS treatment which is almost costless for
the bank to implement has the same economic effect on late payments as a 25% reduction in the
monthly interest rate. In addition we see some heterogeneity in the treatment impact, in particular
less experienced borrowers and those with smaller loans respond more strongly to the treatments,
especially the Cash Back and SMS treatments. If more experienced borrowers are already set in
their ways, they might find it more difficult to change their behavior in response to new
incentives. While in contrast more recent borrowers are still in the process of setting up a
payment routine. Therefore, the estimated treatment incentives could be explained by newer
borrowers still setting up their payment routines and thus might be more successful in helping
them shape timely repayment routines. In fact, we find the strongest effects of the incentives on
younger customers with relatively small loans.

We can also shed some light on the underlying behavior of borrowers. A large fraction of
borrowers seem to pay late not for strategic reasons but because they previously seem to be
unable to keep track of their payment schedules, without the help of simple reminders. This
supports the idea that small businesses in developing countries suffer from lack of financial
management which affects their ability to make payments on time. But this insight has broader
implications for the design of credit products by financial institutions. The repayment behavior
of a borrower is not only shaped by the financial dimensions of the credit, such as interest rate,
late fees etc., but is also driven by what appears to be simple product details such as the ease
with which the borrower can pay the loan, for example whether he remembers the payment due
date. Any implementation which facilitates the payment for borrowers seems to have substantial
implications for loan payment behavior and with it the assessment of credit risk. In fact, this
simple implementation change is equivalent to an incentive of a 25% lower interest rate.

These findings suggest that we need to widen our concept of credit risk beyond strategic and
economic default, and take into account the role of channel factors for loan repayment. The exact
structure and channels through which borrowers pay their loan, may themselves have an impact
on the credit risk of the borrower. Much more has to be done to understand the exact form of
these channel factors, but our results suggest that the magnitude of these effects might be
economically very significant. For example, in future work it would be very interesting to build
on the heterogeneous treatment effects we found in this study and explore whether the different


                                                                                                18
treatments can be optimally targeted to different subgroups of the borrower population. Another
interesting extension would be to understand whether there are positive interaction effects
between the pecuniary and non-pecuniary treatments such as SMS reminders.




                                                                                            19
References

Banerjee, A. and Duflo, E. (2004). "Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints
Using a Directed Lending Program." M.I.T. Working Paper.

Bertrand, M., Karlan, D., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., Zinman, J. (2010). “What's Advertising
Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment”. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics (2010) 125(1): 263-306.

Cole, S. (2009). "Financial Development, Bank Ownership, and Growth. Or, Does Quantity
Imply Quality?" The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1 (February 2009): 33-51.

Dale, A. and Strauss, A. (2009). “Don’t Forget to Vote: Text Message Reminders as a
Mobilization Tool”. American Journal of Political Science. Vol. 53, #4. October, 2009.

De Mel, S., McKenzie, D., and Woodruff, C. (2008). “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises:
Evidence from a Field Experiment”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1329-1372.

Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., and Shleifer, A. (2007). “Private Credit in 129 Countries”, Journal of
Financial Economics 84, 299.329.

Drexler, A., Fischer, G. and Schoar, A. (2010). “Keeping it Simple: Financial Literacy and Rules
of Thumb”. Mimeo.

Fischer, G. (2010), Contract Structure, Risk Sharing and Investment Choice,” Mimeo.

Hertzberg, A., Liberti, J and Paravisni, D. (2010). “Public Information and Coordination:
Evidence from a Credit Registry Expansion,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming

Kaplan, W. (2006). “Can the Ubiquitous Power of Mobile Phone be used to Improve Health
Outcomes in Developing Countries?”. Globalization and Health, 2006, 2:9

Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan, S., and Zinman, J. (2010) “Getting on the Top of
Mind: How Reminders Increase Savings,” NBER Working Papers 16205, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.




                                                                                             20
Karlan, D. and Morduch, J. (2010). “Access to Finance”, in Handbook of Development
Economics, Vol 5. Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig (Eds.), North-Holland

Karlan, D. and Zinman, J. (2010) “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply
Decisions To Estimate the Impacts”. Review of Financial Studies (2010) 23 (1): 433-464.

Karlan and Zinman (2011) “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries
with a Consumer Credit Field Experiment,” forthcoming, Econometrica

Kast, F., Meier, S., and Pomeranz, D. (2010). “Under-Savers Anonymous: Evidence on Self-
Help Groups and Peer Pressure as Savings Commitment Device”. Working Paper (2010)

Rajan, R., and Zingales, L. (1998), “Financial dependence and growth”, American Economic
Review, 88: 559–586.

Udry, C.and Anagol, S. (2006). “The Return to Capital in Ghana.” American Economic Review,
96(2): 388–393.




                                                                                          21
                                                                                 Annex

                                                                  Table A1. Description of Variables



             Variable                                                 Description                                                         Source

Age                         Age of customer (in years)                                                               Loan Application/ Appraisal
Average Days Late           Average number of days late per installment                                              Calculated from Accounts information
Business Owner              Customer owns the business location or premises                                          Loan Application/ Appraisal
Cash Back                   (% of) Customer randomly assigned to Cash Back Incentive                                 Project Implementation
Control                     (% of) Customer randomly assigned to Control group                                       Project Implementation
Female                      (% of) Customer is female                                                                Loan Application/ Appraisal
Future Interest Reduction   (% of) Customer randomily assigned to Reduced Future Interest Rate Incentive             Project Implementation
Homeowner                   Customer own his/her home                                                                Loan Application/ Appraisal
Household Size              Number of people living in the household                                                 Loan Application/ Appraisal
Installments Paid on Time   Percentage of installments paid on time                                                  Calculated from Accounts information
Kajjansi                    (% of) Customer banks at Kajjansi (urban) branch                                         Project Implementation
Kiboga                      (% of) Customer banks at Kiboga (rural) branch                                           Project Implementation
Kyengera                    (% of) Customer banks at Kyengera (urban) branch                                         Project Implementation
Loan Series                 Number of MCC loans the customer has had with the bank                                   Loan Application/ Appraisal
Loan Size                   Loan amount in UGX                                                                       Project Implementation
Married                     (% of) Customer is married or live with partner                                          Loan Application/ Appraisal
Mityana                     (% of) Customer banks at Mityana (rural) branch                                          Project Implementation
Nakawa                      (% of) Customer banks at Nakawa (urban) branch                                           Project Implementation
Perfect Repayment           (% of) Customer repay loans on time for every installment                                Calculated from Accounts information
Repayment Capacity          Montly surpluss of the business discounting household expenses                           Loan Application/ Appraisal
SMS Reminders               (% of) Customer randomily assigned to SMS Reminder Incentive                             Project Implementation
Term                        Term of the loan (in months)                                                             Project Implementation
Year Business Created       Year of business creation, businesses have to be at least one year old to access loans   Loan Application/ Appraisal
                                       Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
This table presents some descriptive statistics for the main variables included in the analysis. Panel A include
loan and customer characteristics, Panel B repayment outcomes, and Panel C the distribution of customers
between experimental groups and branches. N is the number of available observations. Detailed descriptions
of variables can be found in Annex Table A1



                                                                                    Standard
                                                 Mean              Median           Deviation             N

Panel A: Loan and Customer Characteristics

Loan Size (UGX)                                1,786,084         1,000,000          2,296,619           1121
Loan Size (USD)                                   804               450               1,033             1121
Term                                              7.94               7                  2.26            1121
Loan Series                                       1.98               2                  1.29            1117
Female                                           34.88%                               47.68%            1121
Married                                          77.61%                               41.70%            1121
Age                                               38.14               36               10.10            992
Household Size                                    4.86                5                 1.93            1013
Homeowner                                        58.34%                               49.32%            1121
Business Owner                                   35.95%                               48.01%            1121
Year Business Created                           2000.91             2002                4.83            934
Repayment Capacitiy (UGX)                       685,571           435,700            912,699            1024
Repayment Capacitiy (USD)                         309               196                411              1024

Panel B: Repayment Outcomes

Perfect Repayment                               33.81%                                47.33%            1121
Installments Paid on Time                       62.36%                0.7             37.09%            1121
Average Days Late                                8.25                3.33              9.95             1121

Panel C: Distribution of Treatments and Branches
Treatment Groups
Cash Back                                 22.66%                                      41.88%            254
Future Interest Reduction                 21.50%                                      41.10%            241
SMS Reminders                             34.17%                                      47.45%            383
Control                                   21.68%                                      41.22%            243

Branches
Kajjansi                                        16.50%                                37.14%            185
Kiboga                                          29.79%                                45.76%            334
Kyengera                                        16.24%                                36.89%            182
Mityana                                         14.72%                                35.45%            165
Nakawa                                          22.75%                                41.94%            255
                                                               Table 2. Differences Across Groups
This table presents means and proportions for the main variables included in the analysis for each of the experimental groups (Columns 2 to 4) and for the control
group. The description of the variables can be found in Annex Table A1. Columns 5 to 7 include the p‐value associated to the t‐test and the p‐test for the difference
in means and proportions respectively between each of the treatment groups and the control group.



                                                                   Future Interest                             Test (1)‐(2)= 0 Test (1)‐(3)= 0 P‐ Test (1)‐(4)= 0
                                        Control      Cash Back                          SMS Reminder
                                                                     Reduction                                    P‐Value           Value            P‐Value
                                           (1)           (2)             (3)                   (4)                   (5)              (6)               (7)
Means
Loan Size (UGX)                        1,841,358 1,565,157            2,098,340           1,701,044                 0.1283             0.3252             0.4087
Term                                       7.98      7.79                 8.17                7.89                  0.3402             0.3574             0.6095
Loan Series                                1.91      1.99                 2.08                1.96                  0.4686             0.1441             0.6069
Age                                       38.23     38.35                38.91               37.47                  0.8990             0.4862             0.3887
Houshold Size                             4.81      4.93                 5.07                4.73                   0.5165             0.1602             0.6555
Year Business Created                   2001.02   2000.71              2000.63             2001.16                  0.5294             0.4553             0.7160
Log Repayment Capacity                    13.09     13.07                13.13               13.04                  0.7847             0.6435             0.4289

Proportions
Female                                   33.33%       33.07%            36.10%              36.29%                  0.9505             0.5227             0.4498
Married                                  79.84%       77.56%            76.76%              76.76%                  0.5357             0.4123             0.3661
Home owner                               57.61%       55.51%            60.17%              59.53%                  0.6366             0.5682             0.6349
Business owner                           34.16%       39.37%            35.68%              34.99%                  0.2283             0.7244             0.8315
                                                 Table 3. Impact of Incentives on Repayment Behavior


This table reports regression results of the impact of different incentives on repayment behavior. We use three different outcome measures for repayment
behavior. Perfect Repayment is a dummy variable that indicates a person who paid every installment on time, we also use the percentage of installments paid on
time and the average number of days late per installment. Independent variables are described in Annex Table A1. Results are shown for different specifications,
one basic model and models including loan charateristics and person and business characteristics respectively. The analysis uses repayment data built from the
bank IT records and data entered from loan application forms and includes only loans that had their final installment on or before June 2009 and for customers
with no concurent loans at the bank. Regressions (1)‐(4) are estimated using Probit, and all others using OLS, all include branch and time of disbursement fixed
effects. Robust Standard Errors are in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance for 10%, 5% and 1% significance levels, respectively.



                                                                                                   Percentage of installments      Average number of days late
                                                  Perfect Repayment (Probit)                             paid on time                    per installment
                                        (1)            (2)         (3)                (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)            (8)

Cash Back                            0.262**         0.242**          0.261*        0.240*         0.0625**           0.0591         ‐1.780**       ‐1.671*
                                     (0.119)          (0.121)        (0.140)        (0.139)         (0.0313)        (0.0361)          (0.866)        (0.992)
Future Interest Reduction            0.225*           0.218*         0.331**       0.316**           0.0340           0.0412           ‐0.865         ‐0.715
                                     (0.121)          (0.124)        (0.140)        (0.140)         (0.0329)        (0.0372)          (0.901)        (1.020)
SMS Reminders                        0.274**         0.261**         0.262**       0.254**           0.0465           0.0375           ‐1.150         ‐1.063
                                     (0.110)          (0.111)        (0.130)        (0.129)         (0.0296)        (0.0341)          (0.812)        (0.940)
Log Loan Size                                       ‐0.159***       ‐0.00324      ‐0.171***       ‐0.0657***         0.00143        1.829***         ‐0.0981
                                                     (0.0516)        (0.106)       (0.0595)         (0.0140)        (0.0275)          (0.382)        (0.750)
Loan Series                                         0.214***       0.258***       0.263***        0.0574***       0.0670***         ‐1.254***      ‐1.324***
                                                     (0.0326)       (0.0409)       (0.0393)        (0.00885)       (0.00939)          (0.225)        (0.257)
Female                                                                 0.101                                          0.0314                          ‐1.099
                                                                     (0.113)                                        (0.0300)                         (0.809)
Married                                                              0.0453                                         ‐0.00826                          0.353
                                                                     (0.133)                                        (0.0360)                         (0.961)
Age                                                                ‐0.00326                                        ‐0.000895                         0.0281
                                                                   (0.00534)                                       (0.00140)                        (0.0379)
Household Size                                                       ‐0.0341                                        ‐0.00613                           0.114
                                                                    (0.0310)                                       (0.00776)                         (0.208)
Homeowner                                                             0.0669                                          0.0299                          ‐0.820
                                                                     (0.111)                                        (0.0285)                         (0.785)
Year Business Created                                                ‐0.0157                                       ‐0.00508*                         0.126*
                                                                    (0.0103)                                       (0.00260)                        (0.0702)
Business Owner                                                       0.0761                                        ‐0.000270                          0.544
                                                                    (0.0991)                                        (0.0266)                         (0.735)
Log Repayment Capacitiy                                              ‐0.233*                                      ‐0.0884***                        2.285**
                                                                     (0.125)                                        (0.0327)                         (0.903)
Constant                            ‐0.760***        1.200*           33.47          1.157          1.337***         11.77**         ‐12.87**       ‐269.9*
                                      (0.164)        (0.707)         (20.78)        (0.826)          (0.196)         (5.256)          (5.374)        (142.0)

Observations                           1121           1117            855            855              1117            855             1117            855
R‐squared                                                                                             0.092          0.113            0.070          0.078
                            Table 4. Impact of Incentives on Repayment Behavior by Loan Size


This table reports regression results of the impact of different incentives on repayment behavior. We use three different outcome
measures for repayment behavior. Perfect Repayment is a dummy variable that indicates a person who paid every installment on
time, we also use the percentage of installments paid on time and the average number of days late per installment. Independent
variables are described in Annex Table A1. Results are shown for different samples: customers with small loans under or equal to
USD450 (UGX1,000,000) and for customers with big loans higher than USD450 (UGX1,000,000). The analysis uses repayment data
built from the bank IT records and data entered from loan application forms and includes only loans that had their final installment on
or before June 2009 and for customers with no concurent loans at the bank. Regressions (1) and (2) are estimated using Probit, and
all others using OLS, all include branch and time of disbursement fixed effects. Robust Standard Errors are in parentheses. *, ** and
*** indicate statistical significance for 10%, 5% and 1% significance levels, respectively


                                        Perfect Repayment            Percentage of installments          Average number of days
                                             (Probit)                      paid on time                    late per installment
Loan Size is:                          Small            Big             Small             Big               Small            Big
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)                (5)             (6)

Cash Back                             0.380**          0.0364         0.0997**         ‐0.00415           ‐2.843**          0.308
                                       (0.180)        (0.230)          (0.0455)        (0.0600)            (1.259)         (1.666)
Future Interest Reduction               0.287          0.384*           0.0589           0.0212            ‐1.055          ‐0.109
                                       (0.189)        (0.214)          (0.0512)        (0.0551)            (1.426)         (1.514)
SMS Reminders                         0.384**        0.00363             0.0349          0.0379            ‐0.802          ‐1.351
                                       (0.167)        (0.213)          (0.0452)        (0.0519)            (1.236)         (1.454)
Loan Series                          0.300***        0.218***         0.0639***       0.0633***          ‐1.194***       ‐1.349***
                                      (0.0597)       (0.0588)          (0.0144)        (0.0129)            (0.384)         (0.349)
Female                                 ‐0.127        0.519***           0.00107         0.0866*            ‐0.669          ‐1.976
                                       (0.141)        (0.186)          (0.0386)        (0.0461)            (1.045)         (1.224)
Married                               ‐0.0256           0.220          ‐0.00650         ‐0.0203             0.193           0.471
                                       (0.174)        (0.224)          (0.0496)        (0.0522)            (1.295)         (1.432)
Age                                  0.000199        ‐0.00887         ‐3.70e‐05        ‐0.00261           0.00796          0.0715
                                     (0.00689)      (0.00909)         (0.00191)       (0.00212)           (0.0523)        (0.0575)
Household Size                        ‐0.0644       0.000720           ‐0.00712         0.00251            0.0909          0.0297
                                      (0.0415)       (0.0475)          (0.0106)        (0.0114)            (0.282)         (0.313)
Homeowner                              0.0639          0.0139            0.0152          0.0258            ‐0.867          ‐0.334
                                       (0.147)        (0.180)          (0.0387)        (0.0451)            (1.035)         (1.302)
Year Busniess Created                 ‐0.0146         ‐0.0156          ‐0.00524        ‐0.00445             0.127           0.136
                                      (0.0139)       (0.0169)         (0.00365)       (0.00394)            (0.102)         (0.103)
Business Owner                         0.0824           0.118          ‐0.00190        ‐0.00467             0.370           0.949
                                       (0.128)        (0.165)          (0.0353)        (0.0423)            (0.964)         (1.173)
Log Repayment Capacitiy               0.00194       ‐0.469***           ‐0.0351       ‐0.147***             1.301        3.410***
                                       (0.160)        (0.131)          (0.0437)        (0.0316)            (1.169)         (0.871)
Constant                                28.16           36.58             11.42          11.44             ‐259.3          ‐309.9
                                       (28.29)        (34.15)           (7.433)         (7.960)            (207.4)         (208.8)

Observations                            498             357              498              357                498             357
R‐squared                                                               0.083            0.198              0.061           0.135
                  Table 5. Impact of Incentives on Repayment Behavior by Experience with loans at the bank

This table reports regression results of the impact of different incentives on repayment behavior. We use three different outcome
measures for repayment behavior. Perfect Repayment is a dummy variable that indicates a person who paid every installment on time, we
also use the percentage of installments paid on time and the average number of days late per installment. Independent variables are
described in Annex Table A1. Results are shown for different samples: customers without much previous experience with loans at the bank
(in their first or second loan series), and more experienced customers that are on their third or higher loan. The analysis uses repayment
data built from the bank IT records and data entered from loan application forms and includes only loans that had their final installment on
or before June 2009 and for customers with no concurent loans at the bank. Regressions (1) and (2) are estimated using Probit, and all
others using OLS, all include branch and time of disbursement fixed effects. Robust Standard Errors are in parentheses. *, ** and ***
indicate statistical significance for 10%, 5% and 1% significance levels, respectively

                                                                        Percentage of installments         Average number of days late
                                    Perfect Repayment (Probit)                paid on time                       per installment
Loan Series is:                     Inexperieced     Experienced        Inexperieced     Experienced        Inexperieced     Experienced
                                         (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)                 (5)             (6)

Cash Back                               0.341**          0.242             0.0705*          0.0730             ‐1.998*           ‐1.770
                                        (0.162)         (0.281)           (0.0426)         (0.0718)            (1.183)          (1.862)
Future Interest Reduction               0.355**          0.272             0.0309           0.0916              ‐0.386           ‐2.222
                                        (0.160)         (0.287)           (0.0441)         (0.0722)            (1.215)          (1.915)
SMS Reminders                           0.306**          0.212             0.0288           0.0966              ‐0.839           ‐2.480
                                        (0.145)         (0.276)           (0.0394)         (0.0732)            (1.090)          (1.989)
Log Loan Size                           0.0382           0.161            ‐0.00721          0.0811*              0.454         ‐2.664**
                                        (0.129)         (0.205)           (0.0342)         (0.0480)            (0.900)          (1.305)
Female                                  0.0534           0.418*            0.0257           0.0762              ‐0.883           ‐2.274
                                        (0.129)         (0.252)           (0.0361)         (0.0643)            (0.960)          (1.744)
Married                                  0.145           ‐0.167           0.00929           ‐0.0500             ‐0.387            2.216
                                        (0.154)         (0.302)           (0.0435)         (0.0667)            (1.161)          (1.644)
Age                                    ‐0.00230        ‐0.00212          ‐0.000671        ‐0.000234            0.0275           0.0129
                                      (0.00634)        (0.0114)          (0.00173)        (0.00255)           (0.0463)         (0.0723)
Household Size                        ‐7.84e‐05         ‐0.0786           ‐0.00203          ‐0.0100           0.00561             0.268
                                       (0.0372)        (0.0525)           (0.0101)         (0.0123)            (0.270)          (0.328)
Homeowner                                0.117         ‐0.00821            0.0535           ‐0.0302             ‐1.427            0.418
                                        (0.131)         (0.218)           (0.0353)         (0.0536)            (0.973)          (1.410)
Year Busniess Created                   ‐0.0200         ‐0.0224          ‐0.00692*        ‐0.00609*            0.167*             0.146
                                       (0.0123)        (0.0184)          (0.00366)        (0.00364)           (0.0988)         (0.0966)
Business Owner                          0.0390          ‐0.0390            ‐0.0151          ‐0.0121              0.895            0.555
                                        (0.115)         (0.206)           (0.0321)         (0.0517)            (0.873)          (1.461)
Log Repayment Capacitiy                ‐0.364**         ‐0.0152          ‐0.0963**         ‐0.0837*            2.040*          3.233**
                                        (0.156)         (0.231)           (0.0423)         (0.0482)            (1.133)          (1.309)
Constant                                 43.30*          42.69            15.75**           12.75*             ‐358.1*          ‐289.5
                                        (24.88)         (37.13)            (7.404)          (7.316)            (200.1)          (193.8)

Observations                             658              197                658              197                658              197
R‐squared                                                                   0.068            0.119              0.053            0.119
                                  Table 6. Impact of Incentives on Repayment Behavior by Age


This table reports regression results of the impact of different incentives on repayment behavior. We use three different outcome measures
for repayment behavior. Perfect Repayment is a dummy variable that indicates a person who paid every installment on time, we also use
the percentage of installments paid on time and the average number of days late per installment. Independent variables are described in
Annex Table A1. Results are shown for different samples: young customers who are 30 or younger, and older customers who are older than
36. The analysis uses repayment data built from the bank IT records and data entered from loan application forms and includes only loans
that had their final installment on or before June 2009 and for customers with no concurent loans at the bank. Regressions (1) and (2) are
estimated using Probit, and all others using OLS, all include branch and time of disbursement fixed effects. Robust Standard Errors are in
parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance for 10%, 5% and 1% significance levels, respectively


                                                                       Percentage of installments         Average number of days late
                                    Perfect Repayment (Probit)               paid on time                       per installment
Age is:                               Younger           Older            Younger           Older             Younger           Older
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)

Cash Back                                0.421           0.183            0.0623            0.0544            ‐1.639          ‐1.629
                                       (0.280)         (0.201)           (0.0690)         (0.0533)            (1.873)         (1.491)
Future Interest Reduction               0.495*           0.319            0.0463            0.0721            ‐1.497          ‐1.789
                                       (0.284)         (0.197)           (0.0728)         (0.0527)            (1.969)         (1.417)
SMS Reminders                         0.697***           0.137            0.0889            0.0269            ‐2.742          ‐0.673
                                       (0.261)         (0.185)           (0.0665)         (0.0494)            (1.736)         (1.374)
Log Loan Size                            0.156          0.0183            0.0557           ‐0.0116            ‐1.438           0.578
                                       (0.204)         (0.148)           (0.0501)         (0.0395)            (1.247)         (1.117)
Loan Series                           0.532***        0.218***          0.0880***        0.0638***          ‐1.679***       ‐1.380***
                                       (0.122)        (0.0521)           (0.0253)         (0.0133)            (0.645)         (0.380)
Female                                  ‐0.254           0.254           0.00984           0.0831*            ‐0.242         ‐2.553**
                                       (0.220)         (0.175)           (0.0579)         (0.0456)            (1.566)         (1.217)
Married                                  0.118           0.141           ‐0.0209            0.0326             0.435          ‐0.558
                                       (0.249)         (0.211)           (0.0727)         (0.0529)            (2.046)         (1.342)
Household Size                         ‐0.128*         ‐0.0346           ‐0.0180          ‐0.00736             0.306           0.123
                                      (0.0749)        (0.0395)           (0.0183)        (0.00992)            (0.460)         (0.267)
Homeowner                               ‐0.192           0.205           ‐0.0265            0.0497             1.203          ‐1.344
                                       (0.246)         (0.163)           (0.0562)         (0.0399)            (1.501)         (1.119)
Year Busniess Created                  ‐0.0279        ‐0.0209*           ‐0.0105          ‐0.00466             0.303          0.0961
                                      (0.0321)        (0.0120)          (0.00799)        (0.00312)            (0.213)        (0.0833)
Business Owner                           0.287        0.00518             0.0418          ‐0.00150            ‐1.104           0.473
                                       (0.232)         (0.137)           (0.0613)         (0.0363)            (1.596)         (0.990)
Log Repayment Capacitiy                 ‐0.321          ‐0.262            ‐0.100           ‐0.0673            2.768*           1.638
                                       (0.251)         (0.168)           (0.0643)         (0.0445)            (1.640)         (1.268)
Constant                                56.56           43.59*             21.99            10.74*            ‐611.6          ‐207.5
                                       (64.33)         (24.05)            (16.15)          (6.284)            (430.9)         (168.1)

Observations                             222             409                222             409                222              409
R‐squared                                                                  0.112           0.131              0.080            0.112
                                  Table 7. Impact of Incentives on Repayment Behavior by Loan Size and Age

This table reports regression results of the impact of different incentives on repayment behavior. We use three different outcome measures for repayment
behavior. Perfect Repayment is a dummy variable that indicates a person who paid every installment on time, we also use the percentage of installments
paid on time and the average number of days late per installment. Independent variables are described in Annex Table A1. Results are shown for different
samples: Small & Younger are young customers who are 30 or younger with small loans under or equal to USD450 (UGX1,000,000), and "Other" is the
combination of young customers with bigger that USD 450 loans, and older customers (older than 36) with eaither small or big loans. The analysis uses
repayment data built from the bank IT records and data entered from loan application forms and includes only loans that had their final installment on or
before June 2009 and for customers with no concurent loans at the bank. Regressions (1) and (2) are estimated using Probit, and all others using OLS, all
include branch and time of disbursement fixed effects. Robust Standard Errors are in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance for 10%, 5%
and 1% significance levels respectively

                                                                            Percentage of installments paid on         Average number of days late per
                                       Perfect Repayment (Probit)                          time                                 installment
                                    Small & Younger          Other           Small & Younger           Other           Small & Younger          Other
                                           (1)                (2)                   (3)                 (4)                   (5)                (6)

Cash Back                                0.765**               0.140              0.170**               0.0246             ‐4.670**              ‐0.785
                                         (0.354)             (0.186)             (0.0858)             (0.0488)              (2.270)             (1.343)
Future Interest Reduction                  0.503              0.334*               0.124                0.0511              ‐4.216*              ‐1.109
                                         (0.361)             (0.183)             (0.0906)             (0.0484)              (2.402)             (1.299)
SMS Reminders                           0.939***               0.167                0.123               0.0302              ‐4.112*              ‐0.794
                                         (0.325)             (0.171)             (0.0851)             (0.0449)              (2.150)             (1.240)
Loan Series                             0.539***            0.224***             0.0737**            0.0617***               ‐1.116           ‐1.310***
                                         (0.148)            (0.0507)             (0.0283)             (0.0127)              (0.695)             (0.353)
Female                                    ‐0.334              0.177              ‐0.00545              0.0556                ‐0.161             ‐1.727*
                                         (0.276)             (0.155)             (0.0769)             (0.0390)              (2.033)             (1.031)
Married                                  0.634*               0.0143               0.0381              ‐0.0148               ‐1.171              0.637
                                         (0.356)             (0.181)              (0.101)             (0.0447)              (2.802)             (1.161)
Household Size                          ‐0.216**             ‐0.0440              ‐0.0196             ‐0.00967               0.173               0.199
                                         (0.101)            (0.0369)             (0.0267)            (0.00911)              (0.673)             (0.245)
Homeowner                                 ‐0.236             0.0940               ‐0.0213              0.0253                0.615               ‐0.535
                                         (0.323)             (0.147)             (0.0829)             (0.0367)              (2.262)             (1.015)
Year Busniess Created                    0.0150              ‐0.0167             ‐0.00491             ‐0.00328               0.160               0.0617
                                        (0.0422)            (0.0116)             (0.0109)            (0.00297)              (0.297)            (0.0796)
Business Owner                             0.453            0.00143                0.0252              0.00239               ‐0.704               0.399
                                         (0.295)             (0.128)             (0.0858)             (0.0335)              (2.228)             (0.911)
Log Repayment Capacitiy                    0.229           ‐0.265***               0.0207           ‐0.0802***               ‐0.871            2.163***
                                         (0.393)            (0.0920)              (0.105)             (0.0241)              (2.766)             (0.674)
Constant                                  ‐34.49              35.74                9.865                8.087                ‐291.3              ‐141.4
                                         (85.42)             (23.22)              (22.35)              (5.963)              (607.1)             (160.1)

Observations                               147                 484                  147                 484                   147                 484
R‐squared                                                                          0.141               0.123                 0.130               0.098
