                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE BEHAVIOR OF INTEREST RATES
                     AND REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                 DURING A LIBERALIZATION EPISODE:
                    THE CASE OF CHILE 1973—83


                        Sebastian Edwards



                      Working Paper No. 1702




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1985




A previous version of this paper was presented at the American
Economic Association Annual Meetings; Dallas, Texas; December
28—30, 1984. 1 am indebted to Edgardo Barandiaran, Jainie de Melo
and Simon Teitel for helpful comments. Financial support from
U.C.L.A.'s International Studies and Overseas Programs and from the
National Science Foundation Grant SES 84 19932 is gratefully
acknowledged. All errors, however, are my own. The views pre-
sented here are my own and do not represent those of the World
Bank. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Resea rch.
                      The Behavior of Interest Rates
                          and Real Exchange Rates
                     During a Liberalization Episode:
                         The Case of Chile 1973-83


                                   ABSTRACT




            This paper analyzes the behavior of some key variables during   the
recent economic liberalization reform attempted in Chile. The paper

concentrates on the behavior of the real exchange rate and nominal and real

interest rates during the period 1977—83. It is argued that as a consequence

of the liberalization of the capital account in Chile in 1979-81, dramatic

inflows of financial capital resulted. These capital inflows generated an

important increase in expenditure, and a lower relative price of tradables to

nontradables or real appreciation. Moreover, it is argued that it is the

liberalization of the capital account, and not the adoption of a preannounced

rate of devaluation, that generated the dramatic real appreciation of the

Chilean currency between 1979 and 1981 .    A model   to analyze interest rate
behavior    in a semi-open economy is also presented and applied to the case of

Chile. The results obtained suggest that during this period interest rates

responded   both to open-economy and closed-economy factors. Among the former
the increase in the expected rate of devaluation was particularly important.




                                              Sebastian Edwards
                                              The World Bank
                                              Room N-627
                                              1818 H Street,   NW
                                             Washington,     D.C.   20006
CPDTA/disk SE1/doc. realex/7—8-85



                                    INTRODUCTION



          The study of Chile's modern economic history usually generates a

sense of excitement and sadness. Excitement, because during the last 50 years

Chile has been a social laboratory of sorts, where almost every possible type

of economic policy has been experimented; sadness, because to a large extent

all these experiments have ended up in failure and frustration.

          The most recent of these "experiments" began in 1973, after the

military overthrew President Salvador Allende. In the ten years following the

coup, the military implemented deep reforms directed towards transforming

Chile from an economy semi-isolated from the rest of the world, with strong

government intervention, into a liberalized world-integrated economy where

market forces were freely left to guide most of the economy's decisions.

These liberalization reforms were carried out at the same time as a major

stabilization program, aimed at reducing a 600 percent rate of inflation was

being implemented. Many of the policies undertaken roughly correspond to what

a vast number of economists have been advocating for developing countries --

trade   was liberalized; the capital account was (partially) opened; interest

rates were freed and an active domestic capital market was developed; the

fiscal system was reformed with a value added tax replacing a cascading type

sales tax; the social security system was reformed; and the private sector

began to play a more active role in the growth and development process.

           This period was characterized by acute contrasts. For example, while

in 1973 Chile had the highest rate of' inflation in the world (600%), in 1981
                                          -2—



 it had one of the lowest (9%).     On the other hand, the rate of growth of real

 GDP fluctuated drastically: it was —13 percent in 1975; it then averaged

 almost 7 percent per annum during 1977-81; and became -15 percent in 1982. In

 fact, the rapid growth of real GDP in Chile during 1977-81 and the apparent

 success of other policies prompted some observers to (prematurely) talk about

 the Chilean miracle. By the end of 1981, however,the euphoria came to a

sudden end, as it became evident that the growth pace of the previous years

was not sustainable. The inflow of foreign capital was halted, the foreign

debt could not be paid, real interest rates skyrocketed, and a severe finan-

cial crisis erupted. These events, and a drastic deterioration of the terms

of trade -— which amounted to 26 percent between 1979 and 1983 --,
                                                                   provoked
one of the worst recessions faced by the country, from which, at the time of

this writing, it still has not fully recovered. In addition, a number of the

reforms were partially reversed:      tariff rates were hiked; capital movements

were forbidden; the financial sector was plagued with bankruptcies, and was

virtually nationalized. 1/

         A number of economic puzzles have emerged from this experience,

including the extremely high interest rates that prevailed throughout the

episode and the persistence of unemployment. Also, the ultimate failure of

the experiment has added considerable interest to the analysis. Here the most

relevant question —— which has far—reaching policy implications for other

developing countries --   is   whether this failure was a consequence of the

liberalization policies themselves, or if it was the result of other events,

including foreign shocks and inappropriate macroeconomic policies.

         In this paper, an attempt is made to provide some clues for answering

this question. The analysis concentrates on some of the more controversial
                                        —3—




aspects of the experiment —— opening of the external sector and real exchange
rate appreciation, interest rates behavior, and stabilization policies in an

open economy —-, and tries to extract some lessons of experience that could,

in principle, be applicable to other countries. This paper, then, does riot

provide a comprehensive account of the Chilean experiment with free market

policies. This is deliberate, since at this time a number of such general

interpretations are available, and the reader is referred to them. 2/ By

focusing on some specific -- and especially controversial —- aspects of this

experience it is hoped that a better understanding of this episode will be

obtained.

            The paper is organized in the following form. In Section I, the

behavior of the real exchange rate and its relation to the liberalization of

the capital account is investigated. A central question addressed in this

section is whether, as some analysts have pointed out, having fixed th

exchange rate to the U.S. dollar in June of 1979 constituted a major policy

mistake. Section II deals with interest rates, and some plausible explana-

tions for their puzzling behavior are offered. Even though excha:ge rate and

interest rate behavior are intimately related I have decided to analyze these

issues separately, so that a clearer perspective can be obtained. In

Section III, some issues related to the Chilean stabilization program are

discussed.    In this section I compare the military's monetarist. stabilization

program of 1973—83 with the only previous serious monetary-type stabilization

program in Chile -—   the Klein-Saks Mission program of 1955-57. Finally, in
Section IV, some concluding remarks are offered.
                                          —'4--




 I. REAL EXCHANGE RATE AND THE LIBERALIZATION OF THE CAPITAL ACCOUNT



            The behavior of the real exchange rate during the military expeiiment

 affected the developments of the Chilean economy in many important ways. 3/

 Between the second quarter of 1979 and the second quarter of 1982 the

 (effective) real exchange rate appreciated by approximately 25 percent. This

real appreciation has had a central role in most interpretations of the

Chilean crisis of 1982. In fact, a number of authors have claimed that the

adoption of a fixed exchange rate in June of 1979 was a major policy mistake

that provoked the real appreciation and, in conjunction with other elements --

like   the full indexation of wages to past inflation —-     generated the subse-
quent crisis. 14/ In this section the behavior of the real exchange rate is

analyzed,    and it is argued that the main cause   of the real appreciation was

related to the massive capital inflows that followed the liberalization of the

capital    account in 1979. Some regression results reported provide support to
this hypothesis. It is      further argued that while the adoption of a fixed
rate —-    at the same time that wages were fully indexed to past inflation —-
was   a policy mistake, it was not a   major one.

           In   Table 1 quarterly data on the behavior of   the effective real

exchange   rate between 1977 and 198'4 are presented. An increase in this index
reflects a real depreciation, whereas a decline shows a real appreciation. As
may be seen, between 1977 and the second quarter of 1979 -—       in spite   of the
fact that the so—called tablita was tn effect ——     there was actually a slight
real depreciation of the peso. 5/ However, starting in the third quarter of
1979, and up to the second quarter of 1982 a continuous and steep real
                                         —5-



appreciation was observed, which at the end of the first quarter of 1982 had

accumulated to 22 percent. In the second quarter of 1982, the fixed exchange

rate system was abandoned and a succession of devaluations followed. The

fixed rate was first replaced by a system where the exchange rate was pegged

to a basket. This was soon replaced by a floating system, which in turn was

quickly replaced by a crawling peg. This system is in effect at the time of

this writing. Between the abandonment of the fixed parity and mid-19811 a real

effective depreciation of almost 13 percent has taken place. 6/

           Although the domestic capital market was reformed in early 1975 -—

with   interest rates being freed and the creation of new financial institutions

allowed ——   foreign   capital flows were strictly controlled until mid—1979. In

June of that year a process of liberalization of the capital account of the

balance of payments was begun; restrictions on medium- and long-run capital

movements were lifted. The final steps in this process were taken in April of

1980 when additional regulations regarding the maximum monthly inflow of

foreign capital were relaxed. 7/ Short-term capital movements, however, were

forbidden throughout most of the experiment. In July of 1982, and for a brief

period of time thereafter, short—term inflows were also allowed.

           Even though throughout most of the experiment only medium- and long-

term capital movements were permitted, the opening of the capital account

resulted in extremely large inflows of foreign capital. In 1980, capital

inflows more than doubled with respect to 1979, and in 1931 the level of

capital inflows doubled again. In Table 2, biannual data on net capital

inflows in U.S. dollars are presented for 1977 through 1982. The most

striking feature of these data is the very rapid increase in the net inflow in

the period 1978—81 and equally rapid decline in 1982. Most of the increased
                                      —6-




 foreign indebtedness between 1979—81 took place through higher loans obtained

 by the private sector without any government guarantees. For example, in 1979

 the private sector obtained 98 percent of the foreign funds imported through

Article H of the Exchange Law. In 1980 that figure was 97 percent, in 1981

 it was 98 percent and in 1982 it was 77 percent. Most of these funds were

obtained by the banking sector, which in turn loaned it to the final users.

Banks, however, were not allowed to take the exchange risk; all their loans

financed with foreign funds were documented in foreign exchange. The final

borrower was subject to the devaluation risk. These regulations generated a

highly segmented credit market, where only some agents had access to the

"relatively cheap" credit denominated in foreign exchange.

         The massive inflow of foreign capital experienced between mid—1979

and mid-1981 was the main factor behind the real appreciation of the peso. In

fact, the absorption of these foreign funds   required   a real appreciation.

From an analytical perspective, the reason for this is that, to the extent

that a fraction of the net inflowing capital is spent on nontradable goods, an

incipient excess demand for this type of goods will emerge; in order to

restore equilibrium, nontradable goods' relative prices will have to increase,

and a real appreciation will result. 8/ This was indeed the case in Chile,

where a large proportion of the newly imported foreign capital was used to

finance a dramatic boom in the construction sector.

         The fact that a real appreciatin is actually required to absorb an

increase in the level of net capital inflows, introduces an important element

in the discussion of the Chilean experience. This means that the 1979—1981

real appreciation was a short-run equilibrium phenomenon. It was an

equilibrium phenomenon in the sense that, given the level of the capital
                                        —7—




inflows, the real appreciation was needed to maintain internal equilibrium in

the nontradable goods sector. On the other hand, it was a short-run

phenomenon, since the rate at which capital flowed into Chile between mid-1979

and mid-1981 was not sustainable in the long run. Once the nature of the real

appreciation of 1979—1981 is understood in this way, it becomes clear that the

adoption of a fixed rate in 1979 was not the main cause of the real apprecia-

tion. Independently of the exchange rate system, the absorption of a massive

inflow of capital would have required a real appreciation. This means that,

if instead of having pegged the peso to the dollar in June of 1979, Chile had

adopted a floating rate, the opening of the capital account carried out

between June of 1979 and mid-1980, would have resulted in a nominal, as well

as real, appreciation of the peso. 9/

         However, it is important to notice that the rate of capital inflows

is an endogenous variable which, at least in principle, will differ under

alternative exchange rate systems. To the extent that these inflows respond

to interest rate differentials, it is likely that their magnitude would be

somewhat lower under floating or adjustable exchange rates. In the Chilean

case, however, the existing evidence suggests that for the 1979-1981 period,

capital inflows were not sensitive to changes in interest rate differ-

entials. Sjaastad, for example, reports that between August of 1979 and

December of 1980 there was a weak relationship between the rate of capital

inflows the domestic and foreign interest rates spread. Between January 1981

and March 1982 this relationship, however, basically disappeared. 10/ If

capital inflows didn't respond to interest rate differentials, what explains,

then, the massive inflow of foreign funds? A simple explanation is based on

the idea that immediately after the liberalization reforms, the perceived
                                           —8—




 profitability   of domestic investment -- as seen from abroad -—   increases
 dramatically. This provokes a portfolio disequilibrium in the developed

 countries, since investors now want to hold a significantly higher fraction of

 the liberalizing country's capital stock as part of their portfolios. A a

 result, immediately following the liberalization, capital inflows into the

 country will jump. As time goes by, however, and the portfolio imbalance in

 the developed countries is solved, the flow of foreign capital into the

 country will slowly decline towards its new long-run equilibriun.

 Alternatively, we can think that during the period of capital controls a large

 stock disequilibrium had developed, with the desired level of foreign debt

well above its actual level. In this setting, once the capital account is

opened, there is a tendency to solve this stock disequilibrium fairly fast.

This will result in massive inflows of foreign funds in the short run. In

fact, short-run capital inflows will overshoot their new long-run

postliberaljzation level. This behavior of net capital inflows can be modeled

in the following form:     AK =   mm   [AK, e(D-D1)], where AK are actual
capital flows, AK is the maximum amount of net capital inflow allowed
                                                                          every
period before the capital account liberalization. D* is the desired or

sustainable level of foreign debt, which will depend on real permanent income,

and real wealth among other things.      D_1 is the actual stock of debt in the

previous period and e is a partial adjustment coefficient.        Clearly, if
prior to the liberalization AK < e[D-D11 the gap between desired and

actual debt will increase through tine. Once the restrictions on capital

inflows are lifted, actual inflows will become equal to O[D-D1J. That

means that, as with the alternative interpretation discussed above,

immediately following the opening of the capital account capital flows will
                                         —9—




jump to a fraction 0 of the accumulated gap between the desired and actual
debt.   As this gap   is closed,the level of   capital inflows will slowly be

reduced until it reaches a new equilibrium level. 11/ This was clearly the case

of Chile where during 1980-81 the inflow of foreign funds was extraordinary

and greatly exceeded its sustainable long-run level.

          The existence of a fixed nominal exchange rate since June of 1979

made things even worse. First, the slow (approximate) convergence of domestic

inflation towards world inflation, after the exchange rate had been fixed,

generated additional forces towards a real appreciation. 12/ Second, and more

important, the coexistence of a fixed exchange rate and 100 percent indexed

wages made the adjustment required once capital inflows declined, extremely

difficult. The reason for this is that while the absorption of large amounts

of capital inflow requires a real appreciation, the reduction (or reversal) of

capital inflow requires a real depreciation to maintain equilibrium. As

reflected in Table 2, starting in late 1981 the rate of capital inflows

experienced a steep decline. Since the nominal exchange rate was fixed, the

adjustment of the real exchange rate required to cope with the lower rate of

capital inflows had to take place through a decline in the nominal price of

nontradable goods and of real wages. The problem, however, was that due to

the indexation mechanism incorporated into the labor law of 1979, real wages

were virtually inflexible downward. At this point it became apparent to most

observers that a fixed exchange rate and the real wages policy were highly

inconsistent, and that their coexistence represented a policy mistake. As

Sjaastad and others have indicated, these policies amounted to imposing two

mutually inconsistent numeraires in the economy. 13/ As a result of this

inflexibility in real wages, relative prices did not adjust. Instead, there
                                           —1 0—




 was a significant adjustment in quantities, with output and employment falling

 dramati cally.

          A traditional way to have solved the crisis, which was advocated by

 some analysts, was to devalue the peso. The purpose of this measure, of

 course, would have been to generate a real devaluation -- an improvement in

 the degree of competitiveness in the tradable goods sector required to

 reestablish equilibrium compatible with the lower rate of net capital

 inflows. However, due to the wage rate policy -- and in particular to the

 backward-looking indexatjori --   it   is highly likely that the nominal

devaluation would not have succeeded. As numerous historical experiences have

indicated, when wages are 100% indexed, nominal devaluations will usually be

fully translated into higher wages and prices, being self-defeating. In that

regard, an appropriate policy package at this point in time would have

included the simultaneous abandonment of the wage indexation scheme and of the

fixed exchange rate system. The government, however reacted in a very

different way. Between the second half of 1981 and the first half of 1982 a

passive policy was followed. It was argued that the economy would

automatically adjust to the new circumstances. 1LI/ In particular the economic

authorities strongly rejected the idea of intervening in the labor and

exchange rate markets. It was argued at the time that the macroeconomic

adjustment would take place automatically and costlessly through higher

interest rates, reduced expenditure and lower, and even negative, inflation.

Interest rates did increase arid inflation was somewhat reduced in the second

half of 1981. The magnitude of the resulting adjustment, however, was clearly

insufficient. The degree of real appreciation remained high and real interest

rates climbed even faster. The level of domestic activity plummeted in
                                           -11-



1982. The maintenance of a fixed exchange rate --               in   conjunction with fully

indexed wages ——   constituted     a policy mistake only at this time (1981-82),

when the reduction in the level of capital flows required a real depreciation.

Before late 1981, the fixed exchange rate did not constitute a serious

mistake.

           The interpretation of real exchange rate behavior between 1977 and

1982 presented in this paper relies heavily on the alleged existence of a

negative effect of capital inflows on the real exchange rate; according to

this view higher capital inflows will generate a real appreciation of the

domestic currency. In order to investigate the extent of this relationship, a

regression analysis was performed. Reduced form regressions using quarterly

data for the period comprised between the first quarter of 1977 and the fourth

quarter of 1982 were run. In addition to the (lagged) rate of net capital

flows, other possible determinants of the real exchange rate like the terms of

trade and real growth were also included in the regressions. The following

results were obtained; where REER is the indexing of the real effective

exchange rate and the numbers in parentheses are t—statistics: 15/



 log REERt = O.O1i — 0.078 log [net capital flows] —             + 0.798    log REERt      (1)
                                                  t 1
             (3i58) (-3.801)                                         (10.376)


                                                                           R2 =   0.897
                                                                          D.W. = 1.887




 log REERt= 0.016 — 0.076 log [net capital flows]1
             (3.973)    (—3.521)

             —0.218 log [terms of trade]          +   0.271 [growth]_
                                             -1
             (-1.935)                                 (1.250)
                                             —12--




               +0.005[devaluatjon    duInmy] + 0.9614 log REERt1                         (2)
               (0.19)4)                         (7.889)
                                                                       R2     0.9146

                                                                      D.W. = 1.753

            As may be seen, under    both   specifications, the coefficient of the

 lagged value of net capital inflows is significantly negative as expected.

However, the value of the coefficient is not very large, suggesting that it

would take a significant change in the rate of capital flows -— as in Chile --

to   generate large variations in the real exchange rate. 16/ It can also be seen

from the results reported in equation (2) that the coefficients of the terms

of trade variable is negative as expected. The coefficient for real growth,

however, turned out to be positive and insignificant, suggesting that the

Ricardo-Balassa effect did not play an important role in determining the

behavior of the real exchange rate in Chile during this period.               Finally the

coefficient of the lagged dependent variable was fairly high under both

specifications, indicating that after a shock the real exchange rate moved

only slowly towards its new equilibrium. This is, in some sense, not

surprising given that these regressions were run          using   quarterly data. In
sum,   the results presented here provide support to the hypothesis that the
real   exchange rate has been negatively affected by the rate of            capital inflows
in Chile.
          One of   the    most important consequences of   the real appreciation of

the peso was that the tradable goods sector suffered an important loss of

competitiveness, and that a large number of firms ran into serious financial

trouble. Most of these firms faced these problems by resorting to heavy

borrowing from the financial sector, exercising a significant pressure on the
                                     —13—



demand for credit and on interest rates. As the magnitude of the real

appreciation increased, it became apparent for most economic agents that the

fixed exchange rate system was not sustainable. These beliefs fueled, towards

mid— and late 1981, expectations of a significant devaluation, which were

translated into even higher interest rates. In addition to the loss in

competitiveness generated by the real appreciation, the extremely high

interest rates and the depressed domestic demand, especially after 1981,

produced serious financial problems to most firms. 17/ The lack of government

supervision of the financial sector, and the close ownership relationship

between banks and large firms, made things even worse. In order to avoid the

firms' bankruptcy many banks made -— and rolled over --   loans that, from a
purely financial viewpoint, were highly questionable. 18/ As a result, the

portfolio of bad loans in Chilean banks 'ew dramatically between 1981 and the

end of 1982. Of course, these rolling-over operations were not sustainable,

and in early 1983 the financial sector collapsed. The most important banks

had to be rescued by the government, which in early 1985 directly or

indirectly controlled (or owned) more than 70 percent of the banking system.



It. MONETARY POLICY, EXPECTED DEVALUATION AND INTEREST RATES



         Interest rate behavior constitutes one of the most fascinating

puzzles of the recent Chilean experience. Throughout the episode both nominal

and real interest rates were very high. In fact most analysts have pointed

out that the persistence of these high interest rates played a crucial role in

the 1982 crisis. 19/ Table 3 contains quarterly data on borrowing nominal

interest rates, inflation, foreign interest rates (LIBOR) and the rate of
                                        -1 !-




devaluation   for 1977 through 1983. A striking feature of these data is the

fact that, even after the capital account was opened and the exchange rate was

pegged   against the dollar in June of 1979, there was a substantial

differential between the domestic borrowing rates and the foreign (LIBOR)

rate. Only a small fraction of this differential can be explained by the

premium over LIBOR charged by the international financial community to Chilean

borrowers. The average premium    charged   to loans obtained by Chile was 1 .55

percentage points in 1978; 0.99 percentage points in 1979; 0.99 percentage

point in 1980; 0.89 percentage points in 1981; and 0.97 percentage points in

1982. 20/

          The data on nominal interest rates presented in Table 3 refers to

average borrowing rates from the banking system. Throughout the period

lending rates were substantially higher. The spread between nominal lending

and borrowing rates -- which averaged 22.7 percentage points in 1978, 22i

percentage points in 1979, 9i percentage points in 1980, and 11.1 percentage

points in 1981 and 18.2 in 1982 ——   partially   reflected the inefficiency of the

Chilean banking system, which had a much higher cost of operations per unit        of
deposits than banks of comparable size in the U.S. and other industrialized

countries. In Table Lt data on spreads between lending and borrowing rates

between 197L1 and 1983 are presented.

          Until mid—1979, when the process of opening the capital account was

begun, real interest rates were also extremely high. The real borrowing
interest rate averaged 8.8 percent per annum in 1977, 18.9 percent per annum

in 1978 and 13.2 percent per annum during the first half of 1979. The

(partial) opening of the capital account and the resulting large inflows of

foreign capital quickly impacted real interest rates; between the third
                                        —15—




quarter of 1979 and the fourth quarter of 1980 borrowing real rates declined

significantly, averaging only 14.1 percent per annum. Towards the     end   of 1980

the   situation drastically changed. In December of that year the real

borrowing rate climbed to 15 percent per annum, while the real lending rate

exceeded 20 percent per annum. Things became even worse in 1981 , when the

real borrowing rate reached an annual average of 27 percent, and the real

lending interest rate averaged 37 percent. In the first half of 1982,

immediately preceding the devaluation of the peso, the real borrowing rate

averaged 37 percent, while the real lending rate reached the remarkable figure

of 143.3   percent.
            Some possible explanations f or the behavior of interest rates have

been   offered. Sjaastad, for example, argues that regulations forbidding banks
to operate in funds denominated in foreign currencies introduced exorbitant
transaction costs. According to him these costs explain the extraordinarily
high and stable spread between interest rates for peso—denominated operations
and dollar-denominated operations. 21/ Harberger, on the other hand, has argued
that   the existence of a strong and evergrowing "false demand" for credit
played     a central role in the explanation of interest rate behavior. 22/ This

"false demand" consisted of the rolling-over of loans, which in turn, had

their origin in the privatization of a    large number of firms (previously
nationalized during President Allende's government) during the early years of
the military regime. These firms .iere auctioned to private conglomerates that
had to spend significant resources in order to operate, modernize and expand
these companies. Many of these     firms did   not turn out to be profitable, and
increasingly    resorted to additional borrowing in order to stay afloat. As

pointed out above, at the same time banks ——     which had a close ownership
                                              —16—



relation with    the   firms -—   continued to roll over these loans in the hope that

in this way their bankruptcy would be avoided. Of course, this whole

operation    was only possible       due to the lack of supervision of the financial

sector. 23/

            Other observers have mentioned the role of expected devaluation and a

higher country risk premium attached by the international financial community

to Chile, as possible elements that would explain interest rate behavior.

Still others have pointed out that the domestic monetary policy played a

crucial role in the rapid increase of real rates experienced since late

1980. In particular, it        has    been argued that the so—called "neutral monetary"

policy, which was an important ingredient of the "automatic adjustment" macro-

economic approach followed by the economic authorities since late 1979,

resulted in unnecessary upward pressures on the real interest rate. In

connection to this     it is   usually mentioned that between the second quarter of

1980 and the fourth quarter of 1981 the real value of the monetary base

declined by more than 18 percent. 24/ In this section a model that combines

some of these explanations is presented and tested. Also, a number of

analytical issues and lessons that emerge from this experience are raised.



11.1.     Nominal Interest Rates

            In this subsection an attempt to empirically explain the behavior of

the nominal interest rate in Chile between 1977 and 1982 is made.

Traditionally, empirical studies on         nominal   interest rates determination have

made    extreme assumptions regarding the degree of openness of the country under
study. It has usually been assumed that the economy in question is either
fully open to the rest of the world or that it is completely closed. These
                                                   —17—




extreme   assumptions, of course, are not applicable to most developing

countries, whose capital account is, in fact, subject to different types of

controls. In that regard most developing economies, including Chile during

the 1977—83 period, can be classified as semi—open economies.

          A model for analyzing the process of interest rate determination in

the context of semi-open economies as Chile has recently been proposed by

Edwards and refined by Edwards and Khan. 25/ According to this model the

behavior of the domestic nominal interest rate can be captured by the

following set of equations:



                =       o                 c
                             + (l—i,p)i                                            (3)


           i i  =        +         + Pt                                            (14)



          •.c =                e
                         +




                = p —
           rt         AEMSt
                                     +
                                                                                   (6)


           EMSt
                    =   log m — log           m                                    (7)



           log m =              + 11og Yt2(P+vt)3vt                                (8)



           A log m [log m - log                   m1]                              (9)

where the following notation has been used:
                =   nominal        interest rate fri   the semi-open economy
                =   nominal interest rate under the extr'eme assumption of fully

                    open economy

                =   foreign        interest rate

                =   expected rate of devaluation
                                              —18-



               =    risk   premium

               =    nominal interest rate under assumption of fully closed

                    e conomy

            r = actual         real interest rate in period t

            p = long—run         real interest rate

            ¶rt =   expected inflation

          EtSt = excess supply for real money in period t

            m = actual         real money

            m = quantity         of real money demanded in period t

               =    real   income in period t

               =    random shock

and where p, A, a and             are parameters.

           Equation (3) states that the nominal interest rate in a semi-open

economy can be expressed as a weighted average of the values it would take

under the fully open and fully closed extremes. Parameter ' measures the

degree of financial openness of this economy; if                      =
                                                                  p       1   equation (3)   collapses
into the interest arbitrary condition for a fully open economy, given by
equation (14). If, on the other hand,      = 0 equation (3) becomes equal to the

Fisher   closed equation (5). A value of p between zero and one reflects that

this is a semi—open economy. The closer              ip   is   to one the more open thi's

country will be to foreign influences on its financial sector. Equation (14)

is the traditional interest arbitrage condition. It is assumed that under

risk aversion there is a time varying risk premium term (Pt). Equation (6)

states that the real interest rates will negatively depend on the situation of

excess liquidity in the economy. With other things given, an excess supply

for real money (EMS>0) wilt exercise negative pressure, in the short run, on
                                             —19—



the real interest rate. In the long run, however, EMS=0 and r =

Equation (8) is the demand for real money. Finally, equation (9) depicts the
process through which monetary equilibrium is achieved.

         Combining (3)       through (9) the following expression form for the
nominal interest rate in a semi-open economy is obtained:



               +
                   o(i   +
                             D)   +
                                      ä2log m1+ 631og ÷                                   (10)




where 6>0, 62>0, 63>0 6>0 and 62<0. 26/ The most important property of this

expression is that it allows both open and closed economy factors to influence

the domestic nominal interest rate in the short run. Indeed, the extremes of

fully open or closed economies are particular cases of this equation.

Moreover, the degree of financial openness of this country will be related to

the value of S. If                and 62=63=6=0 (10) becomes the open—economy

interest arbitrage condition. In the Chilean case, however, it is expected

that in a regression analysis both the coefficients of (i÷D), i.e., 6i, and

of log m1, i.e., 62 will be significantly different from zero; this would

indicate that in Chile during the period under study both open-economy and

closed—economy     factors played an important role in the behavior of the nominal
interest rate.
         The estimation of equation (10) presents a number of problems. First
data on the expected rate of devaluation have to be obtained. For the period
between 1977 and June of      1979    this can   be   proxied by the   actual   rate of
devaluation.   27/. Especially for the 1978 through mid—1979 period this is a

fairly uncontroversial assumption, since the actual rate of devaluation was

equal to the preannounced rate of devaluation determined by the tablita. On
                                          —20-



 the other hand, between July of 1979 and June of 1982, the actual rate of

devaluation with respect to the U.S. dollar was zero. It is hard to argue,

however, that during this period the expected rate of devaluation was also

equal to zero. On the contrary, the available evidence indicates that the

probability -— and expected magnitude --      of   devaluation increased steadily

throughout the period. For example, Le Fort has determined, using Bayesian

methods, that the expected rate of devaluation increased from approximately 2

percent in July of 1979 —— one month after the parity was fixed --          to   over 26

percent in May of 1982, just prior to the actual devaluation of June of that

year. In this paper, and in order to test the relevance of the model

presented      above, the following simplifying assumption regarding the expected
rate of devaluation during July 1979 and June 1982 was       made:     It was   assumed

that in every quarter the expected rate of devaluation can be proxied by the
difference, in percentage points, between that quarter's          effective real

exchange rate and the effective exchange rate prevailing in the second quarter
of 1979, when the peso was fixed to the dollar. This means, then, that it is
assumed that the degree of real overvaluation of the peso relative to its June
1979 value provides a good proxy for the expected rate of devaluation.
           Another problem related to the estimation of (10) has to do with the
definition of a time series of the expected rate of inflation. In order to
simplify the estimation     was replaced by      the actual rate of
inflation. This is a reasonable thing to do under the assumption of rational
expectations. And      finally, a third serious problem with the estimation of

(10) is related to the risk premium term            Ideally one   would want to model
this   term,   which will generally depend on the stock of   outside   assets of   the
government and on other variables affecting the degree of country risk. This,
                                               —21 —




however, was      considered   to be outside of the scope of this paper.

Consequently it was assumed that              could be expressed as a constant k plus a

serially correlated random term =                       v. This means that in the

estimation of equation (10) a procedure that corrects for serial correlation

should   be used. Given the simplifying nature of these assumptions the results
obtained   from    the estimation of (10) should be interpreted with caution.
           In   the regression a dummy variable that took the value of zero from

1977 to mid-1979 and the value of one form then onwards was introduced in

order   to allow for some distinction between the fixed and non-fixed rate
subperiods.      The estimation of equation (10) using quarterly data for period

1977 through 1982 and using OL$ corrected for serial correlation, yielded the

following results, where as before the numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics

(see the Appendix for the exact data definitions and data sources):



            i. = 0.039 +            - 0.L1112
                         0.239(i+D)
                (0.U18) (1.965)     (—2.030)
                                              log rn1




                   —0.153 log y — 0.378          +   0.090 dummy                          (11)
                  (—0.175)         (—1.130)          (0.905)




                                                                                 =   0.905
                                                                                 =   1   .932

                                                                              N = 18

                                                                             RHO =   -0.378
           These   results are quite interesting. The fact that the coefricient

of (i+D) and of log mt_i are significant at conventional levels and have
                                         —22—




the   expected signs, provides some support to the hypothesis that during the

period under study the behavior of the nominal interest rate in Chile was

influenced   both by open economy factors and   internal monetary   conditions.
This means that interest rate determination in Chile should indeed be modeled

using   a semi—open economy framework.
           In spite of the estimation's shortcomings the results reported jr-i

equation (11) point out towards three basic factors in the explanation of

nominal interest rates behavior in Chile:       (1) nominal world interest rates;

(2) expected devaluation; and (3) real liquidity. 28/ In fact, during 1981,

while the world nominal interest rate and the expected rate of depreciation

increased, real liquidity, in at least some of its definitions, drastically

declined. These elements, then, provide an important guide for the

understanding of nominal interest rate behavior in Chile. Further refinement

of the model, however, should provide additional insights. In particular, a

more detailed consideration of the determinants of the risk premium —— which

now has been assumed to be equal to a constant plus an autoregressive term --

is   a logical step towards the improvement of this model. Also, finding a

better proxy for the expected rate of devaluation would result in improved

estimates.



11.2 Real Interest Rates

          Not only were nominal interest rates extremely high during the

Chilean experiment, but real rates were also dramatically high. As mentioned,

the partial opening of the capital account in mid—1979, and the resulting

increase in the rate of (net) capital inflows, generated an important initial

decline in real interest rates. This situation lasted for approximately 18
                                      -23-



months, until November of 1980. Towards the end of that year, however, a

sharp change was observed. During the year 1981, in spite of the fact that

net capital inflows reached a record high, averaging more than 1 .1 billion

dollars per quarter, real interest rates experienced steep increases. The

real borrowing rate was 22.9 percent in the first quarter of 1981, 26.3

percent in the second quarter, 27.9 percent in the third quarter and 32.8

percent in the fourth quarter.

          What events can account for this abrupt change in the conditions in

the financial market? Obviously, a number of factors can be mentioned,

including the fact that this period coincided with the sharp increase in world

real   interest rates. Another explanation that has been advanced refers to the
fact that in 1981 Chile's rate of inflation was significantly reduced. 29/ For
a   given nominal rate, the argument goes, a decline in inflation results in

higher real interest rates. While this reasoning is evidently (tautologi-

cally) correct, it is clearly incomplete. In fact, it begs the question on

why wasn't the decline in inflation in 1981 accompanied by an equiproportional

drop in nominal rates? The discussion on the behavior of nominal rates

presented in the preceding section provides a partial answer to this. While

inflation finally caine down in 1981 to the level of world inflation, at that

time it became apparent that the prevailing rate of capital inflows was not

sustainable in the long run. This resulted in significant expectations of

devaluation which positively impacted the nominal interest rate without

affecting inflation in an equiproportionate way.

          An approach similar to that used to discuss the behavior of the

nominal rate can be used to focus the analysis on the behavior of the real

rate. Consider equations (12) through (1J4).
                                         —211—




             r = 0r+(1—0)r                                                         (12)



             r=r+                                                                  (13)


                       —           +
             r =   p
                           AEMSt                                                   (114)



            Where rt is the real rate in this semi—open economy, r0 is the real

interest rate that would prevail in the extreme case of a fully open economy,

and
        r   is the real rate under the other possible extreme —-    completely   closed

economy.       0 is a parameter, equivalent to i   in   equation (3), related to the

degree of openness of this economy. If 0=1, equation (12) becomes equal to

the    open economy extreme (13); if 0=0 the fully closed economy equation
results. In the case of a semi-open economy, however, one would expect 0 to
be between zero and one. In equation (13)      is the expected change in the
real   exchange rate. The real exchange rate, in turn, is defined as

 e = EP*/P, where E is the nominal exchange rate, P is the foreign price

level and P is the domestic price level. Equation (114), which is the real

rate equivalent to equation (6) above, is the actual real rate of interest in

period t. Equation (13) is of particular interest and relevance for this

discussion. 30/ It states that even under a completely open economy, with full

capital mobility, real interest rates need not be equal. Moreover, according

to this term if a real depreciation is expected (i.e., et>0) the domestic

real interest rate will exceed the world interest rate. Equations (12), (13)

and (14) can be combined to obtain an expression that provides some insights

for the understanding of the behavior of the real interest in Chile between

late 1980 and mid-1982:
                                           —25—




       r Or +        Be13—
                             (l—8)A13÷ (l—O)p +                                     (15)

According to this equation the domestic real interest rate can increase for

three reasons:       (1) a higher world real interest rate; (2) a higher expected

rate of real depreciation; and (3) the creation of a situation of excess

demand for real liquidity in the econany (EMSt<0). All three elements were

simultaneously present in 1981—82. First, the world real interest rate --

measured as the difference between LIBOR and the US CPI inflation -- increased

by more than 7 percentage points between 1980 and 1981. Second, as Le Fort

has recently established, there is no doubt that starting in late 1980 and

during   most of 1981 the expectations of a real devaluation increased
dramatically. 31/ These expectations were fueled both by the generalized
feeling that the external situation regarding capital inflows was not
sustainable and by the fact that in 1981 the terms of trade began to         turn

dramatically     against Chile. Between 1980 and 1981 the effective real exchange
rate   further appreciated by 12 percent. Finally, as pointed out in

Section II, starting in 1981 there was a large increase in the demand for real

liquidity, stemming (partially) from the bank's decision to roll over their

bad loans as a way to avoid (or more accurately, postpone) firms' bankruptcy.



III. MONETARISM NO4 AND THEN: THE KLEIN-SAKS MISSION VS. THE MILITARY REGIN



            In   this section the military government   approach towards stabiliza-

tion   is compared to the only other sustained monetarist-type stabilization
program undertaken      in Chile, during 1955—57. This comparison focuses mainly

on   the implications of the two different programs      for   real exchange rate
behavior.     The comparison of both episodes provides interesting insights
                                       —26—




regarding the evolution through time of rnonetarist thinking in Chile and Latin
America.    Both experiments had a number of elements in common, and also some

key features that were radically different. In fact this comparison turns      out
to be quite instructive.

           In 1955 inflation in Chile had reached what at the time was

considered to be an extraordinarily high level --   814   percent. The government

decided to seriously tackle the problem by implementing a long-term consistent

stabilization program. For this purpose a New York-based consulting firm was

hired, and in 1955 the Klein-Saks Mission began its work. The mission's terms

of reference stated that it should evaluate the causes of inflation and

external disequilibrium, and recommend a set of policies to combat these

problems. The approach taken by the mission can undoubtedly be labeled as

monetarist. It (correctly) traced the main cause of inflation to money

creation to finance the fiscal deficit, and recommended a package of monetary-

type policies that would work towards eliminating the underlying roots of

inflation. The mission's program was a qualified success. By 1957 the rate

of inflation had declined to 17 percent; the balance of payments had improved

and fiscal finances were in better shape. All in all, given the existing

political constraints, it is possible to state that the mission's achievements

were quite significant.

           The similarities between the Klein-Saks Mission program and the

military program mainly refer to the diagnosis of the causes generating

inflation and the external crisis. Even though the initial conditions were

much worse in 1973 than in 1955, both programs correctly pointed out that the

creation of money to finance the fiscal deficit was the main cause of the

ongoing inflation. Both programs also emphasized Chile's weak external
                                     -27-



position and the inability of the public sector to efficiently mobilize

resources f or investment purposes. 32/

         The two stabilization programs   also   had some important differences.

Two of them are worth pointing out within the context of the present pap4r.

First, contrary to the Klein-Saks program, one of the main features of the

military experience is that after the initial period, the stabilization

program not only focused on the traditional short-run anti—inflationary

elements present in any orthodox IMF—type of program, but also emphasized

long—run institutional reforms, whose purpose was     to   drastically reduce the

government's role in the economy. Towards the late 1970s, the so-called

"modernization reforms," which introduced important structural changes, became

an integral part of the long—run development program, with most of these

reforms having actually been carried out by the end of 1981. 33/

         A second major difference between both monetarist experiences refers

to the framework used for formulating the stabilization programs. While the

Klein-Saks experience was basically based on a closed-economy view of the

world, the new monetarism postulated that, after the trade reform, Chile was

an open economy subject to external shocks. The military stabilization

program was highly influenced by the simplest version of the monetary approach

to the balance of payments. In particular, there was great faith that in a

small open economy the different parity conditions would hold, even in the

short run. In fact, it was the belief that in an open economy the domestic

rate of inflation rapidly converges to the world rate of inflation (plus

expected devaluation) that prompted the economic authorities to base the

stabilization programs on the preannouncement of the rate of devaluation. As

a culmination of this policy the peso was fixed to the U.S. dollar in June of
                                        —28-




 1979. However, this experience showed, once again, that the purchasing power

parity condition does not hold in the short run; for several years the

domestic rates of inflation were significantly higher than the rate of world

inflation plus the rate of devaluation. As already argued, this plus th

opening of the capital account resulted in a major real appreciation of the

domestic currency, and in a significant loss of competitiveness of the

domestic sector. The situation was aggravated by the adoption of a 100

percent wage indexation law in 1979. Towards late 1981, when capital inflows

were substantially reduced, the adjustment of the economy required, a real

devaluation of the peso and a reduction of real wages, which were precluded by

the existing institutional arrangements, including the fixed exchange rate and

the indexatiori scheme. As a result, there was a significant adjustment in

quantities, with output and employment falling dramatically.

         More specifically, the two experiences differed significantly with

respect to the (proposed) exchange rates and wage rate policies. As has

already been pointed out repeatedly, the military program opted for a fixed

exchange rate and fully indexed wages with respect to past inflation.

Regarding these two specific policies the Klein—Saks Mission made very

different policy recommendations. The following quotations from the Mission's

report clearly illustrate this point: 324/


    "[T]he Mission has held that automatic and obligatory readjustments of

   salaries and wages are an important contributing factor in the

    inflation. The Mission.. .advocated using wage policy as one of several

   elements in reducing the rate of.. .price increases. The eventual

   objective of this policy was seen in the restoration of freedom of wage

   negotiations.. ."      (page   10)
                                        —29-



         Regarding exchange rates policy the Mission recommended:


    "The Mission's concrete recommendations were based on the desirability of

    establishing a single flexible exchange rate for all merchandise

    transactions.. .While a free market for capital transactions was   to   be

    maintained..."        (pages 11 and 12)


         The suggestion of a dual exchange rate system, which differentiates

between financial and current external transactions is particularly

interesting in the light of the events of 1979-82, where the massive capital

inflows resulted in a steep real appreciation of the peso. In principle, this

kind of exchange rate arrangement tends to isolate the real side from real

exchange rate movements originated in the financial side of the economy. In

that regard under this type of arrangement the real appreciation resulting

from the liberalization of the capital account would have a reduced effect on

the real side of the economy. 35/

         After comparing the stabilization programs of the Klein-Saks Mission

and of the military regime one is tempted to argue that if (regarding exchange

rates and wage rates) the monetarists of the 1970s had applied the policies of

the monetarists of the 1950s, the magnitude of Chile's current economic

problems would have been less severe.



IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS



         What went wrong in Chile? This is a question with vast policy

implications for developing countries. In the 1970s Chile adopted a set of

policies advocated for a long time by mainstream economists for developing
                                      —30-



 countries. For a while things worked out well arid a number of' experts

believed that Chilean approach would become the norm that developing countries

would try to emulate. 36/ In 1982, however, the experiment collapsed.

         A number of things went wrong. However, it can be argued that the

crisis of the Chilean econany was not directly the consequence of the more

basic liberalization reforms. For example, it is clear that the collapse of

1982 was not related in any direct way to the fiscal reform of 1975, or to the

tariff lioeralizatjon carried out between 1975 and 1979, or to the reform of

the social security system. On the other hand, there is little doubt that the

way in which the financial reform was carried out --   basically   with no

supervision of the financial sector -- played a major role in determining the

magnitude of the crisis. Also, the timing of the opening of the capital

account of the balance of payments in 1979/80 —— which generated wide swings

in the real exchange rate -- was ill conceived.

         It is in the sphere of macroeconomic management where the more

serious mistakes took place. In that respect, the reliance on an "automatic

monetary adjustment" towards late 1981 was particularly harmful. Also, the

combination of a fixed exchange rate with fully indexed wages created

important policy inconsistencies, which became particularly serious in late

1981 when the rate of capital flows dramatically dropped. It should be'

recognized, however, that foreign factors including the world recession and

the drastic reduction in Chile's terms of trade between 1980 and 1982.

Another area where the government policies were particularly deficient refers

to the capital accumulation process. Throughout the period savings and

investment was very low; in fact lower than its level in the 1960s. In that

regard it was quite apparent from the early stages of the economic recovery
                                     —31 —




that the growth pace of 1977-80 was not sustainable in the medium and long
run.
                                        —32—



                                      APPENDIX



                        Data Sources for Regression Analysis

Terms of Trade: Defined as price of exports relative to imports. The data

         were obtained from Universidad de Chile.

Net Capital Inflows: Data obtained from Guillermo Le Fort, "The Real Exchange

         Rate and Capital Flows: The Case of the Southern Cone Countries."

         Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California,

         Los Angeles.

Interest Rates (it): Nominal borrowing rates paid by banks. Data obtained

         from various issues of the Boletin, Banco Central de Chile.

Inflation: Rate of'   change of consumer price level as corrected by Cortazar
        and Marshall for 1975-79. For other years, data obtained from Banco

        Central de Chile.

Exchange Rate: Data obtained from Banco Central de Chile.

Output: Quarterly data obtained from Universidad de Chile.
                                       —33—




                                    FOOTNOTES




*   A previous version of this paper was   presented   at the American Economic

    Association Annual Meetings; Dallas, Texas; December 28-30, 19814.      I arn


    indebted to Edgardo Barandiaran, Jaime de Melo and Simon Teitel for

    helpful comments. All remaining errors, however, are my own. Financial

    support   from U.C.L.A. '5 International Studies and Overseas Programs and
    from the National Science Foundation, Grant SES 814    19932   is gratefully
    acknowledged.
1/ The stabilization and reform attempts of the 1970s were carried out by a

    group   of economists popularly known as the "Chicago boys." On the Chilean
    economy until 1970 see, for example, Jere Behrman, Foreign Trade Regimes
    and Economic Development (Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1976) and Ricardo

    Ffrench—Davis, Politicas Ecoriomicas en Chile 1952—70 (Santiago: Ediciones

    Nueva Universidad, 1973). For analyses of the Chilean economy during the

    military regime see, for example, Jose P. Arellano et al, Modelo Economico

    Chileno: Trayectoria de una Critica (Santiago, Editorial Aconcagua,

    1982); Sebastian Edwards, "Stabilization with Liberalization: An

    Evaluation of Ten Years of Chile's Experiment with Free Market Policies:

    1973-83," Economic Development and Cultural Change 33     (January   1985):

    223—514; "Economic Policy and the Record of Economic Growth in Chile

    1973—82" in G. Walton (ed.), National Economic Policies in Chile

    (Greenwich and London: JAI Press, 1985); Bela Balassa, "Policy

    Experiments in Chile" in G. Walton (ed.), National Economic Policies in

    Chile (Greenwich and London: JAI Press, 1985); and Alejandro Foxley,

    Conservative Economics in Latin America (Berkeley, Los Angeles and
                                             —314—




       London:      University of California Press, 1983); Arnold Harberger,

       "Observations on the Chilean Economy 1973-83," Economic Development and

       Cultural Change 33     (April   1985): Vittorio Corbo, "Recent Ma'oeconomic

       Developments in Chile," World Development (August 1985).

2/ See footnote 1. Note that this paper does not address other important

       issues related to the reform attempt, including the tariff liberalization,

      the income distribution problem, the unemployment problem and the

      investments—savings process. On these issues see Edwards, "Stabilization

      with Liberalization..."

3/    Arnold      Harberger, "The Chilean Economy in the 1970s: Crisis

      Stabilization, Liberalization, Reform" in K. Brunner arid A. Meltzer (eds.)

      Economic Policy in a World of Change (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing

      Co., 1982).

14/   In June of 1979 the nominal exchange rate was      fixed   at 39   pesos   per U.S.

      dollar.      This was the culmination of a process of   preannouncing the rate

      of   devaluation   of the exchange rate begun in early 1978. On the alleged

      role of the exchange rate pegging on the crisis. See, for example, World

      Bank, Chile: An Economic Memorandum (Washington, D.C., 19814); Juan Andres

      Fontaine, "Creciniento, Recesion y Mercado," Estudios Publicos 11 (March

      1983): 73-91; Ricardo Ffrench-Davis, "The Monetarist Experiment in

      Chile," World Development 11 (November 1983): 905—26; and Guillermo

      Le Fort, "The Real xchange Rate and Capital Flows: The Case of the

      Southern Cone Countries," Ph.D. Dt3sertation, University of California,

      Los Angeles, 1985.

5/ It should be noted that between 1973 and 1975 a very sharp real

      depreciation     took place. See Harberger, "The Chilean Economy in the
      1 97Os ."
                                        —35—




6/   During this period the nominal exchange rate with respect to the U.S.

     dollar was devalued by 135 percent.

7/ Throughout the experiment capital inflows were subject to a number of

     controls. For example, there was a minimum maturity f or loans to cothe in

     freely (66 months). Loans of shorter maturities were subject to very high

     reserve requirements. On this see Edwards, "Stabilization with

     Liberalization;" Harberger, "Observations on the Chilean Econiiy;" and

     Corbo, "Recent Macroeconomic Developments..

8/   This   follows from the traditional "transfer problem" in international
     economics. See Rudiger Dornbusch, "External Debt, Budget Deficits and
     Disequilibrium   Exchange Rates" in G. Smith and J.   Cuddington (eds.)
     International   Debt and the Developing Countries (Washington, D.C.: The

     World Bank, 1985); Harberger, "The Chilean Econany...;" Edwards,

     "Stabilization with Liberalization... ;" and Timothy Condon, Vittorio Corbo

     and Jaime de Melo, "A Simulation Analysis of the Macroeconomic Effects of

     Capital Inflows and Wage Indexation in Chile 1977—81," DRD Working Paper

     No. 108 (Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 19814) where a simulation model

     is used to conclude that capital inflows (treated like transfers) played

     an important role in the process of real exchange rate appreciation. See

     also Maurice Obstfeld, "Capital Flows, the Current Account and the Real

     Exchange Rate: Consequences of Liberalization and Stabilization;" S.

     Edwards and L. Ahamed in Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in

     Developing Countries, forthcoming, 1986.

9/ In fact preliminary computations indicate that under a floating exchange

     rate, in mid—1981 the nominal exchange rate would have been approximately

     30   pesos per dollar.
                                        —36—




10/ Larry Sjaastad, "The Failure of Economic Liberalism in the Southern Cone"
     (March 1983).    Attempts to explain econometrically the behavior of the net

    rate of capital flows in Chile    during 1977—1981 didn't produce significant
    results.     The regressions, available from   the author on request, indicate
    that the    rate of capital was not sensible during the period to uncovered

    interest rate differentials. Also, given the segmentation that existed in

    the financial market, at every moment in time there was an excess demand

    for credits denominated in foreign exchange.

11/ For an extensive discussion on the subject, see Sebastian Edwards, The

    Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in
                                                           Developing Countries,

    Princeton Essays in International Finance Fo. 156 (December 19814).      See

    also Ronald I. Mckinnon, "The International Capital Market and economic

    Liberalization in LDCs," The Developing Economies 22 (December 19814):

    1476—81


12/ The decision to peg the peso the U.S. dollar in 1979 was based on the

   belief that this will result in a rapid reduction of Chile's inflation

   towards a level comparable to the world rate of inflation.       Carlos

   Diaz—Alejandro, "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans" in W. R. Cline and S.

   Wintraub (eds.) Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries

   (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981) discusses this issue. On

   the relationship between domestic inflation, world inflation and the rate

   of   devaluation in developing countries, see Sebastian Edwards, "More on
   Purchasing   Power Parity: A Multi-Country   Analysis   of the LDCs' Case,"

   Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of California, Los

   Angeles, 1985.
                                              —37—




13/   Larry Sjaastad, "The Failure of Economic Liberalism." See also Vittorio

      Corbo and Sebastian Edwards, "El Rol de una Devaluacion en la Economia

      Chilena Actual," Working Paper, Departamento de Estudios BHC (Santiago,

      Chile, 1981), Vit.torio Corbo, "Recent Macroeconomic Developments" and

      Sebastian Edwards, "Stabilization with Liberalization."

14/ See Sergio de Castro, "Exposicion de la Hacienda Publica, 1981" (Santiago,

      Ministerio de Hacienda, 1981).

15/ D.W. is the Durbin-Watson statistic; R2 is the coefficient of detertnina—

      tion. These regressions were run         correcting      for the existence of first

      order autocorrelationi. Note that since lagged right-hand side variables

      are   used, no simultaneity problems arise from the estimation reported
      here. The devaluation dummy in equation (2) takes               a value of one in June

      of 1979   and March of 1982, and zero otherwise. On the relationship
      between real exchange rate changes and its theoretical determinants, see
      Sebastian Edwards, "Exchange Rates in Developing Countries," Working

      Paper, University of California, Los Angeles, 1985. See also Carlos Diaz—

      Alejandro,"Latin America Debt: I Don't Think We in Kansas Any More,"

      Brookings   Papers on Economic Activity 2           (19814):   335-14014. See Guillerrno

      Calvo,    "Fractured Liberalism," Economic Development and Cultural Change
      (this issue) for'   an     analysis of the Argentinian experience.
16/ These results are       in     agreement with   the   simulation findings reporte1 in
      Coridon, Corbo and de Melo, "A Simulation Analysis..."
17/ The devaluations of 1982 were a mixed blessing for most firms. On                   one

      hand,    they saw an improvement in      their      degree of competitiveness. On the
      other    hand, since they had incurred a significant dollar-denominated debt,

      the peso value of their liabilities greatly increased. This situation was




                        1fl'7fl,   YT
                                             —38—



       partially solved by the government decision to establish a preferential

       exchange rate to pay debts denominated in foreign currency.

 18/ See also Julio Galvez and James Tybout, "Mi'oeconomjc Adjustment in

       Chile: The Importance of Being a Group," World Development (August 1985)

       for a detailed analysis of the interaction between banks and bank-related

       firms.

 19/ See Harberger, "Observations on the Chilean Economy;" Corbo, "Recent

      Macroeconomic Developments;" Dornbusc'n, "External Debt, Budget Deficits

      and Disequilibrium Exchange Rates;" and Edwards, "Stabilization with

      Liberalization.. ."

20/ These figures refer to loans received by the banking
                                                                    sector; see Boiet.in
      Mensual del Banco Central de Chile. See Sebastian Edwards, "LDCs'
                                                                        Foreign
      Borrowing and Default Risk. An Empirical Analysis, 1976—80," American

      Economic Review 714   (September   19814):    726—314, for an empirical analysis of

      the determinants of the spread over LIBOR for a group of developing

      countries in the period 1976-80.

21/ Sjaastad, "The Failure of Economic Liberalism."

22/ Harberger, "Observations on the Chilean Economy."

23/   Harberger stresses this point in "Observations on the Chilelan           Economy."
      See also Sebastian Edwards, "Review of        Foxley's 'Latin American
      Experiments in Neoconservative Economics, '"       Journal   of Development

      Economics (forthcoming). Galvez and Tybout, "Microeconomic Adjustment in

      Chile," provide empirical evidence on this.

214/ See, for example, Fontaine,
                                    "Crecirniento, Recesion y Mercado." It should

      be pointed out, however, that the different definitions of real money

      behaved quite differently throughout the period. See Edwards, "Interest
                                         —39—




      Rates   and Money in a Semi-Open Economy: Chile 1975-81," Working Paper,
      University of   California, Los Angeles, 1982 and Harberger, "The Chilean

      Economy in the 1970s."

25/ Sebastian Edwards, "Money, the Rate of Devaluation and Interest RateS in a

      Semi-Open Economy," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 17 (February

      1985): 59-68 and Sebastian Edwards and Mohsin Khan, "Interest Rate

      Determination in Developing Countries: A Conceptual Framework," IMF Staff

      Papers (September 1985).

26/ See Edwards     and Khan (i984) for the exact expressions of the Ss in terms
      of the structure parameters of equations (3)   through   (9).

27/ James Hanson and Jaime de Melo, "External Shocks, Financial Reforms and

      Stabilization Attempts in Uruguay during 1974-83," World Development

      (August 1985) also make this assumption in their study on Uruguay.

28/ Hanson and de Melo reached similar conclusions in their analysis of

      interest rate behavior in the case of Uruguay. See, however, Blejer and

      Gil-Diaz, "The Effects of Domestic and External Factors on the

      Determination of the Real Interest Rate: The Case of Uruguay," Economic

      Development and Cultural Change (this issue).

29/ Sae Sjaastad, "The Failure of Economic Liberalism."

30/ Equation (13) can be derived by combining the uncovered interest condition

      and the Fisher equation for the domestic and foreign countries.

31/ Le Fort, "The Real Exchange Rate and Capital Flows..

32/   On the Klein-Saks Mission, see "The Chilean Stabilization Program and the
      Work of the Klein and Saks Economic and Financial Mission to Chile"
      (Santiago,   Chile, May 1958).
                                       -140—




33/ See the analysis in Foxley, "Latin American Experiments in Neoconservative

    Economics." There is little doubt that the implementation of the more

    drastic of these reforms -—   including    the labor law of 1979, the mining

    law and the privatization of the social security system -—     could only be
    carried out because the democratic process had been suspended. It is

    highly unlikely that these (and other) reforms would have been approved by

    a democratically elected congress.

3/ See "The Chilean Stabilization Program and the Work of the Klein and Saks

    Economic and Financial Mission to Chile."

35/ On the role of dual exchange rates for separating the capital and current

    accounts, see Rudiger Dornbusch, "Exotic Exchange Rate Adjustments," Paper

    presented at the NBER/World Bank Conference on Structural Adjustment and

    Real Exchange Rates in Developing Countries.

36/ For example, Ronald Mckinnon States in his "The Order of Economic

    Liberalization: Lessons from Chile and Argentina" in K. Brunner and A.

   Meltzer (eds.) Economic Policy in a World of Change (Amsterdam:       north-

   Holland, 1982) that "The correct order of liberalization.. .approxirnateg

   the successful Chilean experience after 1975. Chile is to be treated as

   the norm or standard of reference" (page 159).
