                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE SOCIAL COST OF NEAR-RATIONAL INVESTMENT

                                       Tarek A. Hassan
                                      Thomas M. Mertens

                                      Working Paper 17027
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w17027


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2011




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Hengjie Ai, George Akerlof, Manuel Amador, Gadi Barelvy, Jeff
Campbell, John Y. Campbell, V.V. Chari, John Cochrane, George Constantinides, Martin
Eichenbaum, Emmanuel Farhi, Nicola Fuchs-Sch¨undeln, Martin Hellwig, Anil Kashyap, Ralph
Koijen, Kenneth L. Judd, David Laibson, John Leahy, Guido Lorenzoni, N. Gregory Mankiw,
Lasse Pedersen, Kenneth Rogoff, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Pietro Veronesi, and Pierre-
Olivier Weill for helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants at Harvard University,
Stanford, Princeton, the University of Chicago, UC Berkeley, the University of British Columbia,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the London School of Economics, the Max Planck
Institute Bonn, Goethe University Frankfurt, the University of Mannheim, Oxford, the University
of Kansas, the EEA/ESEM, the SED annual meeting, the AEA annual meeting, Econometric
Society NASM, the WFA annual meeting, and the NBER AP and EFCE meetings for valuable
discussions. All mistakes remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2011 by Tarek A. Hassan and Thomas M. Mertens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Social Cost of Near-Rational Investment
Tarek A. Hassan and Thomas M. Mertens
NBER Working Paper No. 17027
May 2011, Revised August 2016
JEL No. D83,E2,E3,G1

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that the stock market may fail to aggregate information even if it appears to be efficient,
and that the resulting decrease in the information content of prices may drastically reduce
welfare. We solve a macroeconomic model in which information about fundamentals is dispersed
and households make small, correlated errors when forming expectations about future
productivity. As information aggregates in the market, these errors amplify and crowd out the
information content of stock prices. When prices reflect less information, the conditional variance
of stock returns rises, causing an increase in uncertainty and costly distortions in consumption,
capital accumulation, and labor supply.


Tarek A. Hassan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
tarek.hassan@chicagobooth.edu

Thomas M. Mertens
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research - Finance
101 Market Street, Mail stop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
thomas.mertens@sf.frb.org
    Efficient markets incorporate all available information into asset prices. As a result, investors
can learn from equilibrium prices and update their expectations accordingly. But if investors
learn from equilibrium prices, anything that moves prices has an impact on expectations held by
all market participants. We explore the implications of this basic dynamic in a world in which
people are less than perfect – a world in which they have a small propensity to make correlated
errors when forming their expectations about the future.

    We find that relaxing the rational paradigm in this minimal way has important consequences
for financial markets, capital accumulation, and welfare: if information is dispersed across in-
vestors, the private return to making diligent investment decisions is orders of magnitude lower
than the social return. If we allow for individuals to make small common errors in their invest-
ment decisions, information aggregation endogenously breaks down precisely when it is most
socially valuable (i.e., when private information is highly dispersed). This endogenous infor-
mational inefficiency results in increased uncertainty and socially costly distortions in capital
accumulation, labor supply, output, and consumption.

    We begin by deriving the main economic insights of our analysis in a static model in which
households can store their wealth for future consumption or invest it in capital (stocks). The
number of consumption goods produced by each unit of capital depends on the realization of a
future productivity shock. When making its investment decision, each household observes the
equilibrium stock price and a private signal about this realization.

    If all households are perfectly rational, the stock price is an effective aggregator of informa-
tion – it becomes perfectly revealing about all the information contained in the private signals
(Grossman, 1976). As a result, the conditional variance of stock returns is low (zero if the noise
in private signals is purely idiosyncratic), and households install the optimal amount of capital
in equilibrium.

   We then show that the economy behaves very differently if households are near-rational
rather than fully rational. Near-rational households have an economically small propensity to
make small, cross-sectionally correlated, errors when forming their expectations about future
productivity. That is, they are slightly too optimistic in some states of the world and slightly
too pessimistic in others, but, on average, have unbiased expectations. Households have the
option to avoid loading on these near-rational errors by paying a small mental cost (thinking
harder), but rationally choose not to do so in equilibrium, because making small errors in the
formation of their expectations is almost costless from the perspective of an individual household.
(This result follows directly from the envelope theorem.)

   A large literature in behavioral finance has developed a wide range of psychologically founded
mechanisms that prompt households to make common errors in their investment decisions. 1 We
  1
      Some examples are Odean (1998), Odean (1999), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (2001), Barberis,



                                                      1
thus remain open to many possible interpretations of the small common errors households make
in our model. The idea is simply that households make small mistakes, and the integral over
these mistakes has a non-degenerate distribution.

    Although households have little incentive to avoid near-rational errors in their behavior, these
errors entail a first-order cost to society because they have an external effect on the market’s
capacity to aggregate information. When the average household is slightly too optimistic, it
wants to invest slightly more of its wealth in stocks, and the stock price must rise. Households
that observe this higher stock price may interpret it as either a result of errors made by their peers
or, with some probability, a reflection of more positive information about future productivity
received by other market participants. Rationally, households thus revise their expectations of
future productivity upwards whenever they see a rise in the stock price. As households revise
their expectations upward, the stock price must rise further, triggering yet another revision in
expectations, and so on. Small errors in the expectation of the average household may thus lead
to much larger, non-fundamental, deviations in the equilibrium stock price.

    Because the stock price now transmits amplified noise, the elasticity of the stock price with
respect to information about the fundamental falls, reducing the information content of stock
prices and inhibiting the ability of all households, regardless of whether they are rational or
near-rational, to learn about the future. This rise in uncertainty affects social welfare through
three distinct channels. First, it distorts the allocation of aggregate quantities, for example, by
reducing the covariance of investment with productivity and by distorting the level of capital
accumulation. Second, it raises the level of consumption risk individual households face, by
generating a dispersion in equilibrium consumption: because the stock price no longer transmits
all available information, households differ in their equilibrium actions, adding a cross-sectional
component to consumption risk. Third, if households have a preference for early resolution of
uncertainty, it also directly lowers welfare by delaying the resolution of uncertainty.

    All of these effects of near-rational behavior result from a simple information externality:
an individual household does not internalize that making a small error that is correlated with
the common error affects other households’ ability to learn about the future. We argue this
externality provides a logically coherent rationale for why equilibrium asset prices and other
economic aggregates might contain non-fundamental noise even if all economic actors appear
to act rationally and financial markets are efficient in the sense that rational investors cannot
systematically outperform the market.

    The more dispersed private information is across households, the more severe are the effects
of this information externality, and the more social and private incentives diverge. Because our
model features only a single class of almost perfectly rational households, we are able to conduct
Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1998), Hong and Stein (1999), Allen and Gale
(2003), and Hassan and Mertens (2011).


                                                       2
normative analysis and measure social incentives simply by calculating a utilitarian social welfare
function. Using this function, we can show the market’s capacity to aggregate information is
most socially valuable when private information is most dispersed (when the private signal
contains a lot of idiosyncratic noise). However, the lower the informativeness of the private
signal, the larger the weight households put on the stock price when forming their expectations,
and the larger the amplification of any given near-rational error. The market’s capacity to
aggregate information is thus most vulnerable to near-rational behavior precisely when it is
most socially valuable. By contrast, the private cost of near-rational behavior is decreasing
in the dispersion of private information, because a larger amplification of near-rational errors
makes distinguishing noise from information more difficult, and thus decreases the return to
behaving fully rationally. Making near-rational errors is thus cheapest precisely when they are
most socially harmful.

    The second part of the paper quantifies the amount of non-fundamental noise and the welfare
effects near-rational behavior may entail, by introducing dispersed private information into a
state-of-the-art real business cycle (RBC) model with recursive utility, endogenous capital accu-
mulation, and flexible labor supply (Croce, 2014). At the beginning of each period, households
receive private signals about the future realization of a temporary and a persistent shock to total
factor productivity (TFP). As in the static model, households can condition their expectations
on the state of the economy (prices and macroeconomic aggregates) and make small correlated
errors when forming their expectations about the realizations of the two productivity shocks. To
distinguish the effects of amplified near-rational errors from the effects of noise induced through
the signal structure, we also allow for aggregate noise in private signals and the existence of
exogenous noisy public signals about the two shocks.

    We estimate the model to match standard macroeconomic and asset-pricing moments, as
well as an additional set of moments (generated from the Survey of Professional Forecasters)
that characterize the dispersion and dynamics of expectations. The model performs well in
matching these moments and, in particular, two salient stylized facts highlighted in the recent
literature: that disagreement is counter-cyclical (Bloom, 2014; Patton and Timmermann, 2010)
and highly persistent (Yu, 2011).

    The first main finding from our estimation is that most of the information about future
productivity that households receive originates from noisy private rather than public signals.
The reason is that, in the data, differences in opinion about future GDP growth are large
relative to the size of forecast errors, suggesting households differ in the signals they receive.
Prices (or other economic aggregates households may observe) thus play a potentially important
role in aggregating this information.

    However our estimates also suggest that, in equilibrium, about half of the information con-
tained in private signals is driven out of asset prices by amplified near-rational errors. Neverthe-


                                                 3
less, even these noisy asset prices transmit enough information to reduce the posterior variance
of the persistent and temporary shocks to TFP by 51% and 44%, respectively. By contrast,
we find that the exogenous public signals are relatively less informative (reducing the posterior
variance by 6% and 20%, respectively). Thus, most of what households learn about the future
they learn from endogenously noisy asset prices.

   As they distort equilibrium asset prices, amplified near-rational errors also affect all other
household decisions, distorting the dynamics of capital accumulation, consumption, labor supply,
and output by preventing forward-looking adjustments, introducing non-fundamental variation,
and causing a dispersion in consumption and labor supply across households.

    We quantify the social cost of near-rational behavior as the percentage rise in consumption
that would make households indifferent between remaining in an economy in which all other
households behave near-rationally and transitioning to the stochastic steady state of an economy
in which all other households behave fully rationally until the end of time. In our benchmark
estimation, these social costs amount to 5.31% of permanent consumption, whereas the incentive
to an individual household to avoid small common errors in its expectations is economically small
(0.13% of lifetime consumption). The majority of this social cost arises because the delayed
resolution of uncertainty directly lowers households’ utility, while the increase in consumption
risk due to dispersion in equilibrium consumption and leisure across households accounts for an
additional 1.5 percentage points of the total social cost.

    We make three main caveats to our results. First, our paper offers a near-rational micro-
foundation for noisy demand. We believe this microfoundation is useful because it is broadly
applicable, facilitates welfare analysis, and makes contact with a growing behavioral finance lit-
erature. However, other modeling strategies (involving for example liquidity shocks) may yield
similar results. Second, although we refer to the information content of asset prices, we do so
mainly in keeping with a convention in the literature, where asset prices are generally regarded
as being more easily observable than other aggregate variables. In our quantitative model, how-
ever, macroeconomic quantities may transmit the same information as asset prices. In this sense,
asset prices are not special and we have no way to distinguish learning from asset prices from
learning from other aggregate variables. Third, we abstract from the possibility that households
can actively acquire information. Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) point out that noise in asset
prices may not only reduce information revelation but also improve informational efficiency by
inducing households to acquire more private information. All our results are contingent on an
exogenous signal structure and do not consider this other, potentially stabilizing, force.

    Related Literature       Our paper relates to a large literature on noisy rational expecta-
tions following Hellwig (1980) and Diamond and Verrecchia (1981) in which exogenous noise
trading impedes the aggregation of dispersed information. 2 In particular, the information exter-
  2
      Most closely related are Wang (1994), where noise in asset prices arises endogenously from time-varying private


                                                          4
nality we identify is reminiscent of the free-rider problem in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) where
households do not internalize all the benefits of the private information they acquire. Relative
to this literature, we make progress on two dimensions. First, the introduction of near-rational
behavior microfounds the amount of noise in asset prices in a way that is consistent with the
rational paradigm and lends itself to normative analysis. Second, we show that a given amount
of near-rational errors has a more detrimental effect on the aggregation of information when
information is more dispersed. 3

    A more recent literature on pathologies in information aggregation in financial markets has
focused on information externalities arising either from strategic complementarities or from
higher-order uncertainty. 4 Examples of the former include Amador and Weill (2012) and Gold-
stein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013) who study models in which individuals overweight public
signals, amplifying noise contained therein. Examples of the latter include Allen, Morris, and
Shin (2006), Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2008), and Qiu and Wang (2010), where higher-order
expectations drive a wedge between asset prices and their fundamentals. Our paper highlights
a third type of information externality that arises even when no strategic complementarities are
present and first-order expectations fully determine asset prices: 5 individuals do not internalize
how errors in their investment decisions affect others’ equilibrium expectations. Pathologies
similar to those outlined in this paper are thus likely to arise in any setting in which households
observe prices that aggregate dispersed information. Mertens (2009) derives policies that may
improve welfare in these settings.

    We also contribute to a large literature that studies the general equilibrium effects and wel-
fare costs of pathologies in financial markets, including Stein (1987), DeLong, Shleifer, Summers,
and Waldmann (1989), Chauvin, Laibson, and Mollerstrom (2011), and Lansing (2012). A large
literature in macroeconomics and in corporate finance focuses on the sensitivity of firms’ invest-
ment to a given mispricing in the stock market (Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers, 1993; Baker,
Stein, and Wurgler, 2003; Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman, 2005; Farhi and Panageas,
2006).6 One conclusion from this literature is that the sensitivity of capital investment with
respect to stock prices is low or that the stock market is a “sideshow” with respect to the real
economy (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1990). By contrast, we show quantitatively that the so-
cial cost of a failure of information aggregation, transmitting itself through the channels outlined
investment opportunities, and Albagli (2011), where noise trader risk is amplified due to liquidity constraints on
traders.
   3
     The notion of near-rationality is due to Akerlof and Yellen (1985) and Mankiw (1985). Our application is
closest to Cochrane (1989) and Chetty (2012), who use the utility cost of small deviations around an optimal policy
to derive ”economic standard errors.” Other recent applications include Woodford (2010) and Dupor (2005).
   4
     For an approach to pathologies in social learning based on social dynamics rather than on information exter-
nalities, see Burnside et al. (2011).
   5
     The provision of public information thus always raises welfare in our framework (see Appendix A.11.1).
   6
     Also see Galeotti and Schiantarelli (1994), Polk and Sapienza (2009), Panageas (2005), and Chirinko and
Schaller (2006).



                                                        5
above, is economically large even when this sensitivity is low. 7

    The quantitative application of our model also makes contact with an emerging literature
that strives to document and explain stylized facts concerning the dynamics and dispersion
of expectations (Patton and Timmermann, 2010; Yu, 2011; Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2012;
Sockin, 2015).

    Finally, we add to the existing literature by quantifying the effects of our information mi-
crostructure within a full-fledged dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model. Existing models
with dispersed information typically require policy functions that are (log) linear in the expecta-
tion of the shocks agents learn about (e.g., Hellwig, 2005; Lorenzoni, 2009; Angeletos, Lorenzoni,
and Pavan, 2012; and Angeletos and La’O, 2013). By contrast, in standard RBC models with
capital accumulation and decreasing returns to scale, households’ policies are non-linear func-
tions of the average expectation of future productivity. We are able solve and estimate our model
due to recent advances in computational economics. We follow the solution method in Mertens
(2009), which builds on Judd (1998) and Judd and Guu (2001) in using an asymptotically valid
higher-order expansion in all state variables around the deterministic steady state of the model
in combination with a nonlinear change of variables (Judd, 2002).

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 derives the main theoretical
insights of the model in a simple three-period model. Section 2 introduces our mechanism into a
quantitative RBC model with endogenous capital accumulation. Section 3 estimates the model
and presents quantitative results.



1        Static Model

The model economy exists at three time periods t = 0, 1, 2. At t = 1, an endowment of a
numéraire good can be stored until t = 2, or converted into units of capital K at adjustment
cost 2κ
      1
        K 2 , where κ ≥ 0. At t = 2, each unit of capital returns η units of the numéraire:
                                                                     
                                               Y = ηK, η ∼ N ηˉ, σ 2η .

The capital adjustment technology is operated by an investment goods sector that performs
instant arbitrage between the price of capital traded in a Walrasian stock market at t = 1, Q,
and the number of units of capital in circulation:

                                                                         1 2
                                            max Π = QK − K −               K .
                                              K                         2κ
    7
        This finding also relates to a large literature on the costs of business cycles. See Barlevy (2005) for a survey.




                                                             6
Its first-order condition requires that it supplies

                                               K = κ(Q − 1)                                                (1)

units of capital to maximize arbitrage profits.

   A continuum of identical households indexed by i ∈ [0, 1] populates the economy. At t = 1,
each household observes Q and receives a private signal about productivity

                                                si = η + ν i ,                                             (2)

where ν i represents i.i.d. draws from a normal distribution with zero mean and variance σ 2ν .8
Given si , each household chooses to purchase zi units of capital (“stocks”) to maximize expected
utility from terminal wealth, E1i [Ui ] , where

                                                     ρ
                                           Ui = w2i − V1 [w2i ],                                           (3)
                                                     2

with risk aversion ρ > 0. V1 [w2i ] is the posterior variance given si and Q, and terminal wealth
is given by
                                        w2i = zi (η − Q) + Π,                                 (4)

where Π is a lump-sum transfer of profits from the investment goods sector.

     When forming their expectation about productivity, households make a small error. This
 small error shifts the posterior probability density function of η by μi ( + ˆi ), where μi ≥ 0
 measures household i’s exposure to the error  + ˆi . We refer to a household as near-rational if
 μi > 0 and as fully rational if μi = 0. The expectational error is positively correlated across
 households, where  ∼ N (0, σ  ) is the common component that is the same across all households,
ˆi ∼ N (0, μ̂σ  ) is the idiosyncratic component, and μ̂ calibrates the size of the correlation across
 households. The expectations operator E1i is thus the rational expectations operator, except
 that it allows households to make small mistakes about the conditional mean of η:

                                       E1i [η] = E1i [η] + μi ( + ˆi ) ,                                 (5)

where E1i [η] = E [η|Q, si ] is the rational expectations operator conditional on the information
available to household i at time 1. Although near-rational households make correlated mistakes
when forming their expectations, they understand the structure of the economy, understand
the equilibrium mapping of information into Q, and have the correct perception of all higher
   8
    In section 1.4, we show that the conclusions of our model continue to hold in more general information
environments where the noise in the private signal is correlated across households and where households observe
an exogenous public signal in addition to their private signal.




                                                       7
moments of the conditional distribution of η.9 Importantly, households know they and others
load on the common error, .

    There are many reasons why households may make small correlated errors in practice. For
concreteness, we assume households choose to load on the near-rational error with μi > 0 because
they face a small mental cost λ|U ˉ |(1 − μi ) of behaving fully rationally, where U
                                                                                   ˉ is households’
certainty-equivalent wealth in the case in which all households behave fully rationally (i.e., when
μi = 0 ∀i). The parameter λ  1 calibrates this small mental cost of fully rational behavior as
a share of certainty-equivalent wealth. For convenience, we normalize σ  such that

                                                   ˉ |(1 − μi ) = 1
                         μi = arg max E0 [Ui ] − λ|U                      ∀i

in the symmetric equilibrium, and thus

                                   E1i [η] = E [η|Q, si ] +  + ˆi .                          (7)


    One can show that σ  is a monotonic, strictly increasing function of λ (see Appendix A.3 for
a proof). That is, the larger the mental cost of behaving fully rationally, the larger the near-
rational errors households make when forming their expectations. As a result, all comparative
statics over λ and σ  are qualitatively identical, and we use them interchangeably below. In the
limit in which λ → 0, all households behave fully rationally with σ  → 0.

   Lastly, market clearing requires that aggregate demand for stocks is equal to the number of
units of capital in circulation:         Z 1
                                             zi di = K.                                    (8)
                                              0


1.1      Solving the Model

Plugging (4) into (3) and taking the derivative with respect to zi yields households’ optimal
demand for stocks:
                                           E1i [η] − Q
                                      zi =             .                                  (9)
                                              ρV1 [η]
We can then use the market-clearing condition (8) and plug in (9) and (1) to show the market
price of capital is a linear function of the average expectation of η:
                                         R1
                                              E1i [η] di + κρV1 [η]
                                   Q=     0
                                                                    .                         (10)
                                                1 + κρV1 [η]
  9
      Formally,               h              i     h              i
                           E1i (η − E1i (η))k = E1i (η − E1i (η))k ∀ k > 1.                     (6)




                                                   8
                                                            R
Households can thus directly infer the average expectation E1i [η] di from observing Q. We may
guess that the equilibrium price function is linear in η and :

                                                         Q = π 0 + π 1 η + γ.                                                       (11)

Assuming this guess is correct, we can write the rational expectation of η given the private signal
and Q as                                               Z                         1
                                               E1i [η] = α0 + α1 si + α2             E1i [η] di,                                     (12)
                                                                             0

where the constants α0 , α1 , and α2 are the weights households give to the prior, the private
signal, and the average expectation, respectively. Using (7), substituting (2), and taking the
integral across individuals gives
                                   Z       1
                                                               α0     α1         1
                                               E1i [η]di =         +       η+        ,                                              (13)
                                       0                     1 − α2 1 − α2    1 − α2

where the noise in private signals, ν i , as well as the idiosyncratic errors, ˆi , integrate to zero.
Plugging this expression back into (10) and matching coefficients with (11) verifies that the
equilibrium price function is indeed linear.

   It follows that in addition to si , households can extract an independent and unbiased signal
                  R1
about η, (1−α
            α1
               2)
                   0 E1i [η]di − α1 = η + α1 , from observing Q. Bayes’ rule then implies the
                                 α0         1

posterior variance is the inverse of the sum of the precision of the prior and the two signals:
                                                                                                   −1
                                 V [η|si , Q] = V1 [η] = σ −2    −2   2 −2
                                                           η + σ ν + α1 σ                               .                           (14)

Moreover, the conditional expectation of η is the precision-weighted sum of the signals and the
prior mean divided by the posterior precision 10 :
                                                                                                     
                                                         σ −2
                                                           η ηˉ + σ −2
                                                                    ν si + α 1 σ 
                                                                             2 −2 η +          1
                                                                                               α1 
                                E[η|si , Q] =                                                                .                       (15)
                                                                        V1 [η]−1

Matching coefficients with (12) yields

                     ηˉV1 (η)σ 2                                   V1 [η]                                  α1 V1 (η)
        α0 =                            ,         (16)       α1 =          , (17)            α2 =                         .   (18)
               σ 2η (α1 V1 (η) + σ 2 )                              σ 2ν                                α1 V1 (η) + σ 2
    Solving the system of equations consisting of the matched coefficients in (11), (14), (16),
(17), and (18) leads to expressions in terms of parameters. Because the closed-form solution
for V1 [η] is somewhat cumbersome, it is convenient to rewrite the solution of all endogenous
variables as a function of V1 [η] and parameters.

 10
      See Appendix A.1 for a more detailed proof.


                                                                    9
Lemma 1.1
The unique linear symmetric equilibrium of this economy is characterized as follows:
                                                                                                    
        V1 [η] ηˉ + κρσ 2η                          σ 2η − V1 [η]                       σ 2η − V1 [η] σ 2ν
   π0 =                      ,   (19)       π1 =                     ,    (20) γ =                            , (21)
        (1 + κρV1 [η]) σ 2η                      (1 + κρV1 [η]) σ 2η               V1 [η] (1 + κρV1 [η]) σ 2η

where the conditional variance is implicitly defined by
                                                                              !−1
                                                                 V1 [η]2 −2
                                 V1 [η] =    σ −2
                                               η    +   σ −2
                                                          ν    +        σ          .                      (22)
                                                                   σ 4ν

Proof See Appendix A.2.


    These results have two immediate implications. First, note the standard deviation of the
idiosyncratic component of expectational errors, μ̂, appears in none of the solutions above and
is thus irrelevant for the stock price, the conditional variance of η, and all aggregate variables.
Second, although the sensitivity of the capital stock with respect to the stock price, κ, influences
the response of the stock price to η and , it does not affect households’ ability to learn about
η (the conditional variance of η in (22) is independent of κ). Similarly, plugging (17) into (15)
shows the loadings of households’ expectation operators on η and  depend only on σ η , σ ν , and σ  ,
and not on κ. How much households can learn about the future is thus unrelated to the function
linking stock prices to the real economy. We will show in section 2 that this insight carries over to
a quantitative model in which the equilibrium expectations operator continues to be a function of
the same three variables, despite much more complex and non-linear macroeconomic dynamics.


1.2   External Effect on Information Aggregation

The last two terms on the right-hand side of (13) reflect two channels through which near-
rational behavior affects equilibrium expectations. The last term shows the small common error
is amplified with the multiplier 1/ (1 − α2 ). Because α2 is a number between 0 and 1, the
multiplier is always larger than 1, reflecting the fact that the stock price also transmits the
common error whenever it transmits information. The extent of amplification depends on how
much households (rationally) rely on Q when forming their expectation of η. The bigger the
weight they place on the stock price, α2 , the larger the amplified noise in equilibrium expectations
relative to . The second term on the right-hand side reflects the indirect effect of near-rational
behavior, which arises due to the fact that households optimally calculate the coefficients α1
and α2 . When the market price of capital transmits an amplified common error in addition to
information about η, households rationally lower α2 and, as a result, decrease the equilibrium
information content of stock prices.

                                                          10
    To understand these two effects, it is useful to consider the limiting case in which all house-
holds are fully rational, which arises when the mental cost of fully rational behavior, and thus
the size of near-rational errors, goes to zero (λ → 0). In this case, the model coincides with a
standard rational expectations equilibrium in which the stock price is perfectly revealing about
future productivity (commonly referred to as the “Grossman equilibrium”). Appendix A.4 shows
that
                                          lim [V1 [η]] = 0                                     (23)
                                          λ→0

and
                                            lim [π 1 ] = 1.                                     (24)
                                           λ→0

In this case, households put all weight on the stock price (α2 = 1) and no weight on their
private signal (α1 = 0). In this limit, a marginally small common error is infinitely amplified,
γ = 1/ (1 − α2 ) = ∞. The direct effect of near-rational behavior is thus to generate large non-
fundamental errors in the market price of capital and in equilibrium expectations. The indirect
effect of near-rational behavior is households’ rational reaction to this fact. When the stock price
transmits amplified common errors, households rationally reduce α2 , such that the multiplier on
 becomes finite. However, a reduction of α2 also reduces the elasticity of the stock price with
respect to information, π 1 . The following proposition formalizes this intuition.

Proposition 1.2
Near-rational behavior globally decreases the elasticity of the stock price with respect to future
productivity:
                                      ∂π 1
                                           <0       ∀λ > 0.                                   (25)
                                      ∂λ
As the mental cost of fully rational behavior (and thus σ  ) approaches 0, the marginal effect of
near-rational behavior on this elasticity becomes infinitely large:
                                                
                                            ∂π 1
                                        lim        = −∞.                                        (26)
                                        λ→0 ∂λ


Proof See Appendix A.5.


The result of this proposition can alternatively be restated in terms of the size of the errors:
∂π 1 /∂σ  → −∞ for σ  → 0. (We find an infinite, rather than just a large, multiplier at the
margin because the stock price becomes perfectly revealing of all available information when
λ → 0. If some other exogenous source of noisy demand remained even when λ = 0, this
amplification would instead be finite.)

    It follows that near-rational behavior has a first-order detrimental effect on the stock market’s
capacity to transmit information. This result contrasts sharply with the utility considerations
of an individual household that loads on the small common error. By the envelope theorem, the

                                                 11
first-order effect from loading on (small) near-rational errors is zero:

                                                   ∂E0 [Ui ]
                                             lim             = 0.
                                             λ→0    ∂μi

Both the demand schedule for stocks in (9) and the expectations operator (12) are the result of
an optimization. Near-rational errors, even if they contain a common component, represent a
small deviation from the household’s optimal program. Because the slope of the utility function
at the optimum is 0, the marginal effect of these deviations on utility is also 0.

    The key to understanding this result is that a hypothetical rational household (μi = 0) that
                                                                       
lives in an economy populated by near-rational households μj6=i = 1 has no informational ad-
vantage. Near-rational households understand fully that they and other households are making
errors when forming their expectations. They react to this fact by lowering α2 in response
to a rise in the equilibrium amount of non-fundamental volatility in the stock price. Because
learning about η is isomorphic to learning about , near-rational households thus already do
everything possible to learn about the common component of the near-rational error. 11 Absent
an informational advantage, the optimal behavior of a fully rational household is then simply
to implement the same optimal program, but without the near-rational error. The utility gain
from behaving fully rationally instead of near rationally is thus 0 at the margin.

    By continuity, proposition 1.2 implies that for small σ  , near-rational behavior represents
an externality that has a first-order detrimental effect on the market’s ability to aggregate
information, whereas households have only a negligible (lower-order) incentive to avoid making
these errors. The stock market thus fails to aggregate information even though it is efficient
in the sense that a fully rational household cannot systematically outperform a near-rational
household with the same information set.

   We next consider the comparative static of this result when private information becomes
more dispersed in the economy.

Proposition 1.3
  1. The more dispersed private information is, the more detrimental the effect of near-rational
     errors on information aggregation:
                                        2 σ 2 V [η]2 + 4V [η]4 
                                                                     
               ∂π 1        1 + κρσ 2η  2σ ν  1               1         <0      if λ > 0
                    =−                                             
               ∂σ ν    σ 2η (1 + κρV1 [η])2 σ 5ν σ 2 + 2σ ν V1 [η]3 = 0       in the limit λ → 0.


   2. Any strictly positive mental cost of fully rational behavior may destroy the stock market’s
  11
    From (11), knowing η and Q is clearly the same as knowing  and Q; we could thus rewrite the entire optimal
program using a signal extraction about  and obtain the same result.




                                                      12
Figure 1: Ratio of the conditional variance of η to its unconditional variance plotted over the
level of dispersion of private information, σ ν /σ η .


      capacity to aggregate information as the dispersion of private information goes to infinity:
                                                 
                                              
                                       V1 [η]      1 if λ > 0
                                lim       2
                                               =
                              σ ν →∞    ση       0 in the limit λ → 0.


Proof See Appendix A.6.

    Figure 1 illustrates this point. It plots the ratio of the conditional variance of η to its
unconditional variance over the level of dispersion of private information. To facilitate the
interpretation of the results, we scale all standard deviations with the standard deviation of the
productivity shock, σ η . With this scaling, all standard deviations have a natural interpretation.
In particular, the ratio ( σσνη )2 measures the level of dispersion of information in the economy
as the number of individuals who, in the absence of a market price, would need to pool their
private information in order to reduce the conditional variance of η by one half. A value of 0 on
the vertical axis indicates households can perfectly predict tomorrow’s realization of η, whereas
a value of 1 indicates η is completely unpredictable.

    The horizontal red line shows that when all households behave fully rationally (λ, σ  = 0),
η is perfectly predictable, regardless of how dispersed information is in the economy. In this
case, the stock price perfectly transmits all available information in the economy. This situation
changes drastically when λ, σ  > 0. The thick blue line plots the results for the case in which the
standard deviation of the common component of the near-rational error is 1% of the standard
deviation of η. The curve rises steeply and converges to 1. To the very left of the graph, when
the private signal is more precise and households thus rely relatively little on the stock price
when learning about the future, near-rational behavior has a relatively small detrimental effect

                                                13
on information aggregation. However, when we move to the right of the graph, households
rely more on the stock price, and near-rational behavior has a larger detrimental effect. When
private information is highly dispersed, near-rational behavior results in the total collapse of
information aggregation. This result is quite general and continues to hold in more complex
settings. In fact, our quantitative model in section 2 will produce a figure almost identical to
Figure 1.

    The second statement in Proposition 1.3 implies this qualitative result does not depend on
how near-rational households are. For comparison, Figure 1 plots the comparative statics for
near-rational errors that are an order of magnitude larger ( σση = 0.1) and an order of magnitude
smaller ( σση = 0.001). In each case, the productivity shock becomes completely unpredictable if
information is sufficiently dispersed.

    The implication of this finding is that information aggregation in financial markets is most
likely to break down precisely when it is most socially valuable – when information is highly
dispersed. This comparative static again contrasts sharply with the incentives an individual
household faces:
Proposition 1.4
Holding λ fixed, households make larger near-rational errors the more dispersed information is;

                                            ∂σ 
                                                 > 0.
                                            ∂σ ν

Proof See Appendix A.7.

For a given mental cost of fully rational behavior, households make larger near-rational errors
precisely when they are more socially harmful. In other words, making mistakes of a given
magnitude σ  becomes cheaper as we move from left to right in Figure 1. The reason is, again,
that learning about  is isomorphic to learning about η. When households’ private signals are
more precise, they know more about η and thus more easily detect the common component of
the near-rational error, which makes near-rational behavior costlier (it pays to be fully rational
if you can identify and trade against ). When private signals are noisier and information
aggregation breaks down, no one can learn much about the future. The less households can
learn about the future, the less they can distinguish movements in stock prices that are due to
η from movements that are due to . Making near-rational errors is thus cheaper precisely when
they are most socially harmful.

    Due to this additional amplification, the deterioration in the information content of stock
prices when increasing σ ν is more pronounced when we hold fixedλ than if we hold fixed σ  , as
illustrated in Appendix Figure 1.

   A crucial feature of these results is again that any collapse in the aggregation of information

                                               14
Figure 2: Decomposition of the ratio of the conditional variance of η to its unconditional variance
plotted over the level of dispersion of private information.


affects everyone in the economy: conditional on receiving the same private signal, the difference
in the expectation of a rational and near-rational household is small,  +ˆi . In fact, the posterior
variance we plotted in Figure 1 is the conditional variance of such a fully rational household:

                             V1 [η]   1  2 2                 2 2            2 2
                                                                                 
                                    =      α  σ
                                             1 ν + (1 − π 1 )  σ η + (γ − 1)  σ  .                                 (27)
                              σ 2η    σ 2η

The expression for the precision of the forecast of a near-rational household is identical, except
the third term in brackets is then γ 2 σ 2 .12

    Figure 2 decomposes the conditional variance (27) into its three components. The thick blue
line in Figure 2 is the same as the thick blue in Figure 1. It plots the ratio of the conditional
variance of η to its unconditional variance over the level of dispersion of private information for
the case in which σση = 0.01. The dotted line plots the first term on the right-hand side of (27),
which is the error households make in their forecast of η t+1 due to the noise in their private
signal. It is roughly constant throughout, reflecting the fact that households reduce α1 when
the private signal contains more noise. The broken line plots the second term, which is the
error households make in their forecast because the stock price does not reflect all information
about η t+1 (the “indirect” effect of near-rational behavior), and the third component is the
error households make due to amplified common errors in the stock price (the “direct” effect of
near-rational behavior).

       At low levels of σ ν , amplified small common errors are the main source of households’ forecast
  12
    This result follows from the analysis in Appendix A.1. By “precision”of the forecasts of near-rational house-
                   Eit [(η t+1 −Eit (η t+1 ))2 ]
hold, we refer to               σ2
                                                 . Note, however, that from (6), the near-rational household has the same
                                 η
“perceived”
            conditional    variance
                                      as
                                           a   rational household,
                                                              
  Eit (η t+1 − Eit η t+1 )2 = Eit (η t+1 − Eit η t+1 )2 .


                                                           15
errors. As private information becomes more dispersed, the amplification rises and eventually
peaks as households, confronted with noisy private signals and a noisy stock price, begin to rely
more on their priors, reducing both α1 and α2 . At the same time, the information content of the
stock price begins to fall. In the region in which the broken line approaches 1, small common
errors result in a complete collapse of information aggregation, and α1 , α2 → 0.


1.3   Real Effects of Near-rational Behavior

Now that we understand the aggregation of information in our model, we can ask how near-
rational behavior affects the economy as a whole. Using (11), we can write equilibrium stock
returns as
                                 η − Q = −π 0 + η (1 − π 1 ) − γ.                      (28)

Near-rational behavior affects each of the three terms on the right-hand side. The third term on
the right-hand side shows that it induces non-fundamental volatility in stock returns. Equation
(25) shows that near-rational behavior reduces π 1 and thus causes a rise in the volatility of
equilibrium stock returns (in the sense that the volatility of stock returns is 0 when all households
behave fully rationally, and positive if and only if λ, σ  > 0). Near-rational behavior thus results
in an increase in the amount of financial risk households face in the stock market. Lastly, this
increase in financial risk in turn induces a rise in the equity premium by lowering the first term.
Taking time-zero expectations of (28) and using (19) and (20) to substitute for π 0 yields
                                                                          !
                                                        (1 − π 1 ) σ 2η
                             E0 [η − Q] = κρ (ˉ
                                              η − 1)                          .
                                                         1 + κρσ 2η

These effects on stock returns are mirrored in distortions of aggregate quantities:
Proposition 1.5
Near-rational behavior lowers the covariance between capital accumulation and productivity and
reduces the expected level of capital accumulation and output by impeding the stock market’s
capacity to aggregate information:

            ∂E0 [K]   ∂E0 [K] ∂π 1         ∂Cov0 [K, η]   ∂Cov0 [K, η] ∂π 1
                    =              < 0 and              =                   <0.
              ∂λ       ∂π 1 ∂λ                ∂λ             ∂π 1      ∂λ

Proof See Appendix A.8.

    Our model allows us to assess the welfare effects of these distortions while avoiding two
common difficulties in noisy rational expectations models (e.g., Brunnermeier et al. (2014)).
First, because the model features only a single class of agents, we can calculate the ex-ante
(time zero) utility of these agents without having to consider the utility of non-maximizing
“noise” or “liquidity” traders that are commonly used as a modeling device to induce noise

                                                 16
in the equilibrium stock price. Second, because near-rational households are, by definition,
“nearly” maximizing their utility, whether we consider welfare under the fully rational or the
near-rational measure is inconsequential. Because the biases in the behavior of near-rational
households are small, whether we respect them for the purposes of our utility calculations does
not matter; that is, E0 [Ui ] ≈ E0 [Ui ]. Using these two insights, we can show the following lemma:

Lemma 1.6
The ex-ante utilitarian social welfare function can be written as

                                                             ρ
                                SW F = E0 [Ui ] = E0 [w2a ] − E0 [V1 [w2i ]] ,                              (29)
                                                             2

where
                          E0 [V1 [w2i ]] = V0 [w2a ] + V0 [w2i − w2a ] − V0 [E1i [w2i ]]

and
                                                                            1    
                         E0 [w2a ] = (ˉ
                                      η − 1) E0 [K] + Cov0 (K, η) −           E0 K 2 .                      (30)
                                                                           2κ

Proof See Appendix A.9.


    The utilitarian social welfare function thus depends on the unconditional mean and variance
                                            2
of aggregate wealth, w2a ≡ K (η − Q) + K   2κ , the expected dispersion of wealth across households
(reflecting the fact that cross-sectional dispersion of consumption represents a source of risk
from the perspective of the household), and the amount of information about w2i revealed at
t = 1 (reflecting a preference for early resolution of uncertainty).

Proposition 1.7
Near-rational behavior lowers welfare by lowering the level of aggregate wealth, increasing the
dispersion of wealth across households, and delaying the resolution of uncertainty. These effects
represent a negative externality of near-rational behavior that transmits itself through the effect
of near-rational errors on the stock market’s capacity to transmit information:
                                                                                                
          ∂SW F   ∂E0 [Ui ]           ∂SW F ∂π 1
                                                          2
                                                      2 σ ν ρκ 1 + κρ (1 − η ˉ)2 + σ 2η + 1       ∂π 1
      lim       −             = lim                = ση                                    lim          < 0.
      λ→0   ∂λ      ∂μi         λ→0    ∂π 1 ∂λ                   2σ 2ν ρ 1 + κρσ 2η         λ→0   ∂λ


Proof See Appendix A.10.


     By reducing the market’s capacity to transmit information, near-rational behavior thus has
a large (first-order) external effect on welfare. This effect works through three channels. First,
it lowers aggregate wealth by distorting the aggregate capital stock, output, and consumption.
Second, it increases the dispersion of wealth across households, because households differ in their
equilibrium expectations and investments when information aggregation breaks down. Third,



                                                        17
it delays the resolution of uncertainty, because households know less about the future in equi-
librium. Taken together, near-rational behavior thus entails first-order social costs while it is
costless to the individual household at the margin. In the following section, we use our quanti-
tative model to gauge the overall size of these costs in the data and the relative contributions
of the three channels above.

    Note, however, that even these qualitative results have implications beyond their immediate
application to the present paper: a large literature on the real effects of stock market dys-
functionality has traditionally focused on estimating either the sensitivity of capital investment
with respect to stock prices, κ, or the covariance of capital investment with non-fundamental
movements of stock prices, Cov0 (K, ). Our results above show that neither of these quantities
are a sufficient statistic of the welfare consequences of near-rational behavior (instead, they are
at best partially informative only about the first channel). In this sense, our results show the
social costs of a dysfunctional stock market can be large even if the stock market appears as a
“sideshow” (Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1990) in the sense that κ is low.


1.4   Alternative Information Environments

The key result of the analysis above is that small correlated errors in household expectations
have a lower-order effect on an individual household’s utility but a first-order external effect on
social welfare. We now show this result carries over to richer information environments in which
households are exposed to other noisy signals. We consider two alternative sources of correlated
errors in expectations.

   In the first specification, households can additionally observe a noisy public signal about η,

                                            g = η + $,                                          (31)
                      
where $ ∼ N 0, σ 2$ . In the second specification, we introduce aggregate noise in private
signals of the form
                                        si = η + ν i + ζ,                                     (32)
                   
where ζ ∼ N 0, σ 2ζ , such that the integral over private signals is no longer perfectly revealing
about η.

Proposition 1.8
If there exists either a noisy public signal (as in (31)) or aggregate noise in the private signal
(as in (32)), the marginal effect of near-rational behavior on the elasticity of the stock price with
respect to productivity continues to become infinitely large as the mental cost of fully rational




                                                 18
behavior (and thus σ  ) approaches zero:
                                                                 
                                               ∂π 1            ∂π 1
                                     lim              = lim           = −∞.
                                     λ→0       ∂λ      σ  →0 ∂σ 


By contrast, the marginal effects of noise in the public signal and aggregate noise in the private
signal on this elasticity go to 0 as their standard deviations go to 0:
                                                                      
                                 ∂π 1                               ∂π 1
                     lim                =0       and    lim                = 0,   respectively.
                    σ $ →0       ∂σ $                  σ ζ →0       ∂σ ζ

Proof See Appendix A.11.

    This proposition has two direct implications. First, it demonstrates that none of our results
rely on the stock price becoming perfectly revealing of η if all households are fully rational.
Near-rational behavior continues to have a first-order effect on information aggregation even if
aggregate noise is present in the private signal or if households observe other (exogenous) public
signals aside from the stock price.

    Second, near-rational errors () are amplified in equilibrium while noise introduced through
the signal structure ($ and ζ) is not. To see the intuition for this result, consider the equilibrium
price function in a general model that allows for these other types of noisy signals (shown for
κ = 0):
                           α0      α1 + α3        α1          α3             1
                    Q=          +          η+          ζ+           $+          ,
                         1 − α2     1 − α2      1 − α2      1 − α2       1 − α2

where α3 is the weight households put on the exogenous public signal when forming expectations.
The result now follows from the fact that α1−α 1 +α3
                                                   2
                                                     = π 1 , 1−α
                                                              α1
                                                                 2
                                                                   , and 1−α
                                                                          α3
                                                                             2
                                                                               are always numbers
between 0 and 1, whereas the coefficient on near-rational errors 1−α2 ranges between 1 and ∞.
                                                                      1

Near-rational errors are amplified in equilibrium because they affect the market’s capacity to
aggregate information. By contrast, noise introduced through the signal structure merely affects
the amount of information that is available for aggregation, but does not result in the kind of
externality shown in Proposition 1.7.

    Figure 3 illustrates these findings. The thick blue line plots the now familiar effect of a small
common error in household expectations with σση = 0.01. The red horizontal line plots the effect
                                                                              σ
of an identical amount of small aggregate noise in the private signal (i.e., σηζ = 0.01). The red
line has an intercept of 0.012 and is perfectly horizontal. Aggregate noise in the private signal
is not amplified, and the fact that an individual household observes a signal with common noise
does not have an external effect on the market’s capacity to aggregate information. The effect
of aggregate noise in the private signal is thus invariant to how dispersed information is in the
economy. The broken lines in Figure 3 show the same comparative static, but in the presence
                                                  σ
of large aggregate noise in the private signal ( σηζ = 1). Both lines retain their shape but now

                                                         19
Figure 3: Comparison of the effects of small common errors in household expectations with the
effects of small common noise in the private signal (solid lines) and large common noise in the
private signal (broken lines).


have a higher intercept, reflecting the fact that less information is now available to aggregate,
even if the stock price is fully revealing. However, for the remaining dispersed information, the
information externality of near-rational behavior operates in the same way as in Figure 1. The
externality is thus relevant whenever dispersed private information exists that is valuable for
predicting η. A key challenge for our quantitative analysis below will thus be to estimate the
degree of dispersion in private information in the data.

   The appendix contains several additional results. Appendix A.12 contrasts our near-rational
approach with the model of Hellwig (1980). In this model, the market’s capacity to aggregate in-
formation depends on the volatility of exogenous noise trader demand, where a separate class of
agents (“noise traders”) inelastically purchases random quantities of stocks. In Appendix A.13,
we also consider near-rational errors about the second conditional moment (the conditional vari-
ance of η), which we show to be isomorphic to the near-rational errors about the conditional
expectation in (7) under some additional assumptions. In Appendix A.14, we extend our envi-
ronment to allow rational households to obtain an informational advantage over near-rational
households by observing the error they would have made had they acted near-rationally. We
show that even using this alternative counterfactual, all the main results of our analysis go
through, provided the standard deviation of idiosyncratic errors, μ̂, is sufficiently large.



2    Quantitative Model

In this section, we set up a quantitative model that allows us to estimate the welfare effects
and the equilibrium impact of near-rational behavior. To this end, we use a decentralization
of the RBC model by Croce (2014). We choose this model for two reasons. First, it performs


                                               20
well in matching both macroeconomic and asset-pricing moments and should therefore provide
a reliable quantitative assessment of the macroeconomic effects of asset market dysfunctionality.
Second, it assumes households have recursive preferences as in Epstein and Zin (1989) that
directly price news and therefore represent a natural choice in the context of our analysis where
near-rational behavior distorts news about the future.


2.1   Setup

Technology is characterized by a linear homogeneous production function that uses capital, Kt ,
and labor, Nt , as inputs:
                                      Yt = Ktα (eat Nt )1−α ,                             (33)

where Yt stands for output of the consumption good. The productivity of labor, at , has a
long-run component, ω, and a short-run component, η S :

                                    Δat+1 = μa + ω t + η St+1 ,                               (34)

where the long-run component follows

                                        ω t = ρω t−1 + η L
                                                         t .                                  (35)

Both shocks to productivity, η S and η L , are i.i.d. normally distributed with mean zero and
standard deviations σ ηS and σ ηL , respectively.

   The equation of motion of the capital stock is

                                Kt+1 = (1 − δ k )Kt + It − Gt Kt ,

where It denotes aggregate investment and δ k is the rate of depreciation. Furthermore, there
are convex adjustment costs to capital following Jermann (1998):
                                                               1− 1          !
                                  It            v1         It       ξ
                             Gt =    −                                  + v0       ,          (36)
                                  Kt          1 − 1ξ       Kt

where v1 and v2 are positive constants and the parameter ξ determines the equilibrium elasticity
of the capital stock with respect to the stock price.

   A representative firm purchases capital and labor services from households. Because it
rents services from an existing capital stock, the firm’s objective collapses to a period-by-period
maximization problem:
                                      max Yt − dt Kt − wt Nt ,                                 (37)
                                     Kt ,Nt



                                                  21
where Kt and Nt denote factor demands for capital and labor, respectively. First-order condi-
tions with respect to capital and labor pin down the market-clearing wage, wt , as the marginal
product of labor and the rental rate of capital, dt , as the marginal product of capital. Because
the production function is linear homogeneous, the representative firm makes zero economic
profits from producing the consumption good.

   The representative firm also owns an investment goods sector that converts the consumption
good into units of capital, while incurring adjustment costs. It takes the price of capital as given
and then performs instantaneous arbitrage:

                                         max Qt (It − Gt Kt ) − It .                                       (38)
                                           It

Taking the first-order condition of this profit function gives us the equilibrium price of capital
(Tobin’s Q), Qt = 1/1 − G0t . Because of decreasing returns to scale in converting consumption
goods to capital, the investment goods sector makes positive profits in each period.
                                                                                     Profits are
paid to shareholders as a part of dividends per share, Dt = α Kt + Qt Gt Kt − Gt .13
                                                                Yt          0 It


   A continuum of households on the interval i ∈ [0, 1] has Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences
over the consumption bundle C̃it :
                                                                                1
                                                                                           1
                                                                    h        i 1− ψ       1− 1
                                              1                                               ψ
                                           1− ψ                     1−γ        1−γ
                        Uit = (1 − δ)C̃it        − π(bit ) + δEit Uit+1                         ,        (39)


where the parameters ψ and γ measure the households’ intertemporal elasticity of substitution
and relative risk aversion, respectively. π(bit ) is a small penalty for holding bonds that ensures
a well-defined portfolio choice at the deterministic steady state (Judd and Guu, 2001). 14 The
consumption bundle C̃it is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of consumption and leisure:

                                       C̃it = Cito (eat−1 (1 − nit ))1−o ,

where leisure scales with aggregate productivity to ensure the existence of a balanced growth
path.

    At the beginning of every period, each household receives a private signal about the shocks
to long-run and short-run productivity:

                                         sjit = η jt+1 + ν jit , j = L, S,

  13
     Alternatively, profits may be paid to households as a lump-sum transfer; this assumption matters little for
the quantitative results of the model.
                                                               1)
                                                                          2
  14                                              1   a    (1− ψ      bit
     We use the simple quadratic form π(bit ) = 2000 e t−1          e
                                                                      at−1    .



                                                        22
where ν jit again represents i.i.d. draws from a normal distribution with zero mean and variance
σ 2νj , j = L, S. In some specifications, we also allow for aggregate noise in these private signals as
in (32). To further distinguish the implications of near-rational behavior from the implications
of noisy signals, we allow households to observe an exogenous noisy public signal about each of
the two shocks,
                                       gtj = η jt+1 + $jt , j = L, S,

with $j ∼ N (0, σ $j ).

    Households observe all prices and aggregate state variables at time t and understand the
structure of the economy as well as the equilibrium mapping of dispersed information into prices
and economic aggregates. The rational expectations operator, conditional on all the information
available to household i at time t, is
                                                                                                             
              Eit [∙] = E ∙|sL     S L S
                             it , sit , gt , gt , Qt , rt , dt , wt , Ct , Nt , Kt , Yt , It , Gt , at , ω t−1 ,   (40)

where rt is the risk-free interest rate. The only sources of uncertainty are thus the two inno-
           t+1 and η t+1 , and households must form a conditional expectation of them. As in
vations, η L         S

the model in section 1, we assume households make small common errors when forming these
expectations. The expectations operator Eit in (39) is thus the rational expectations operator
with the only exception that
                                       h      i     h      i               
                                    Eit η jt+1 = Eit η jt+1 + μji jt +ˆjit ,                                     (41)

where again jt ∼ N (0, σ j ) and ˆjit ∼ N (0, μ̂σ j ), j = L, S. For simplicity, we assume the
near-rational errors about the two innovations are uncorrelated with each other and i.i.d.

   Given the private and public signals and their knowledge about the state of the economy,
households maximize lifetime utility (39) by choosing a time path for consumption and labor,
and their holdings of stocks and bonds {C̃it , nit , kit , bit }∞
                                                                t=0 . Each household’s optimization is
subject to a budget constraint:

                  Qt kit+1 + bit = Qt−1 Rt kit + (1 + rt−1 )bit−1 + Hit − Cit + wt nit ,                           (42)

where Hit are transfers from state-contingent claims discussed below. The returns to capital are
                                                                                     
                                                   Yt+1                  It+1
                                (1 − δ k )Qt+1 + α K t+1
                                                         + Q t+1   G 0
                                                                     t+1 Kt+1 − G t+1
                     Rt+1 =                                                                            .           (43)
                                                                  Qt

The market-clearing conditions for the stock, bond, labor, and goods markets are




                                                             23
         Z                                             Z                                      Z
Kt+1 =       kit+1 di,        (44)                0=       bit di,     (45)           Nt =        nit di,   (46)
and
                                                    Yt = C t + I t .                                        (47)

    Finally, the payments from contingent claims, Hit , avoid having to keep track of the evo-
lution of wealth across households. 15 At the beginning of each period (and before receiving
signals), households can trade claims that are contingent on the state of the economy and on
the realization of the noise they receive in their private signals, ν jit . These claims are in zero net
supply and pay off at the beginning of the next period. Because the claims are traded before
any information about η jt+1 is known, their prices cannot reveal any information about future
productivity. Contingent-claims trading thus completes markets between periods, without af-
fecting households’ signal-extraction problem. In equilibrium, all households choose to hold
these securities with net payoff
         
         Q R K − Q R k − (1 + r )b
             t−1 t t      t−1 t it          t−1 it−1 if {Cit , nit , kit , bit } = arg max (39)|Hit =0
  Hit =                                                                                                ,
         0                                             otherwise
                                                                                          (48)
such that all households enter each period with the same amount of wealth. From (44) and (45),
                                                                R
it follows immediately that these claims are in zero net supply, Hit di = 0.

     The rational expectations equilibrium is the economy in which μji = 0 ∀i, j = L, S, such that
the expectations operator Eit in equation (39) coincides with the rational expectation in (40).
The near-rational expectations equilibrium posits that μji = 1 ∀i; households make small errors
as given in (41). In Appendix B.2, we provide a formal definition of equilibrium and show the
first-order and envelope conditions.


2.2    Solving the model

We use the solution method developed in Mertens (2009) to transform the equilibrium conditions
of the model into a form we can solve with standard techniques. The key to this approach is
to show that all prices and economic aggregates are a function of the usual “macroeconomic”
state variables of the model St = {Kt , ω t−1 , η L
                                                  t , η t } as well as households’ average expectation
                                                        S

     t+1 and η t+1 :
of η L         S

                                  Z      h      i    Z   h      i
                         q̂tj =       Eit η jt+1 di = Eit η jt+1 di + jt     for j = S, L.                 (49)

  15
    See Mertens and Judd (2013) for a perturbation-based approach to solving incomplete market models with
substantial heterogeneity.




                                                            24
Lemma 2.1
A recursive equilibrium exists with the following properties:
(1) A household’s optimal behavior depends on the current (commonly known) state of the econ-
omy, St , the household’s conditional expectation of next period’s innovation to long-run and
short-run productivity, Eit [η jt+1 ], and the average expectation of this innovation, q̂tj , j = L, S.
The conditional expectation, in turn, depends on the private signal sjit as well as q̂tj . Individual
choices are thus determined by these state variables:

                                                           t+1 ], Eit [η t+1 ]), x = C, n, k+1 , b.
                         xit = x(St , q̂tL , q̂tS , Eit [η L             S



(2) All prices and economic aggregates depend on the current state of the economy and q̂tj :

                       Xt = X(St , q̂tL , q̂tS ), X = C, N, K+1 , Y, I, G, R, Q, r, d, w.

Proof: See Appendix B.3.

    Given this lemma, we can use standard perturbation methods to solve for households’ equi-
librium policies as a function of the vector {St , q̂tL , q̂tS , Eit [η L
                                                                        t+1 ], Eit [η t+1 ]} and for all economic
                                                                                      S

aggregates as a function of {St , q̂tL , q̂tS }. In other words, we can separate the solution of the
non-linear model from the information microstructure by simply treating Eit [η jt+1 ] and q̂tj as
state variables. The final step of the solution is then to solve for Eit [η jt+1 ].

Condition 2.2
A pair of aggregate quantities and/or prices exists that is invertible in q̂ L and q̂ S , conditional
on knowing all other state variables.

      This condition ensures two observable variables (e.g., the returns on stocks and bonds) exist
that are strictly monotonic in average expectation about η L and η S but have different sensitiv-
ities, such that households can infer q̂ S and q̂ L from observing the two variables conditional on
the state of the economy. Learning from these variables is then just as good as directly observing
q̂ S and q̂ L (they span the same σ-algebra). Although we cannot solve for the mapping of q̂ S and
q̂ L into prices and aggregate quantities in closed form, we verify invertibility using the numerical
solution of the model.

    Typically, many combinations of aggregate variables and prices meet these criteria. That
is, because households know the state of the economy, they have many ways of inferring q̂ S
and q̂ L , for example, by observing output and wages. In this sense, asset prices are not special
and we have no way to distinguish learning from asset prices from learning from other prices
or aggregate variables. For ease of exposition, we nevertheless follow the existing literature and
refer to this process as learning from asset prices, because asset prices may be more easily and


                                                            25
frequently observable in practice—however keeping in mind that our results do not speak to the
question whether households in reality learn from asset prices versus other economic aggregates.

    Given Lemma 2.1 and Condition 2.2, households’ equilibrium expectations of η jt+1 for j =
S, L are independent of the aggregate dynamics of the model. Due to the normality of con-
ditioning variables sjit and q̂tj for j = S, L respectively, the resulting conditional distributions
are Gaussian and identical to the linear setup in section 1. As a result, all the qualitative re-
sults concerning the effect of the near-rational errors on equilibrium expectations developed in
our static model readily carry over to the quantitative model. Appendix B.4 contains a formal
treatment of these statements.



3     Estimation and Results

We next quantify the implications of our model by taking it to the data, estimating the size of
near-rational errors, the dispersion in private signals, and the precision of public signals.


3.1   Estimation strategy

To focus our efforts on the novel part of the model, its information microstructure, and to
preserve a maximum of comparability with earlier work, we set all parameters not directly
related to information equal to the benchmark calibration proposed by Croce (2014). Table 1
lists these parameters. For example, the capital share, α, is set to 0.345, δ k is set to match the
annualized capital depreciation rate in the US economy (6%), and the average annual growth rate
of productivity, μa , is 1.8%. Relative risk aversion and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
are set to values of 10 and 2, respectively, and the annualized subjective discount factor, δ, is
fixed at 0.954. Crucial for the model’s capacity to match asset prices, the annualized persistence
of the long-run shock to productivity is 0.8, while the standard deviation of the long-run shock is
relatively small (11% of the standard deviation of the short-run shock). The parameters v1 and
v2 in the adjustment-cost function are set such  that,
                                                       at the deterministic steady state,     Gt = 0
                                                                                            1
and ∂Gt /∂ (It /Kt ) = 0 (implying that v0 = 1−ξ (δ + e − 1) and v1 = (δ + e − 1) ).
                                                    1        μ                       μ      ξ



   We also follow Croce (2014) in calculating excess stock returns as the excess returns on a lev-
                                                                                                  φlev
ered claim to capital that is subject to idiosyncratic cash-flow shocks: Rex,t
                                                                          LEV = (R − r
                                                                                  t    t−1 + ut )      .
This practice is standard in the finance literature because, in the data, payouts to equity are
more volatile than consumption and most claims to equity are levered. We again follow Croce
(2014) by setting the annualized standard deviation of u to 6.5% (consistent with Bansal and
Yaron (2004)) and φlev = 2 (consistent with the amount of financial leverage measured by Rauh
and Sufi (2012)).



                                                 26
                                 Table 1: Calibrated Parameters

                  Parameter                                               Value
                  Capital share                                   α       0.345
                  Time discount factor                           δ 12     0.954
                  Avg. productivity growth                     12μa       0.018
                  Consumption share                               o        0.20
                  Autocorrelation of η L                         ρ12       0.8
                  Ratio of standard dev. of η L and η S      σ ηL /σ ηS    0.11
                  Capital depreciation rate                     12δ k      0.06
                  Relative risk aversion                          γ         10
                  Intertemporal elasticity of substitution        ψ          2
                  Leverage of market return                     φlev       2.0
                  Capital adjustment cost parameter               ξ          7

Notes: Calibrated parameters taken from the benchmark calibration in Croce (2014) and used
in all specifications shown in Tables 2 to 5.


     We also maintain the standard practice in the long-run risk literature by using a monthly
decision horizon and then aggregating the model-implied macroeconomic and financial time
series to the annual frequency to match annual moments (Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Bansal et al.,
2012). However, note this choice of decision horizon is less innocuous in our case, because the
decision horizon also determines the horizon at which households learn about the future. That
is, in our main specification, households make decisions at the monthly frequency and receive
signals about the realization of productivity shocks one month (rather than a quarter or a year)
in the future. For this reason, we measure empirical moments disciplining the dynamics of
expectations and the amount of information available to households at the same horizon as in
the model (one month ahead), rather than at the annual frequency. In robustness checks, we
also show our main results do not change when we instead calibrate the model at the quarterly
frequency and thus allow households to observe signals about shocks one quarter ahead.

    For parsimony, we set the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic component of near-rational
errors to 0 (μ̂ = 0) and estimate the standard deviation of short-run productivity shock, σ ηS , as
well as the six parameters governing the information microstructure (σ νj , σ j , σ $j , j = S, L),
using the simulated method of moments. Our estimator of these parameters, m̂, minimizes the
distance between a vector of empirical moments, θ, and the corresponding moments generated
by the model, m, subject to the constraint that our estimates of σ j are small enough such that
the utility gain of behaving fully rather than near-rationally is economically small:

                                                                     ˉ
                         m̂ = arg min (m − θ)0 Ω (m − θ) s.t. λ(m) < λ,                        (50)
                                   m

where Ω is our estimate of the variance-covariance matrix of the empirical moments, calculated


                                                27
using a bootstrap procedure detailed in Appendix C.1, λ is the compensating variation in terms
of permanent consumption for individual i of setting μi = 0 in all future periods, and λ     ˉ is a
measure from the data of the minimum size of incentives required to induce households to engage
in fully rational behavior. For a given parameter vector, we create 100 synthetic time series, each
of length equal to our sample size. Following the procedure in Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, and
Rebelo (2015), we then calculate m as the probability limit of the model-implied small-sample
moments by calculating the sample moments of interest from each sample and then averaging
across samples.

    Similar to the private cost of near-rational behavior, λ, we measure the social cost of near-
rational behavior as the compensating variation for individual i of setting μj = 0 ∀j 6= i. Both
calculations are performed at the stochastic steady state of the model, such that our measure
for the social cost of near-rational behavior takes into account that the abolition of near-rational
behavior today induces an adjustment process to a new stochastic steady state. See Appendix
C.2 for details on this calculation.


3.2    Data

Our target vector, θ, contains 17 empirical moments listed in the first column of Table 3. Because
our focus is on identifying the information microstructure of the model, the first five of these
targets are of particular importance—characterizing the dynamics and dispersion of expectations
using data from the Survey of Professional Forecasters 1969-2008. All of our calculations use
forecasts for the current quarter, that is, forecasts of quarterly GDP and consumption growth
made six weeks before the end of the quarter, which is the horizon closest to the one-month-
ahead forecasts households make in our model. The first two targets measure the degree of
uncertainty about future GDP growth: the variance of the average forecast of GDP growth
and the variance of the average forecast error (both normalized with the standard deviation of
GDP growth). The remaining three moments characterize the dispersion in expectations held
by individual forecasters: the time-series average of the cross-sectional standard deviation of
forecasts of GDP growth, the correlation of this dispersion with future consumption growth,
and its monthly autocorrelation. Aside from quantifying the dispersion of expectations in the
data, these latter two moments reflect two salient stylized facts about disagreement highlighted
in the literature—that disagreement is counter-cyclical (Bloom, 2014; Patton and Timmermann,
2010), and that it is highly persistent at the monthly frequency (Yu, 2011). Appendix C.1 gives
details on the construction of these moments. 16

  The remaining 12 entries in the target vector are standard macroeconomic and financial
moments that are typically used to discipline long-run-risk models. They include the standard
  16
     Related to these stylized facts, Li and Li (2014) find that turnover in the stock market increases with the dis-
persion of expectations, suggesting this dispersion is driven, at least in part, by heterogenous private information.


                                                         28
deviation of output, the equity premium, and the correlation of stock returns with consumption
growth. All of these moments are constructed from annual US data (1929-2008) in a manner
identical to that used by Croce (2014) (see Appendix C.3 for details).

    Although the calculation of these moments is fairly straightforward and has ample prece-
dent in the literature, we are unaware of existing estimates of the minimum size of economic
incentives required to induce households to engage in fully rational behavior, λ.ˉ To nevertheless
discipline our choice of this parameter, we follow three alternative approaches. In our benchmark
estimation, we rely on the observation from the household finance literature that tests of ratio-
nal consumption smoothing tend to reject only in natural experiments involving small stakes,
whereas those involving large stakes tend to find evidence consistent with rational behavior. Fol-
lowing the procedure in Fuchs-Schuendeln and Hassan (2015), and using the parameters γ and ψ
from Table 1, we calculate the utility gain as a percent of permanent consumption from smooth-
ing a pre-announced income change over a year versus behaving as a hand-to-mouth consumer
for each of 17 published studies on the subject (see Appendix C.4 for details). Our results, listed
in Appendix Table 1, show that experiments corresponding to an equivalent variation of more
than 0.13% of consumption on average find evidence consistent with rational behavior, whereas
those involving smaller stakes do not. In the extremes, all experiments involving stakes smaller
than 0.01% of consumption reject rational behavior, whereas none of those with stakes larger
than 0.37% do. We thus use λ    ˉ = 0.13% in our benchmark calibration. In robustness checks, we
explore the entire range 0.01% to 0.37%, use alternative estimates from the rational inattention
literature (Maćkowiak and Wiederholt, 2015), and also estimate λ without a constraint.


3.3   Results

We present the results of our estimation in the following order. First, we discuss our findings
regarding the information microstructure and relate them to the insights developed in our static
model. We then show that the model gives a good fit to the data, discuss the effects of near-
rational behavior on the economy, and show how these effects empirically identify the information
microstructure. Lastly, we probe the robustness of our results.

    We first discuss and interpret the benchmark estimates in the first column of Table 2—the
best fit to the data according to (50). The estimated dispersion of private information about the
long-run and short-run shocks are σ Lν /σ η = 23.59 and σ ν /σ η = 13.16, respectively, implying that
                                          L               S    S

in the absence of other sources of information, 23.592 = 556 and 13.62 = 185 households would
have to pool their private signals about the two shocks to reduce their conditional variance by
one half. The standard deviation of the common error in household expectations of the long-run
shock is 0.09% of the standard deviation of the shock to long-run productivity, but is amplified
by a factor of 537, such that a one-standard-deviation shock to L results in a 0.48 σ ηL rise in


                                                 29
the average expectation of η L in equilibrium. Similarly, the standard deviation of the common
error about the short-run shock is 0.42% of the standard deviation of the shock to short-run
productivity, but is amplified by a factor of 99.

    As a result of this amplified noise, we find that equilibrium asset prices transmit about
as much noise as information. The noise-to-signal ratios are 0.97 and 1.28 about the long-
run and short-run shock, respectively. Nevertheless, even these noisy asset prices transmit
enough information to reduce the ratio of conditional to unconditional variance to 0.49 for the
long-run shock and 0.56 for the short-run shock. By contrast, our estimates show that both
exogenous public signals are relatively imprecise (σ $L /σ ηL = 3.69 and σ $S /σ ηS = 1.99), such
that a household observing only their private signal and the exogenous public signal would have
corresponding ratios of 0.94 and 0.79. 17 Thus, most of what households learn about the future
they learn from dispersed private information that is aggregated in asset prices.

    Next, we build intuition and link these quantitative estimates to the theoretical results from
our static model. Figure 4 shows the familiar comparative static over the level of dispersion of
private information, while holding constant all other benchmark estimates. The top panels again
plot the ratio of the conditional to unconditional variance of η L and η S . Both graphs show the
same shape as Figure 1, but they asymptote to (1 + 3.96−2 )−1 = 0.94 and (1 + 1.99−2 )−1 = 0.80
respectively, reflecting the fact that households can extract a small amount of information from
the exogenous public signals even when the market’s capacity to aggregate information collapses
completely. Apart from this modification, a given σ S or σ L again has a larger effect on the
stock market’s capacity to aggregate information when private information is more dispersed,
where the distance between the solid blue line and the red dashed line shows the external effect
of near-rational behavior on the average expectation held by market participants.

    Equipped with these estimates of the amount of information and amplified noise contained in
asset prices, we calculate that a given household would be willing to pay 5.31% of its permanent
consumption for all other households to forgo their near-rational behavior and behave fully
rationally until the end of time. The social cost of near-rational behavior is thus an order of
magnitude larger than the private cost (0.13% of permanent consumption). The second row
in Figure 4 shows the social cost generated by this externality is monotonically increasing in
σ νS and σ νL , ranging up to 9.84% of consumption when all private information about η L is
driven out of prices (σ νL → ∞). The social value of the part of information aggregation that
does not get crowded out by near-rational behavior is thus equivalent to 9.84%-5.13=4.53% of
permanent consumption. By contrast, near-rational errors about η S appear to have a much
smaller impact on welfare (we return to this observation below). Although the social cost of
near-rational behavior is economically large and monotonically increasing in σ νS and σ νL , the
  17
     Using equation (14) and the numbers given in Table 2, we get (1 + 23.59−2 + 3.96−2 )−1 = 0.94 and (1 +
13.16−2 + 1.99−2 )−1 = 0.79.



                                                    30
                                  Table 2: Estimation Results

                                                         Benchmark Model      Aggregate Noise
                                                        (Noisy Public Signal) in Private Signal
 Panel A: Parameter Estimates

 Near-Rational Error
     σ L /σ ηL (%)                                              0.09                   0.09
     σ S /σ ηS (%)                                              0.42                   0.35
 Noise in Private Signal
     σ νL /σ ηL                                                  23.59                 24.04
     σ νS /σ ηS                                                  13.61                 13.71
 Std.dev. of productivity
     σ ηS (%)                                                    0.98                   0.98
 Noise in Public Signal
     σ $L /σ ηL                                                  3.69
     σ $S /σ ηS                                                  1.99
 Aggregate Noise in Private Signal
     σ ζL /σ ηL                                                                         0.00
     σ ζS /σ ηS                                                                         0.11

 Panel B: Implications for Information Aggregation

 Conditional Variance
     Vt [ηL]/σ 2ηL                                               0.49                   0.50
     Vt [ηS]/σ 2ηS                                               0.56                   0.57
 Amplification of near-rational error (1/(1 − α2 ))
     multiplier on L                                           536.75                577.86
     multiplier on S                                            99.02                142.99
 Noise-to-signal ratios in asset prices
     Noise-to-signal about η L                                   0.97                   1.00
     Noise-to-signal about η S                                   1.28                   1.32

 Panel C: Implications for Welfare

 Private Cost                                                    0.13                   0.13
 Social Cost                                                     5.31                   5.40


Notes: Panel A shows estimated parameters using the simulated method of moments. The target
and simulated moments of the estimation are shown in column 1 of Table 3. The simulated
moments are shown in columns 2 and 6, respectively. Panels B and C show the implications
of these estimates for information aggregation and welfare. The social cost of near-rational
behavior is the compensating variation for an intervention that commits all other households to
behave fully rationally until the end of time (μj = 0 ∀j 6= i.), calculated at the stochastic steady
state of the model. Similarly, the private cost of near-rational behavior is the compensating
variation for eliminating the near-rational error only from the household’s own behavior.
                                                31
Figure 4: Comparative statics over dispersion of private information about the long-run (left
column) and short-run (right column) shock to TFP growth (σ νL and σ νS ), holding constant all
other parameters of the benchmark estimation given in Tables 1 and 2. The red dashed line shows
the results corresponding to full rationality (σ L = σ S = 0). First row: ratio of conditional to
unconditional variance of the shock; second row: social cost of near-rational behavior in percent
of permanent consumption; third row: multiplier on near-rational error in average expectation
about the shock.


private cost is smaller than 0.13% of permanent consumption over the entire range (not shown).

    The last row of Figure 4 shows the multiplier on the near-rational error, 1/(1−α2 ). Consistent
with Figure 2 in section 1, it shows the amplification peaks around a factor of 550 and 120 for
intermediate values of σ νL and σ νS , respectively. The estimates from our benchmark model are
slightly to the right of the peak in both cases. As we move farther to the right in the graph,
the noise-to-signal ratio in asset prices increases to the point that households give up learning
from prices, begin to lower both α1 and α2 , and instead rely on their priors. Eventually, the
coefficients α1 and α2 converge to zero, whereas the noise-to-signal ratio and the social cost
of near-rational behavior continue to increase monotonically as more and more information is
driven out of prices.

   Next, we show that the model performs well in matching the dynamics of expectations



                                                32
measured in the data. Column 2 of Table 3 shows the simulated moments generated by our
benchmark estimation. In particular, the model comes close to matching the standard deviation
of the average expectation of GDP growth (0.58 vs. 0.64 in the data) and the average forecast
error of GDP growth (0.54 vs. 0.69 in the data). It also matches both stylized facts about the
dynamics of disagreement by generating a negative correlation between consumption growth
and the cross-sectional standard deviation of expectations (-0.58 vs. -0.34 in the data), as well
as high levels of persistence of this standard deviation (0.98 vs. 0.88 in the data).

    The crucial feature enabling our model to match both of these stylized facts is the com-
bination of the i.i.d. Gaussian information microstructure and the non-linear dynamics of our
RBC framework. A household’s optimal consumption is a concave function of expected future
productivity. A constant dispersion in expectations about productivity thus naturally results
in higher levels of dispersion in expectations about consumption growth in a recession (when
the consumption function is steep) than in a boom (when it is relatively flat). This dispersion
in turn is highly persistent because of a high degree of persistence in the long-run shock and
the level of the capital stock. Despite these successes, more disagreement exists among fore-
casters on average than our model can rationalize—it significantly under-predicts the average
cross-sectional standard deviation of expectations (0.04 vs. 0.11 in the data). However, we may
speculate that in reality forecasters also disagree for reasons outside our model, for example due
to differences in priors (Burnside et al., 2011).

    More broadly, the model also offers a good fit to the standard macro and asset-pricing
moments shown in the remainder of Table 3, matching nine of 12 moments within two standard
errors. However, it significantly under-predicts the correlation of consumption growth with
investment (0.42 vs. 0.68 in the data), the standard deviation of the risk-free rate (1.28 vs. 3.82
in the data), and the standard deviation of stock returns (13.36 vs. 21.21 in the data). All three
of these shortcomings are common in this type of long-run-risk model, and also apply to Croce
(2014). Nevertheless, the introduction of near-rational behavior moves the model closer to the
data in at least one of these dimensions, as we discuss below.

   To highlight the role of near-rational behavior in generating these results, column 3 shows
the simulated moments we obtain when imposing full rationality, that is, σ L , σ S = 0, on our
benchmark estimates. Comparing columns 2 and 3 shows three sets of effects of near-rational
behavior on the economy, reminiscent of those we derived in our static model.

    First, near-rational behavior generates a dispersion in equilibrium expectations: under full
rationality, all households hold identical expectations in equilibrium because asset prices per-
fectly reveal all available information about η L
                                                t+1 and η t+1 , such that all three moments relating
                                                          S

to the dispersion in expectations naturally degenerate.

   This ability to explain disagreement among forecasters thus identifies the combined role of



                                                33
                                    Table 3: Fit of Estimated Models
                                    (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)      (5)          (6)
      Moments                      Data                   Benchmark Model               Aggregate Noise
                                (std. err.)            (Noisy Public Signal)            in Private Signal
                                                      σ L , σ S = 0 σ L = 0 σ S = 0
        ˉ
      σ(E[dy])/σ(dy)               0.64       0.58        0.96        0.57      0.98          0.57
                                  (0.02)
             ˉ
      σ(dy − E[dy])/σ(dy)          0.69       0.54        0.28        0.56      0.21          0.55
                                  (0.08)
      σ xs (Ei [dy])(%)            0.11       0.04         0          0.04      0.01          0.04
                                  (0.01)
      cor(dc, σ xs (Ei [dy]))     −0.34       −0.58      N/A         −0.57      0.23         −0.58
                                  (0.14)
      ACF [σ xs (Ei [dy])]         0.88       0.98       N/A          0.98      0.85          0.98
                                  (0.06)
      σ(dy)(%)                     3.34       3.42        3.36        3.47      3.30          3.42
                                  (0.42)
      σ(dc)/σ(dy)                  0.65       0.65        0.70        0.65      0.70          0.64
                                  (0.04)
      σ(di)/σ(dy)                  4.45       4.82        5.07        5.17      4.68          4.82
                                  (0.46)
      cor(dc, di)                  0.68       0.42        0.24        0.28      0.38          0.42
                                  (0.11)
               lev
      cor(dc, rex  )               0.15       0.07       −0.08        0.03     −0.07          0.08
                                  (0.17)
         lev
      E(rex  )(%)                  3.89       4.27        3.77        4.25      3.80          4.28
                                  (2.35)
         lev
      σ(rex  )                    21.21       13.36      13.21       16.18      9.55          13.37
                                  (1.82)
      E[r](%)                      0.64       0.99        1.24        1.01      1.23          0.99
                                  (0.40)
      σ(r)(%)                      3.82       1.28        1.90        1.28      1.91          1.27
                                  (0.46)
      ACF [rex
            lev
                ]                  0.05       0.00        0.00        0.00      0.00          0.00
                                  (0.13)
      ACF [r]                       0.7       0.67        0.50        0.67      0.50          0.66
                                  (0.06)
      ACF [dc]                     0.51       0.67        0.66        0.67      0.68          0.67
                                  (0.17)
Note: Target moments (column 1) and simulated moments from our benchmark model (column
2) and a model that allows for aggregate noise in the private signals instead of exogenous public
signals (column 6). Columns 3-5 impose full rationality (column 3) and full rationality about
only the long-run and short-run shocks to TFP growth, respectively, on the benchmark estimates.
Lowercase letters denote logs. E[.], σ(.), and cor(., .) denote means, standard deviations, and
correlations, respectively. d stands for the first difference in the time series (e.g., σ(dy) stands for
the standard deviation of output growth). ACF [.] refers to the first-order autocorrelation. Ei [.]
denotes the one-period-ahead forecast of forecaster i, E[.]  ˉ denotes the cross-sectional average
of Ei [.], and σ xs (.) denotes the time-series average of the cross-sectional standard deviation of
one-period-ahead forecasts. See section 3.2 of the main text for details on the construction of
the target moments.
                                                   34
dispersed private information and near-rational errors relative to noise contained in exogenous
public signals. While both mechanisms can generate forecast errors of a given size by determining
the amount of information available, only the former can simultaneously generate disagreement.
Because the amount of disagreement we see in the data is large relative to the size of average
forecast errors, our estimator prefers very noisy (and thus useless) public signals and instead
chooses (intermediate) values of σ νS and σ νL that simultaneously imply large amplified near-
rational errors and a maximum of disagreement in equilibrium. (We show below that this result
continues to hold when we allow for aggregate noise in the private signal.)

    Second, near-rational behavior increases the amount of risk faced by households because it
delays the resolution of uncertainty: it raises the standard deviation of average forecast errors
and lowers the standard deviation of average expectations relative to the fully rational case.
Households react to this increase in risk by demanding a higher equity premium (4.27 vs. 3.77
in the fully rational case) and more precautionary savings, lowering the average risk-free rate by
0.25 percentage points relative to the fully rational case. Both of these effects are particularly
pronounced because households have a preference for early resolution of uncertainty (ψ > 1).

     Third, near-rational behavior (and the amplified errors it entails) distorts aggregate quan-
tities. Comparing the remaining moments shown in columns 2 and 3 shows the effects of these
distortions: a higher correlation between consumption growth and investment growth (0.42
vs. 0.24 in the fully rational case), a similar rise in the correlation between consumption growth
and stock returns, a fall in the relative volatility of investment growth from (4.82 vs. 5.07 in
the fully rational case), and a slight increase in the unconditional volatility of output and stock
returns. All of these effects of near-rational behavior point to misallocations that result from
changes in the aggregate dynamics of the economy.

     Figure 5 illustrates the effects of these misallocations by comparing impulse-response func-
tions of our benchmark model (the solid blue lines) with those under fully rational behavior
(the red broken lines). The four columns depict responses to a two-standard-deviation shock to
η L , L , η S , and S , respectively, where η L and η S materialize in period 1 and households form
expectations (and make errors) in period 0.

    The plots in column 1 show that learning about the shock to long-run productivity in advance
allows households to adjust their behavior ex ante (in period 0). Under full rationality, all
of this adjustment occurs in period zero, allowing households to decrease consumption and
increase investment in the period before the arrival of the long-run productivity shock. Under
near-rational behavior, information is only partially revealed in period 0 such that households
partially adjust their behavior in both periods 0 and 1. This dampening of the response of
investment and stock returns to long-run shocks is responsible for the increase in the correlation
between consumption growth and investment as well as the increase in the correlation between
consumption growth and stock returns noted above (compare columns 2 and 4 in Table 3,


                                                 35
where the specification column 4 imposes σ L = 0). More generally, this dampening also tends
to decrease the unconditional volatility of other macroeconomic aggregates, such as output,
investment, and stock returns—all signs of a delayed response to persistent shocks.

    By contrast, columns 3 and 4 of Figure 5 show that near-rational behavior with respect to the
short-run shock tends to increase the volatility of macroeconomic aggregates. Column 3 shows
the impulse responses of consumption and investment with respect the the short-run productivity
shock are similar, regardless of whether households are rational or near-rational. The reason
is that, due to the transitory nature of the shock, households invest relatively little even when
learning with certainty that short-run productivity will be higher next month. The amplitude
of the response to the productivity shock is thus roughly the same regardless of near-rational
behavior. However, when households are near-rational, the same aggregates also respond to the
amplified near-rational error, increasing the unconditional volatility of investment, consumption,
and stock returns (compare columns 2 and 5 in Table 3, where the specification column 5 imposes
σ S = 0).18

     We draw two main conclusions about the effect of near-rational behavior on aggregate quan-
tities. First, near-rational behavior induces misallocations by delaying the response to infor-
mation, in particular about η L , and by inducing non-fundamental volatility. Second, these
misallocations tend to have different effects on unconditional moments, contributing to the
identification of the relative size of the two types of near-rational errors. For example, near-
rational errors about η L have a larger effect on the correlation between consumption growth and
investment because information about the long-run shock elicits a larger investment response
ex-ante. Similarly, near-rational errors about η L tend to lower the unconditional variances of
output, stock returns, and investment while near-rational errors about the η S tend to increase
them. The differential effect on the standard deviation of excess returns is particularly large
(16.18 when σ L = 0 vs. 9.55 when σ S = 0). Figure 6 shows comparative statics illustrating
these differential effects for two examples.

    We next study the impact of the three sets of effects of near-rational behavior on welfare.
As in our static model, near-rational behavior is costly for society because it generates a dis-
persion of consumption and leisure across households, increases risk by delaying the resolution
of uncertainty about the path of future consumption, and decreases aggregate wealth due to
misallocations of consumption, labor, and investment. Although our quantitative model does
not allow a simple additive separation of these three channels similar to the one we derived
in section 1, we can gauge the relative influence of each of the three channels by calculating
compensating variations associated with two counterfactual experiments.

       In the first experiment, we gauge the welfare cost of the cross-sectional dispersion in con-
  18
    The effect on the unconditional volatility of excess stock returns is particularly large and asymmetric because
the increase in uncertainty about η S dampens off-setting movements in the risk-free rate.


                                                        36
                 (1)   ηL
                        1 = 2σ ηL                 (2)   L
                                                         1 = 2σ L                (3)   η S1 = 2σ ηS               (4)   S1 = 2σ S




37
     Figure 5: The solid blue lines in all panels show impulse-response functions for our benchmark estimation shown in column 1 of
     Table 2. The red dashed line shows the results corresponding to full rationality (σ L = σ S = 0). Columns 1 and 3 show responses
     to a two-standard-deviation shock to long-run and short-run productivity, respectively, that materialize at t = 1 (but can be learned
     about at t = 0). Columns 2 and 4 show responses to a two-standard-deviation common error in household expectations in t = 0
     about shocks to long-run and short-run productivity that materialize in t = 1, respectively. Lowercase letters denote logs. d stands
     for the first difference in the time series.
Figure 6: Comparative statics over dispersion of private information about the long-run (left
column) and short-run (right column) shock to TFP growth (σ νL and σ νS ). The red dashed line
shows the results corresponding to full rationality (σ L = σ S = 0). See the caption of Figure
4 for details First row: correlation of consumption growth with investment growth; second row:
standard deviation of output growth in percent;


sumption and leisure by calculating a household’s willingness to pay for receiving the mean
private signal in all periods (ν it = 0 ∀t), while holding constant its policy functions and the co-
efficients in its expectations operator. The household is thus being offered to always consume at
the mean of the distribution across households, holding constant all other aspects of its behavior.

    In the second experiment, we gauge the direct utility cost of the delayed resolution of un-
certainty by evaluating the stream of consumption and leisure accruing to households in our
model using a CRRA utility function with γ = ψ1 = 10 and then calculating the social cost
of near-rational behavior in the usual way (i.e., by calculating the compensating variation for
setting μj = 0 ∀j 6= i). Because the CRRA utility function is additively separable, it is invariant
to the timing of resolution of uncertainty. Calculating the social cost of near-rational behavior
in this way may thus serve as a useful reference for the size of the welfare effects of near-rational
behavior absent its direct effect of delaying resolution of uncertainty.

    Table 4 shows the results of the two counterfactual experiments. It shows that of the total
social cost of near-rational behavior (5.31%), a full 1.5 percentage points are accounted for by
the cost of dispersion in consumption and leisure across households. 19 Moreover, the social
cost of near-rational behavior evaluated using the CRRA utility function is 1.06% of permanent
consumption, suggesting that about four fifths of the social cost of near-rational behavior in our
   19
      Recall that trading in contingent claims ensures all households hold the same wealth at the beginning of each
period, such that this number reflects only the dispersion in behavior that arises within the period. In this sense,
it is a lower bound for the cost of dispersion that would arise in a model with a dynamic wealth distribution.


                                                        38
                           Table 4: Decomposition of Welfare Losses

                                                             Benchmark Model      Aggregate Noise
                                                            (Noisy Public Signal) in Private Signal
 Social Cost
      Total (σ L , σ S =0 ∀ j6=i)                                  5.31                   5.40
      from errors about LRR (σ L =0 ∀ j6=i)                         5.02                   5.11
      from errors about SRR (σ S =0 ∀ j6=i)                         0.29                   0.28
      Cost of dispersion                                             1.50                   1.50
  Social Cost evaluated using CRRA (γ = 10, ψ=1/10)                  1.06                   1.08

Note: Implications of near-rational behavior for welfare based on the results of estimations
shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2, respectively. Cost of dispersion: a household’s willingness
to pay for receiving the mean private signal in all periods (ν it = 0 ∀t), holding constant its
policy functions and the coefficients in its expectations operator. Social cost evaluated using
CRRA: social cost of near-rational behavior when evaluating the stream of consumption and
leisure accruing to households with γ = ψ1 = 10. See the caption of Table 2 for details.


benchmark estimation arises due to its effect of delaying the resolution of uncertainty. The same
preference for early resolution of uncertainty that allows the model to produce a relatively large
equity premium (Bansal and Yaron, 2004) and large costs of aggregate consumption fluctuations
(Epstein et al., 2014; Croce, 2012) thus also accounts for the majority of the social cost of near-
rational behavior.

    Consistent with these results, we also find that near-rational errors about long-run produc-
tivity are much more costly (5.02% of permanent consumption) than those about short-run
productivity (0.29%), because they prevent households from learning about, and reacting pre-
emptively to, the key determinant of the long-term path of their consumption.

    In light of these findings, it is apparent that near-rational behavior and the non-fundamental
volatility it induces is socially costly even when the capital stock is relatively unresponsive to
variation in stock prices (and mispricings thus have a relatively smaller effect on the allocation
of capital). Figure 7 shows comparative statics of the social cost of near-rational behavior over
the elasticity of the capital stock with respect to stock prices, ξ, holding constant all other
parameters of our benchmark model. The figure shows results for values of ξ ranging from one
half to double its value in our benchmark model (7). The right part of the figure shows the
same comparative static for the standard deviation of investment for comparison. The plots
show the social cost of a breakdown in the market’s capacity to aggregate information is almost
completely invariant to variation in the elasticity of the capital stock with respect to stock prices
and to the size of the dynamic response of the capital stock to a given mispricing. In this sense,
stock market dysfunctionality (induced by near-rational behavior) is socially costly even if it
appears to be a “sideshow.”


                                                 39
Figure 7: Comparative static of the social cost of near-rational behavior over the elasticity
of the capital stock with respect to stock prices, ξ, holding constant all other parameters of
our benchmark estimation shown in Table 2. The right part of the figure shows the same
comparative static for the standard deviation of investment growth divided by the standard
deviation of output growth for comparison.


3.4   Robustness

We next explore the robustness of our results across a range of different variations, considering
alternative sources of noise in the information environment, variation in the degree of near-
rationality, and the choice of the decision horizon.


Alternative Information Environments From the results in Table 2, we can see that the
availability of an exogenous noisy public signal has only a minor effect on our estimates. Our
benchmark estimates suggest these signals are relatively uninformative such that, in equilibrium,
households largely ignore them when forming their expectations. As a result, the noise these
exogenous signals transmit has little effect on equilibrium behavior.

    Column 2 of Table 2 re-estimates a variation of our model where instead of exogenous noisy
public signals, we allow for aggregate noise in private signals as in (32) and estimate the standard
deviation of this aggregate noise along with σ νj , σ j (j = S, L), and σ ηS . We find again that
our estimates do not load on this alternative source of noise (σ ζL /σ ηL = 0 and σ ζS /σ ηS = 0.11).
Looking across the two columns, all other estimates remain virtually unchanged, as do the
implications of these estimates: the ratio of conditional to unconditional variance is 0.50 and
0.57 for the long-run and short-run shocks, respectively, near-rational errors are amplified by
factors of 577 and 143, and the estimated social cost of near-rational behavior is now only slightly
higher at 5.40% of permanent consumption. The last column in Table 3 shows that aggregate
noise in the private signal also does not significantly affect the model’s fit to the data.

   Amplified near-rational errors thus appear more relevant for fitting the data than either of
these alternative sources of noise operating through the signal structure. The reason is that, in


                                                 40
the data, households make forecast errors and disagree (quite strongly) about their forecasts.
Although noise from exogenous public signals and aggregate noise in private signals can ratio-
nalize only the former, near-rational behavior (in combination with noisy private signals) can
rationalize forecast errors, disagreement, and the dynamics of this disagreement.


The Degree of Near-Rationality Because the literature has little precedent for assessing
the minimum size of economic incentives required to induce households to engage in fully rational
behavior, Table 5 probes the robustness of our results over various levels of λ.  ˉ The first four
columns maintain the constraint λ < λ ˉ on the objective function (50) and vary this limit between
0.01% and 0.37% of consumption—the lowest and highest stakes at which natural experiments
have found evidence inconsistent with rational consumption smoothing (see Appendix Table 1).
Table 5 shows that our main results are largely unaffected across these variations. Even when
we specify the private cost of near-rational behavior to be smaller than 0.01% of consumption,
the then very small near-rational errors (σ L = 0.0008σ ηL and σ S = 0.0001σ ηS ) are amplified
enough to reduce the ratio of conditional to unconditional variance of the two shocks to about
one half (0.49 and 0.62, respectively), and the social cost of this near-rational behavior remains
at 5.10% of permanent consumption. As we increase λ,      ˉ this social cost increases slightly up
to 5.75% of permanent consumption (when λ      ˉ = 0.37%). As the size of near-rational errors
increases, the degree of equilibrium amplification decreases, as reflected in a decrease of the
estimated idiosyncratic noise in the private signals σ νL,S .

    Column 2 alternatively sets λˉ = 0.08%, consistent with estimates of the private cost of
rational inattention from Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2015). 20 The column again shows results
remarkably close to those in our benchmark calibration.

    Across all the variations in columns 1-4, our estimator always picks combinations of param-
eters at the maximum allowable private cost of near-rational behavior. Column 5 shows the
results of an unconstrained estimation where we instead add the mean (0.15%) and the variance
(0.024) of the four numbers used as limits in the other columns to the target vector θ and the
weighting matrix Ω, respectively. In this case, the estimated private cost of near-rational be-
havior is even higher (0.71% of permanent consumption), but nevertheless about 8-fold smaller
than the social cost (5.55%).

    Our main conclusion from this table is that the less rational we assume households to be, the
better the model tends to fit the data. Nevertheless, the central insight that the social cost of
near-rational behavior is orders of magnitude higher than the private cost appears independent
of how we specify this private cost.
  20
    Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2015) find that the per-period loss accruing to firms due to deviations of the
price from the profit-maximizing price equals 1/1700 of firms’ steady-state revenue and 1/5900 of steady-state
consumption (pages 3 and 31), collectively amounting to approximately 0.08% of consumption.



                                                     41
    Table 5: Estimation using alternative targets for private cost of near-rational behavior

                                  (1)     (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)
                                λ ≤0.01 λ ≤0.08        λ ≤0.13   λ ≤0.37 unconstrained
                                                     (Benchmark)
     Implications for Welfare
         Private Cost            0.01     0.08           0.13          0.37         0.71
         Total Social Cost        5.1     5.12           5.31          5.75         5.55
     Implications for Information Aggregation
         Vt [ηL]/σ 2ηL           0.49     0.49           0.49          0.5          0.41
         Vt [ηS]/σ 2ηS           0.62     0.58           0.56          0.5          0.48
     Estimated Parameters
         σ L /σ ηL (%)          0.08     0.08            0.09         0.31         0.18
         σ S /σ ηS (%)          0.01     0.34            0.42         0.92         2.31
         σ νL /σ ηL              24.35   25.82            23.6        12.82        21.42
         σ νS /σ ηS             158.87   17.74           13.61         7.39         5.35
         σ ηS (%)                0.98     0.98            0.98         0.98         0.98
         σ $L /σ ηL              3.00     3.00            3.69        1013          0.90
         σ $S /σ ηS              1.53     1.53            1.99        1012          1.38

Note: Variations of the benchmark estimation from Table 2 using different constraints on the
private cost of near-rational behavior (λ). Column 3 shows the benchmark estimation for com-
parison. Column 5 shows the results of an unconstrained estimation where we instead add the
mean and the variance of the four numbers shown (0.01, 0.08, 0.13, and 0.37) to the target
vector and the weighting matrix of our estimator. See section 3.4 of the main text for details.


Choice of Decision Horizon As a final robustness check, we explore how our results change
when we use a quarterly rather than a monthly decision horizon, where households then receive
signals about long-run and short-run shocks to productivity one quarter ahead of time. To tie
our hands, we again use the quarterly calibration proposed by Croce (2014) (he simply scales
the time discount factor and the depreciation rate such that δ 4 = 0.954 and 4δ k = 0.06, but
sets ρ4 = 0.9), and then use the same parameters from column 1 of Table 2 while scaling up
                                          √
the standard deviations of all shocks by 3. This calibration gives a similarly good fit to the
data and shows a social cost of near-rational behavior of 6.34% of permanent consumption. Our
results thus appear to imply only moderately larger social costs when we increase the horizon
at which households can learn about the future.


4    Conclusion

A large literature on noisy rational expectations studies markets’ capacity to aggregate dispersed
information. However, normative and quantitative applications of this literature have often faced
difficulties because they require a source of noise in demand, a role often filled by noise traders


                                                42
whose welfare is hard to evaluate, or by some other large shock to the supply of financial assets
that may be hard to rationalize in general equilibrium.

    In this paper, we have proposed a microfoundation for noisy demand that is part and parcel
of the idea that prices aggregate information: an individual household does not internalize that
small errors it makes when forming expectations affect other households’ ability to learn about
the future. If these errors are, in any part, correlated across households, they amplify as house-
holds learn from equilibrium prices, leading to much larger errors in equilibrium expectations
and diminishing the market’s capacity to aggregate information. We argue that this external-
ity provides a logically coherent rationale for why equilibrium asset prices and other economic
aggregates might contain large amounts of non-fundamental noise even if all economic actors
appear to act rationally and financial markets are efficient in the sense that rational investors
cannot systematically outperform the market.

    We find that the more dispersed private information is across households, the more severe this
externality is—making small mistakes is cheaper precisely when they are most socially harmful.
The social costs of this near-rational behavior result from misallocations of resources, increases
in the variance of consumption across households, and delays in the resolution of uncertainty.

    A quantitative application of our model yields four main insights. First, most of the infor-
mation about future productivity that households receive originates from noisy private rather
than public signals. Markets thus play a potentially important role in aggregating this infor-
mation. The social value of aggregating all of it amounts to 9.84% of permanent consumption.
Second, amplified near-rational errors drive out about half of this information content, such that
equilibrium asset prices transmit as much amplified noise as information. Third, the reduced
information content of asset prices results in a countercyclical and highly persistent dispersion
of expectations across households, in line with salient stylized facts. It also results in a rise of
the equity premium, a fall in the risk-free interest rate, and a range of distortions in aggregate
investment, output, and consumption. Fourth, our estimates for the social cost of near-rational
behavior range between 5.1% and 5.7% of permanent consumption, whereas the private cost of
this behavior is on the order of 0.13% of permanent consumption.

    We believe that the framework developed in this paper may prove useful for a normative
and quantitative evaluation of a large body of results from the market microstructure literature
(Hellwig, 1980; Kyle, 1985), studying the role of dispersed information in the economy, its effect
on macroeconomic dynamics, the cross-section of household behavior, and its interactions with
policy. Particularly interesting would be a re-evaluation of the social value of the provision of
private information (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980). Beyond the market microstructure literature,
near-rational behavior may also provide a new approach to other contexts where agents’ ability
to infer information from prices has real effects, for example on the slope of the Philips curve
(Lucas, 1975).


                                                43
References
Aaronson, D., S. Agarwal, and E. French (2012). The spending and debt response to minimum
  wage hikes. American Economic Review 102 (7), 3111–39.

Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. S. Souleles (2007). The reaction of consumer spending and debt
  to tax rebates-evidence from consumer credit data. Journal of Political Economy 115 (6),
  986–1019.

Agarwal, S. and W. Qian (2014). Consumption and debt response to unanticipated in-
  come shocks: Evidence from a natural experiment in singapore. American Economic Re-
  view 104 (12), 4205–30.

Akerlof, G. and J. Yellen (1985). A near-rational model of the business cycle with wage and
  price inertia. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 823–838.

Albagli, E. (2011). Amplification of uncertainty in illiquid markets. Available at SSRN 1788216 .

Albuquerque, R., M. S. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2015). Valuation risk and asset pricing.
  mimeo Northwestern University .

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2003). Asset price bubbles and monetary policy. Desai, Meghnad, and
  Yahia Said, eds. Global Governance and Financial Crises, Routledge, London and New York ,
  19.

Allen, F., S. Morris, and H. S. Shin (2006). Beauty contests and iterated expectations in asset
  markets. Review of Financial Studies 13 (3), 719–752.

Amador, M. and P.-O. Weill (2012). Learning from private and public observations of others?
 actions. Journal of Economic Theory 147 (3), 910–940.

Angeletos, G.-M. and J. La’O (2013). Sentiments. Econometrica 81 (2), 739–779.

Angeletos, G.-M., G. Lorenzoni, and A. Pavan (2012). Wall street and silicon valley: A delicate
 interaction. NBER Working Paper No. 13475 .

Bacchetta, P. and E. Van Wincoop (2008). Higher order expectations in asset pricing. Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking 40 (5), 837–866.

Baker, M., J. C. Stein, and J. Wurgler (2003). When does the market matter? stock prices and
  the investment of equity-dependent firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 969–1005.

Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron (2012). An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks model
  for asset prices. Critical Finance Review 1 (1), 183–221.


                                               44
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
  puzzles. Journal of Finance, 1481–1509.

Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998). A model of investor sentiment. Journal of
  Financial Economics 49, 307–343.

Barlevy, G. (2005). The cost of business cycles and the benefits of stabilization. Economic
  Perspectives-Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 29 (1), 32.

Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch (1998). Learning from the behavior of others:
  Conformity, fads, and informational cascades. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, 151–170.

Blanchard, O. J., C. Rhee, and L. H. Summers (1993). The stock market and investment.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 115–136.

Bloom, N. (2014). Fluctuations in uncertainty. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(2), 153–76.

Broda, C. and J. A. Parker (2014). The economic stimulus payments of 2008 and the aggregate
  demand for consumption. Journal of Monetary Economics 68, Supplement (0), 20–36.

Browning, M. and M. D. Collado (2001). The response of expenditures to anticipated income
  changes: Panel data estimates. American Economic Review 91 (3), 681–692.

Brunnermeier, M., A. Simsek, and W. Xiong (2014). A welfare criterion for models with distorted
  beliefs. Quaterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1711–1752.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011). Understanding booms and busts in housing
  markets. National Bureau of Economic Research No. w16734 .

Chauvin, K., D. Laibson, and J. Mollerstrom (2011). Asset bubbles and the cost of economic
  fluctuations. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43 (s1), 233–260.

Chetty, R. (2012). Bounds on elasticities with optimization frictions: A synthesis of micro and
  macro evidence on labor supply. Econometrica 80 (3), 969–1018.

Chirinko, R. S. and H. Schaller (2006). Fundamentals, misvaluation and investment: The real
  story. Institute for Advanced Studies, Economic Series 200 .

Cochrane, J. H. (1989). The sensitivity of tests of the intertemporal allocation of consumption
  to near-rational alternatives. American Economic Review 79 (3), 319–337.

Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). What can survey forecasts tell us about information
  rigidities? Journal of Political Economy 120 (1), 116–159.




                                              45
Coulibaly, B. and G. Li (2006). Do homeowners increase consumption after the last mortgage
  payment? an alternative test of the permanent income hypothesis. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 88 (1), 10–19.

Croce, M. (2012). Welfare costs in the long run. UNC Kenan-Flagler Research Paper (2013-3).

Croce, M. M. (2014). Long-run productivity risk: A new hope for production-based asset
  pricing? Journal of Monetary Economics 66 (C), 13–31.

Daniel, K. D., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (2001). Overconfidence, arbitrage, and
 equilibrium asset pricing. Journal of Finance 56, 921–965.

DeLong, B. J., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1989). The size and incidence
  of the losses from noise trading. Journal of Finance 44, 681–696.

Diamond, D. W. and R. E. Verrecchia (1981). Information aggregation in a noisy rational
  expectations economy. Journal of Financial Economics 9(3), 221–235.

Dupor, B. (2005). Stabilizing non-fundamental asset price movements under discretion and
 limited information. Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 727–747.

Epstein, L., E. Farhi, and T. Stralezcki (2014). How much would you pay to resolve long-run
  risk? American Economic Review 104 (9), 2680–2697.

Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
  consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica 57 (4), 937–969.

Farhi, E. and S. Panageas (2006). The real effects of stock market mispricing at the aggregate:
  Theory and empirical evidence. mimeo Harvard University .

Fuchs-Schuendeln, N. and T. A. Hassan (2015, June). Natural experiments in macroeconomics.
  (21228).

Galeotti, M. and F. Schiantarelli (1994). Stock market volatility and investment: Do only
 fundamentals matter? Economica (New Series) 61, 147–165.

Gilchrist, S., C. P. Himmelberg, and G. Huberman (2005). Do stock price bubbles influence
  corporate investment? Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 805–827.

Goldstein, I., E. Ozdenoren, and K. Yuan (2013). Trading frenzies and their impact on real
 investment. Journal of Financial Economics .

Grossman, S. (1976). On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where trades have diverse
  information. Journal of Finance 31 (2), 573–585.



                                              46
Grossman, S. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980). On the impossibility of informationally efficient
  markets. American Economic Review 70 (3), 393–408.

Hassan, T. A. and T. M. Mertens (2011). Market sentiment: A tragedy of the commons.
 American Economic Review 101, 2.

Hellwig, C. (2005). Heterogenous information and the welfare effects of public information
  disclosures. mimeo Univeristy of California Los Angeles .

Hellwig, M. (1980). On the aggregation of information in competitive markets. Journal of
  Economic Theory 22, 477–498.

Hong, H. and J. C. Stein (1999). A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
  overreaction in asset markets. Journal of Finance 54, 2143–2184.

Hsieh, C.-T. (2003). Do consumers react to anticipated income changes? evidence from the
  alaska permanent fund. American Economic Review 93 (1), 397–405.

Jermann, U. J. (1998). Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 41 (2), 257–275.

Johnson, D. S., J. A. Parker, and N. S. Souleles (2006). Household Expenditure and the Income
  Tax Rebates of 2001. American Economic Review 96 (5), 1589–1610.

Judd, K. L. (1998). Numerical Methods in Economics. The MIT Press.

Judd, K. L. (2002). Perturbation methods with nonlinear change of variables. mimeo, Hoover
  Institution, Stanford University .

Judd, K. L. and S.-M. Guu (2001). Asymptotic methods for asset market equilibrium analysis.
  Economic Theory 18 (1), 127–157.

Kyle, A. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica.

Lansing, K. J. (2012). Speculative growth, overreaction, and the welfare cost of technology-
  driven bubbles. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83 (3), 461–483.

Lorenzoni, G. (2009). A theory of demand shocks. American Economic Review 99 (5), 2050–
  2084.

Lucas, R. (1975). An equilibrium model of the business cycle.     Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 83 (6), 1113–1144.

Maćkowiak, B. and M. Wiederholt (2015). Business cycle dynamics under rational inattention*.
 The Review of Economic Studies , rdv027.


                                             47
Mankiw, N. G. (1985). Small menu costs and large business cycles: A macroeconomic model of
 monopoly. Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (2), 529–537.

Mertens, T. (2009). Excessively volatile stock markets: Equilibrium computation and policy
 analysis. mimeo New York University .

Mertens, T. M. and K. L. Judd (2013). Equilibrium existence and approximation for incomplete
 market models with substantial heterogeneity. mimeo New York University .

Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1990). The stock market and investment: Is the
 market a sideshow? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 157–215.

Odean, T. (1998). Volume, volatility, price, and profit: When all traders are above average.
 Journal of Finance 53, 1887–1934.

Odean, T. (1999). Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89, 1279–1298.

Panageas, S. (2005). Neoclassical theory of investment in speculative markets. mimeo the
  Wharton School .

Parker, J. A. (1999). The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in Social
  Security Taxes. American Economic Review 89 (4), pp. 959–973.

Parker, J. A., N. S. Souleles, D. S. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2013). Consumer spending and
  the economic stimulus payments of 2008. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2530–2553.

Patton, A. J. and A. Timmermann (2010). Why do forecasters disagree? lessons from the term
  structure of cross-sectional dispersion. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (7), 803–820.

Polk, C. and P. Sapienza (2009). The stock market and corporate investment: a test of catering
  theory. Review of Financial Studies 22, 187–217.

Qiu, W. and J. Wang (2010). Asset pricing under heterogeneous information. mimeo MIT Sloan
  School of Management .

Rauh, J. D. and A. Sufi (2012). Explaining corporate capital structure: Product markets, leases,
  and asset similarity. Review of Finance 16 (1), 115–155.

Scholnick, B. (2013). Consumption Smoothing after the Final Mortgage Payment: Testing the
  Magnitude Hypothesis. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4), 1444–1449.

Shea, J. (1995). Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis. American
  Economic Review 85 (1), pp. 186–200.

Sockin, M. (2015). Not so great expectations: A model of growth and informational frictions.
  mimeo Univerisity of Texas at Austin .

                                              48
Souleles, N. S. (1999). The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds.
  American Economic Review 89 (4), 947–958.

Souleles, N. S. (2000). College tuition and household savings and consumption. Journal of
  Public Economics 77 (2), 185 – 207.

Souleles, N. S. (2002, July). Consumer response to the Reagan tax cuts. Journal of Public
  Economics 85 (1), 99–120.

Stein, J. C. (1987). Informational externalities and welfare-reducing speculation. Journal of
  Political Economy 95 (6), 1123–1145.

Stephens, M. (2008). The Consumption Response to Predictable Changes in Discretionary
  Income: Evidence from the Repayment of Vehicle Loans. Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics 90 (2), 241–252.

Wang, J. (1994). A model of competitive stock trading volume. Journal of Political Economy 102
 (1), 127–168.

Woodford, M. (2010). Robustly optimal monetary policy with near-rational expectations. Amer-
 ican Economic Review 100 (1), 274–303.

Yu, J. (2011). Disagreement and return predictability of stock portfolios. Journal of Financial
  Economics 99, 162–183.




                                              49
                                    Online Appendix




Appendix Figure 1: Ratio of the conditional variance of η to its unconditional variance plotted
over the level of dispersion of private information. The graph compares the case of an endogenous
σ  with fixed λ to case of a fixed σ  using κ = 2 and ρ = 5.



A       Appendix to Section 1

A.1     Derivation of (14), (15), and (27)

Plugging (13) back into (10) and matching coefficients with (11) yields


        α0 + ρV1 [η]κ(1 − α2 )                         α1                                   1
 π0 =                           ,     π1 =                           ,      γ=                           .
        (1 − α2 )(1 + ρV1 [η]κ)              (1 − α2 )(1 + ρV1 [η]κ)             (1 − α2 )(1 + ρV1 [η]κ)
                                                                  (51)                                 (52)


    Using (2) and (11), the vector (η, si , Q) has unconditional expectation (ˉη , ηˉ, π 0 + π 1 ηˉ) and
the following variance covariance matrix:
                                                                           
                                      σ 2η         σ 2η        π 1 σ 2η
                                                                           
                               Σ =  σ 2η     σ 2η + σ 2ν      π 1 σ 2η     .
                                     π 1 σ 2η    π 1 σ 2η   π1ση + γ σ
                                                             2 2        2 2




                                                     50
Thus, by the property of the conditional variance of the multi-normal distribution,
                                                                                                                  !−1                  !
                                                                   σ 2η + σ 2ν                  π 1 σ 2η                   σ 2η
            V1 [η] =       σ 2η   −       σ 2η π 1 σ 2η
                                                                        π 1 σ 2η           π 21 σ 2η + γ 2 σ 2             π 1 σ 2η
                                                  1
                     =                                                    .
                           σ −2
                             η       +     π 21 γ −2 σ −2
                                                            + σ −2
                                                                 ν


Plugging (51) and (52) into this expression gives (14).
Similarly, by the properties of the multi-normal distribution,
                                                                                                        !−1                                !
                                                          σ 2η + σ 2ν               π 1 σ 2η                         si − ηˉ
      E[η|si , Q] = ηˉ +          σ 2η π 1 σ 2η                                                                                                .
                                                               π 1 σ 2η        π 21 σ 2η + γ 2 σ 2                Q − (π 0 + π 1 ηˉ)

Replacing Q by (10) and plugging in (13) and (53) gives (15).
Matching the coefficients of (15) with (12)
                                             !                                                                                  !−1
                        α1                                                              σ 2η + σ 2ν           π 1 σ 2η
                                                  =       σ 2η     π 1 σ 2η                                                            ,
                 α2 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)                                                           π 1 σ 2η    π 21 σ 2η + γ 2 σ 2

and solving for α1 , α2 yields

                                                          γ 2 σ 2η σ 2
                           α1 =                                                           ,
                                       γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2 + σ 2η π 21 σ 2ν + γ 2 σ 2
                                                                          π 1 σ 2η σ 2ν
                           α2 =                                                                                    .                             (54)
                                          γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2 + σ 2η π 21 σ 2ν + γ 2 σ 2              (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)

Combining (54) with (51), (52), and (14) yields (27).



A.2    Proof of Lemma 1.1

Use the law of total variance and (11) and (12) to get

         σ 2η = V1 [η] + V0 [E1i [η]]
               = V1 [η] + V0 [α1 ν i + (α1 + α2 π 1 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)) η + α2 γ(1 + ρV1 [η]κ)]
               = V1 [η] + α21 σ 2ν + (α1 + α2 π 1 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ))2 σ 2η + α22 γ 2 σ 2 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)2 .

Now note from (17) and (18) that

                                                                    V1 [η]2 V1 [η]4      V1 [η]2 V1 [η]2 α21
             α21 σ 2ν + α22 γ 2 σ 2 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)2 =                     +           =        +            ,
                                                                      σ 2ν   σ 4ν σ 2     σ 2ν      σ 2


                                                                          51
                     α21                            
and from (14) that   σ 2
                            =     1
                                V1 [η]   − σ −2   −2 such that
                                             η + σν


                            α21 σ 2ν + α22 γ 2 σ 2 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)2 = V1 [η] − V1 [η]2 σ −2
                                                                                         η .



   In addition, using (51) we can show that

        (α1 + α2 π 1 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ))2 = ((1 − α2 )π 1 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ) + α2 π 1 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ))2
                                              = π 21 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ)2 .

Substituting these two expressions back into (55) yields

                             σ 2η = 2V1 [η] − V1 [η]2 σ −2                    2 2
                                                        η + π 1 (1 + ρV1 [η]κ) σ η .
                                                              2



Solving this expression for V1 [η] gives

                                                         σ 2η (1 − π 1 )
                                                V1 [η] =                 .                       (56)
                                                         1 + κρπ 1 σ 2η

Now take the market-clearing condition (8), plug in (7) and (9) on the left-hand side and (1) on
the right to get               R1
                                0 E1i [η]di − Q + 
                                                    = κ(Q − 1).
                                      ρV1 [η]
Take the unconditional expectation on both sides:

                                          E0 [η − Q] = ρκV1 [η](E0 [Q] − 1).

Now note from (11) that E0 [Q] = π 0 + π 1 ηˉ and therefore:

                                    −π 0 + (1 − π 1 )ˉ
                                                     η = ρκV1 [η](E0 [Q] − 1).

Solving for π 0 and plugging in (56) yields

                                                    (1 − π 1 )(ˉ
                                                               η + κρσ 2η )
                                             π0 =                           .                    (57)
                                                         1 + κρσ 2η

Similarly, from (51), (52), and (17), it follows that

                                                              σ 2ν
                                                    γ = π1          .                            (58)
                                                             V1 [η]




                                                           52
Again plugging in (56) yields                                    
                                         π 1 σ 2ν 1 + κρπ 1 σ 2η
                                      γ=                           .
                                                σ 2η (1 − π 1 )

To solve for π 1 , substitute (17), (18), and (58) into (51) to get
                                                                                !−1
                                                    −1     V1 [η]2
                             π1 =   σ −2
                                      ν    V1 [η]        −               + ρκ         .
                                                           π 1 σ 4ν σ 2

Combining this expression with (56) and solving yields (20). Plugging (20) into (57) and (58)
separately gives (19) and (21). And substituting α1 using (17) in (14) yields (22).


A.3    Details on Amplification from Cost Function
Lemma A.1
There is a one-to-one mapping between the cost parameter λ and the size of the error σ  where
the derivative dσ
                dλ is strictly positive. In the limit in which λ → 0, all households behave fully
                  


rationally with σ  → 0.

    To show the magnitude of near-rational errors, take the first-order condition with respect to
the optimal choice of μi
                               dE0 [w2i ] ρ               ˉ| = 0
                                         − V1 [w2i ] + λ|U
                                 dμi       2
where we plug in for wealth from equation (4), use V1 [w2i ] = zi2 V1 [η], the optimal portfolio choice
(9), and the definition of near-rational expectations (5). We arrive at

                                     μi σ 2   E0 [E1 [η]]     ˉ |.
                                             +              = λ|U
                                    ρV1 [η]     ρV1 [η]

Now we plug in the equilibrium choice μi = 1 and recognize that

                                                                α2
                                       E0 [E1 [η]] =               σ2
                                                              1 − α2 

from (12) and (13). After substituting α2 by plugging (17) into (18), we get that the size of the
errors relates to the costs via
                                                  ˉ |σ 2 − V1 [η])
                                         V1 [η](λ|U     ν
                                  σ 2 =                           .                         (59)
                                                    σ 2ν
                                                2
    In a last step, we sign the derivative dσdλ . Therefore, we re-arrange the expression we just
                                               


derived to
                                         ˉ | = V1 [η] + σ  σ ν
                                                     2       2 2
                                     ρλ|U                                                    (60)
                                                   V1 [η]σ 2ν



                                                         53
where we call c = λ|U   ˉ |. Taking the total derivative of (59) with respect to c and recognizing
that V1 [η] is a function of σ 2 delivers the following expression

                                                        dσ 2                  ρV1 [η]σ 2ν
                                                              =                                      .
                                                         dc     2V1 [η] dVdσ1 [η]          dV1 [η]
                                                                              2 + (1 − c dσ 2 )σ ν
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                           


Using (60) and the total derivative of (22) with respect to σ 2 delivers the lengthy expression

      dσ 2
                                                                                    T (V1 [η])
             =                                                                                                                                                    (61)
      dc         cσ 2
                    ν       σ4   2       3    4       4     2 4         2 2      4 4           2      4 2         2 2       2 6 4         4 4 4         8 4
                             η σ ν V1 (η) + σ η V1 (η) + 2σ η σ ν V1 (η) σ  + σ η σ ν V1 (η)σ  + 2σ η σ ν V1 (η) σ  + 2σ η σ ν σ  + σ η σ ν σ  + σ ν σ 



where

  T (V1 [η]) =          σ 4η V1 (η)6 + σ 8ν V1 (η)2 σ 4 + 4σ 2η σ 6ν V1 (η)2 σ 4 + 2σ 4η σ 6ν V1 (η)σ 4 + 2σ 2η σ 4ν V1 (η)4 σ 2 + 2σ 4η σ 4ν V1 (η)3 σ 2
                                                +3σ 4η σ 4ν V1 (η)2 σ 4 + 3σ 4η σ 2ν V1 (η)4 σ 2 + 2σ 2η σ 8ν σ 6 + σ 4η σ 6ν σ 6 + σ 10 6
                                                                                                                                          ν σ




which is clearly positive.


A.4          Deriving (23) and (24)

Jointly solving (22) and (59) for V1 [η] and picking the only real solution for the conditional
variance yields the two closed-form solutions
                      sr
                 1                      2                                                                                        
    σ = √                   σ4   ˉ             ˉ σ 2 σ 2 λρU             ˉ + 1 2 + λ2 ρ 2 U
                                                            ˉ − 1 + σ 4 λρU                ˉ 2 σ 4 + λρU
                                                                                                       ˉ σ 2 σ 2 1 − λρU           ˉ +1 2
                                                                                                                       ˉ + σ 4 − λρU
                              η λρU + 1      2λρU   η ν               η                          ν         η ν               η
               2σ ν


and
               r
                                      2                                                                                         
           −                ˉ +1
                     σ 4η λρU                   ˉ σ 2 σ 2 λρU
                                             2λρU           ˉ − 1 + σ 4 λρUˉ + 1 2 + λ 2 ρ2 U           ˉ σ 2 σ 2 λρU
                                                                                            ˉ 2 σ 4 + λρU                         ˉ +1 2
                                                                                                                    ˉ + 1 + σ 4 λρU
                                                    η ν               η                           ν         η ν               η
V1 [η] =                                                                                                                                .
                                                                         2σ 2η λρUˉ +1
                                                                                                                                     (62)

The solution for the conditional variance can be re-written as
               s                                                   
          1 2 λρU  ˉ 2σ 2 σ 2 λρUˉ − 1 + λρU ˉ σ 4 + λρU
                                                       ˉ σ 4 + 2σ 4         1 ˉ 2             σ 2η
                        η ν                      η         ν      η
V1 [η] = − σ η                                                        + 1 +   λρ U σ η + σ ν +
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                    .
          2                             σ 4η                                2                  2

From this form, it can be directly seen that the limit of λ → 0 results in a conditional variance
of zero. Plugging this into (20) yields (24).




                                                                                        54
A.5    Proof of Proposition 1.2

Solve (56) for π 1 and differentiate with respect to V1 [η] to get

                                         ∂π 1          1 + κρσ 2η
                                                =− 2                  < 0.                                       (63)
                                        ∂V1 [η]   σ η (1 + κρV1 [η])2

In addition, differentiate both sides of (22) with respect to σ  and rearrange to get

                                         ∂V1 [η]          2V1 [η]4
                                                 =                           > 0.
                                          ∂σ      2σ 2 V1 [η]3 + σ 3 σ 4ν

                                                             ∂π 1 ∂V1 [η] ∂σ 
Then, using Lemma 1.1, the fact that             ∂π 1
                                                 ∂λ     =   ∂V1 [η] ∂σ  ∂λ      yields (25), and applying (23) yields
(26).


A.6    Proof of Proposition 1.3

For the first part of the proposition, differentiate both sides of (22) with respect to σ ν and
rearrange to get
                             ∂V1 [η]   2σ 2 σ 2 V1 [η]2 + 4V1 [η]4
                                     = ν                          > 0.
                              ∂σ ν        σ 5ν σ 2 + 2σ ν V1 [η]3
Combing this with (63) proves the first equality and the inequality for strictly positive σ  . The
proof of the case λ → 0 follows directly from (23).
We start with the solution for the conditional variance in (62) and re-write it in the form
                       q                                                                                   
                  1                                                                            
       V1 [η] =             ˉ σ 2η σ 2ν λρU
                       − 2λρU                            ˉ + 1 2 + λ2 ρ 2 U
                                          ˉ − 1 + σ 4η λρU                ˉ 2 σ 4ν + σ 2η λρU         ˉ σ 2ν .
                                                                                            ˉ + 1 + λρU           (64)
                  2

First, note that, when taking the limit, the term under the square root independent of σ ν can
be left out and further note that the following limit is true
                                                            q
                                                                                       a3
                                   lim a0 + a1 x2 − x         a3 + a21 x2 = a0 −          .
                                  x→∞                                                 2a1

Apply this relationship to lim σν →∞ V1 [η] where we plug (64) in for the conditional variance and
we get limσν →∞ V1 [η] = σ 2η if λ > 0. The result from the proposition immediately follows. For
the case where λ = 0, note that the conditional variance is zero independent of information
dispersion.




                                                              55
A.7      Proof of Proposition 1.4

Differentiating (59) with respect to σ 2ν and plugging in the derivative of the conditional variance
which we obtain by totally differentiating (22), we get
                                                                                                                           
   dσ 2       σ 4η V1 (η)7 + σ 4η σ 6ν V1 (η)2 σ 4 + σ 4ν V1 (η)3 σ 4 σ 2η + σ 2ν 2 + 2σ 2η σ 2ν V1 (η)5 σ 2 σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 4η σ 8ν σ 6
         = 4                                                                                                                                  .
   dσ 2ν  σ ν V1 (η) σ 4η σ 2ν V1 (η)3 + σ 4η V1 (η)4 + σ 4η σ 4ν V1 (η)σ 2 + 2σ 2η σ 2ν V1 (η)2 σ 2 σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 4ν σ 4 σ 2η + σ 2ν 2


A.8      Proof of Proposition 1.5

Plug (11) into (1) to get
                                                    K = κ (π 0 + π 1 η + γ − 1) .                                                              (65)

Taking time-zero expectations of (65) and using (19) and (20) to substitute for π 0 yields
                                                                                                 !
                                                                               1 + π 1 κρσ 2η
                                              E0 [K] = κ (ˉ
                                                          η − 1)                                     .                                          (66)
                                                                                1 + κρσ 2η

In addition, from (65) and (28), we have

                                                         Cov0 (K, η) = κπ 1 σ 2η .                                                              (67)

                                   ∂E0 [K]                   ∂Cov0 [K,η]
It follows directly that            ∂π 1      > 0 and           ∂π 1         > 0. The remainder of the proof follows from
Proposition 1.2.


A.9      Proof of Lemma 1.6

Combine (2), (5), (8), (7), (9), (12), and (17) to show that

                                                                               νi
                                                              zi − K =              .
                                                                              ρσ 2ν

From (1), equilibrium profits are
                                                                       (Q − 1)2
                                                             Π=κ                .                                                               (68)
                                                                          2
Taking (3), plugging in (4), and substituting Π using (68) and (1) yields

                                                                             K2 ρ 2
                                               Ui = zi (η − Q) +                − zi V1 [η].
                                                                             2κ  2




                                                                        56
                                                                                   K2
Replacing zi = ρσ
                νi
                  2 + K, applying the definition wa = K (η − Q) +                  2κ ,   and taking time-zero
                  ν
expectations on both sides yields
                                                                  "          2 #
                               νi                         K2    ρ       νi
          E0 [Ui ] = E0             (η − Q) + K (η − Q) +      − E0          +K      V1 [η].
                              ρσ 2ν                       2κ    2      ρσ 2ν

The second equality in (29) follows from the fact that E0 [ν i ] = 0 and ν i is uncorrelated
                                                                                        h     with
                                                                                               i η,
K, and Q. As a result, the first term in the left square brackets drops out and E0 2 ρσν K = 0
                                                                                           νi

in the right square brackets.
The first equality follows from noting that E0 [Ui ] does not depend on ν i . It is thus independent
of i, and we have that                   Z          1
                                     SW F ≡             E0 [Ui ] di = E0 [Ui ] .
                                                0

Finally, use (1) to substitute Q out of (4):

                                        K2                                     K2
                wa = K(η − 1) −            = (Kη − E0 [K]ˉ
                                                         η ) + (E0 [K]ˉ
                                                                      η − K) −    .
                                        2κ                                     2κ

Taking time-zero expectations on both sides yields (30).

    Next we derive the different channels of utility. The utility specification in (3) embeds a
preference for early resolution of uncertainty. To see this, note that disutility from variance
stems only from conditional variance and thus the timing of the arrival of information matters
for welfare. More technically, we can write E0 [Ui ] = − ρ1 E0 [log (E1 [exp (−ρw)])]. The con-
cave transformation through the logarithm favors volatile expectations and thus gives rise to a
preference for early resolution of uncertainty.

    To show the economically relevant channels of information aggregation on welfare, we make
two rearrangements to the specification of utility. First, we apply the law of total variance to
the variance term V1 [w2i ] = V0 [w2i ] − V0 [E1i [w2i ]]. Second, we recognize that

                                                             νi
                                         w2i − w2a =              (η − Q).
                                                            ρσ 2ν

and, since ν i is independent of all other shocks, the covariance Cov0 [w2i − w2a , w2a ] is zero. As
a result,

                                    V0 [w2i ] = V0 [w2a + w2i − w2a ]
                                            = V0 [w2a ] + V0 [w2i − w2a ] .

The different channels by which near-rationality influences social welfare can now better been




                                                          57
seen when we rearrange the second term as follows

                                    1         1                                                   1
     SWF = E0 [Ui ] = E0 [w2a ] − ρV0 [w2a ] − ρV0 [w2i − w2a ] +                                   ρV0 [E1 [w2i ]]
                      | {z }
                      Level effect
                                   |2 {z } |2        {z      }                                   |2      {z      }
                                            Variance effect         Dispersion effect     Early resolution of uncertainty



A.10     Proof of Proposition 1.7

It follows directly from the envelope theorem that
                                                                 
                                                        ∂E0 [Ui ]
                                                  lim −             = 0.
                                                  λ→0    ∂μi

For the second and third equality, note that the social welfare function (29) depends on three
terms: the level of expected wealth, the idiosyncratic component in the expected volatility of
portfolio returns, and the aggregate component in the expected volatility of portfolio returns.
We first solve each of the three components as a function of the parameters of the model and
π 1 . Equating (14) and (56) gives
                                       s
                                                           (1 − π 1 ) π 21 σ 2ν σ η 2
                                 γ=                                                         .                              (69)
                                           σ 2   π 1 σ 2ν + σ 2η (π 1 σ 2ν κρ + (π 1 − 1))

Squaring both sides of (65) and taking expectations gives E0 [K 2 ]. Plugging E0 [K 2 ], (66), and
(67) into (30) and substituting in (57) and (69) yields
                                                                         !                                2
                   1        (π 1 − 1) 2 ηˉ + κρσ 2η                             (π 1 − 1) 2 ηˉ + κρσ 2η
       E0 [wa ] = − κ{2ˉ
                       η 1−                                                   +                  
                   2               κρσ 2η + 1                                          κρσ 2η + 1 2
                                                            (1 − π 1 ) π 21 σ 2ν σ 2η
                         + (π 1 − 2) π 21 ηˉ2 +                                           + (π 1 − 2) π 1 σ 2η − 1}.
                                                  π 1 σ 2ν + σ 2η (π 1 (σ 2ν κρ + 1) − 1)

We can then show that
                                                                                     
                        ∂E0 [wa ]             ∂E0 [wa ] ∂π 1         κσ 2η           ∂π 1
            lim                     = lim                      =              lim          < 0,
           σ  →0         ∂σ        σ  →0     ∂π 1 ∂σ         2 1 + κρσ 2η σ →0 ∂σ 

where the last equality uses (25). Using (25) and (63) from Proposition 1.2,

                                                                     
                       1 ∂V1 [η]        1           ∂π 1 −1          ∂π 1
               lim −               =−         lim             lim           < 0.
              σ  →0 2ρσ 2ν ∂σ       2ρσ 2ν σ →0 ∂V1 [η]   σ  →0 ∂σ 




                                                               58
Similarly, taking time-zero expectations of the third term and plugging in (57), (69), and (56)
yields
                                                                                                                          !
                                      κρ π 2  η −1)2 −1
                                           1 (ˉ                              η −1)2 −1
                                                            κρ −(π 1 −2)π 1 (ˉ                      (π −1)π 2 σ2                     (ˉ
                                 σ2                       +                            −         1      1 ν        + π2   + 
                                                                                                                                      η −2)ˉ
                                                                                                                                           η
                                                                                                                                                +1
                                  η             2                                                                           1
  h   i                                   κρσ η +1                  κρσ 2
                                                                        η +1
                                                                               2            σ2        2                2
                                                                                              η π 1 σ ν κρ+1 −1 +π 1 σ ν            κρσ 2
                                                                                                                                        η +1
                                                                                                                                              2
    2                     2 2
E0 K V1 [η] = (1 − π 1 ) κ σ η                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                            2
                                                                                    π 1 κρσ η + 1



Again taking the derivative with respect to σ  , taking the limit as σ  goes to zero and using (25)
yields                                                                
                    "        2      #       2 ρσ 2 (1 − η    2                     
                      ρ ∂E0 K V1 [η]        κ      η       ˉ )   + σ 2
                                                                     η           ∂π 1
              lim −                      =                               lim           <0
             σ  →0   2      ∂σ                   2 1 + κρσ 2η          σ  →0 ∂σ 

and concludes the proof.


A.11       Alternative information environments

A.11.1       Dispersed Information with an Exogenous Public Signal

This section solves the model with public signals introduced in section 1.4. We may guess that
the solution for Q is some linear function of η, $, and :

                                                    Q = π 0 + π 1 η + π 2 $ + γ,

where the rational expectation of η given Q and the private and public signals is
                                                     
                                            Eit η t+1 = α0 + α1 si + α2 Q + α3 g.

A matching coefficients approach parallel to that in section 1.1 gives

                                                 α1 + α3          α3           1
                                        π1 =             , π2 =        , γ=        .                                                          (70)
                                                 1 − α2         1 − α2      1 − α2

The amplification of near-rational errors is thus influenced only in so far as the presence of
public information may induce households to put less weight on the market price of capital
when forming their expectations.

    The vector (η, si , Q, g) has the following variance covariance matrix:
                                                                                                                  
                              σ 2η         σ 2η                        π 1 σ 2η                   σ 2η
                                                                                                                  
                        
                             σ 2η    σ 2η + σ 2ν                      π 1 σ 2η                   σ 2η             
                                                                                                                   .
                            π 1 σ 2η    π 1 σ 2η        π 22 σ 2$ + π 21 σ 2η + γ 2 σ 2 π 2 σ 2$ + π 1 σ 2η      
                                                                                                                  
                              σ 2η         σ 2η                 π 2 σ 2$ + π 1 σ 2η           σ 2$ + σ 2η




                                                                       59
Appendix Figure 2: Ratio of the conditional variance of the productivity shock to its uncon-
ditional variance plotted over the level of dispersion of information, σ ν /σ η , and for varying
precisions of the public signal. In each case, σ  /σ η is set to 0.01.


Solving the signal-extraction problem returns

                                                             γ 2 σ 2$ σ 2η σ 2
                         α1 =   σ 2$   (                                              )
                                     σ η (γ σ  +(π 1 −π 2 )2 σ 2ν )+γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2 +γ 2 σ 2η σ 2ν σ 2
                                        2    2    2

                                                         (π 1 −π 2 )σ 2$ σ 2η σ 2ν
                         α2 =                                                                                .   (71)
                                       (                                              )
                                σ 2$ σ 2η (γ 2 σ 2 +(π 1 −π 2 )2 σ 2ν )+γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2 +γ 2 σ 2η σ 2ν σ 2
                                                       (
                                               σ 2η σ 2ν γ 2 σ 2 +π 2 (π 2 −π 1 )σ 2$ )
                         α3 =
                                       (                                              )
                                σ 2$ σ 2η (γ 2 σ 2 +(π 1 −π 2 )2 σ 2ν )+γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2 +γ 2 σ 2η σ 2ν σ 2


Based on these results, Figure 1 plots the conditional variance of η for the rational and near-
rational expectations equilibrium and for varying levels of precision of the public signal.

    In the absence of near-rational behavior, the provision of public information makes no dif-
ference, because households are already fully informed from the outset. When households are
near-rational, the presence of the public signal is relevant only insofar as a collapse of informa-
tion aggregation affects only the subset of information that is dispersed across households and
not the information that is publicly available. If the public information provided is relatively
precise, Vσ1 [η]
             2   now converges to values less than 1 as σ ν goes to infinity.
          η




A.11.2    Dispersed Information with Aggregate Noise in Private Signal

This subsection solves the model with aggregate noise in the private signal introduced in section
1.4. We may guess that
                                  Q = π 0 + π 1 (η + ζ) + γ,


                                                              60
where both the expectation (12) and the coefficients π 0 , π 1 , and γ are the ones given in the
main text. However, the variance-covariance matrix of the vector (η, si , Q) changes to
                                                                                                               
                              σ 2η                 σ 2η                
                                                                                         2
                                                                                  π 1 σ η
                                                                            
                        σ 2η   σ 2ζ + σ 2η + σ 2ν     π 1 σ 2ζ + σ 2η       .
                                                                        
                         π1ση π1 σζ + ση
                              2        2      2    π1 σζ + ση + γ σ
                                                    2    2      2        2 2



Applying the projection theorem yields

                                                                    γ 2 σ 2η σ 2
                              α1 =      σ 2ζ ( γ 2 σ 2 +π 21 σ 2ν)+σ2η (γ 2 σ2 +π21 σ2ν )+γ 2 σ2ν σ2
                                                                    π 1 σ 2η σ 2ν                                   (72)
                              α2 =      σ 2ζ (γ 2 σ 2 +π 21 σ 2ν )+σ 2η (γ 2 σ 2 +π 21 σ 2ν )+γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2


and                                                                                     
                                           σ 2η σ 2ζ γ 2 σ 2 + π 21 σ 2ν + γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2
                   V1 [η] =                                                                          .
                               σ 2ζ   γ 2 σ 2 + π 21 σ 2ν + σ 2η γ 2 σ 2 + π 21 σ 2ν + γ 2 σ 2ν σ 2

    The key insight is that aggregate noise does not get amplified. Figure 3 illustrates this
result. The thick blue line plots the now familiar effect of a small common error in household
expectations with σση = 0.01. The red horizontal line plots the effect of an identical amount of
                                                σ
small common noise in the private signal (i.e. σηζ = 0.01). The red line has an intercept of 0.012
and is perfectly horizontal. The common noise in the private signal is not amplified, and does
the fact that an individual household observes a signal with common noise does not have an
external effect on the market’s capacity to aggregate information. The effect of common noise
in the private signal is thus invariant to how dispersed information is in the economy.

    The broken lines in Figure 3 show the same comparative static, but in the presence of large
                                        σ
common noise in the private signal ( σηζ = 1). Both lines retain their shape but now have a
higher intercept, reflecting the fact that less information is now available to aggregate, even
if the stock price is fully revealing. However, for the remaining dispersed information, the
information externality of near-rational behavior operates in the same way as in the model in
section 1. The externality is thus relevant whenever financial markets play an important role in
aggregating dispersed information, regardless of the exact information structure.




                                                                     61
A.11.3       Formal proof of Proposition 1.8

Since the expressions are shorter for the case of aggregate noise in the private signal, we start
with the proof for this case first. Combining (51), (52), and (72) yields

                                        −1                                                  2−1/3 3−2/3 Φζ
             π 1 = σ 2η σ 2ζ + σ 2η           − 21/3 3−1/3 σ 2ν σ 2ζ + σ 2η + σ 2ν σ 2 Φ−1
                                                                                         ζ  +               ,                                     (73)
                                                                                                 σ 2ζ + σ 2η 3

where
                                                 r                                                                                   !
                                            √                                                                             
      Φζ =    −9σ 2η σ 2ζ + σ 2η 5 σ 4ν σ 2 + 3    σ 2ζ + σ 2η 9 σ 6ν σ 4 27σ 4η σ 2ζ + σ 2η σ 2ν + 4 σ 2ζ + σ 2η + σ 2ν 3 σ 2         1/3
                                                                                                                                                .




Rewriting this expression in order form of σ  yields

                         π 1 = O(1) − 21/3 3−1/3 O(1)O(σ 2 )Φ−1
                                                              ζ +2
                                                                   −1/3 −2/3
                                                                       3     O(1)Φζ

and                                                                   1
                                              p                         3
                             Φζ = −9O(σ 2 ) + 3 (O(σ 2 ) + 4O(σ 6 )) = O(σ  ),
                                            y
where we denote y = O(x) if                 x   = const as σ  → 0. Taking the derivative with respect to σ 
yields

          ∂π 1                                                   ∂Φζ                     ∂Φζ
               = −24/3 3−1/3 O(σ  )Φ−1
                                     ζ  + 21/3 3−1/3 O(σ 2 )Φ−2
                                                              ζ       + 2−1/3 3−2/3 O(1)
          ∂σ                                                    ∂σ                     ∂σ 

and                                                                                   
             ∂Φζ   1                   1                6 −2
                                                             1                      
                  = Φ−2   −18O(σ  ) +   O(σ 2
                                              ) + 4O(σ  )     2O(σ  ) + 24O(σ 5
                                                                                  )     .
             ∂σ   3 ζ                 2
Cancelling coefficients and taking the limit on both sides yields the proof of the first statement:

          ∂π 1                                        ∂Φζ         ∂Φζ
   lim            = − lim O(σ  )Φ−1          2   −2
                                  ζ + lim O(σ  )Φζ        + lim
   σ  →0 ∂σ        σ  →0             σ  →0        ∂σ  σ →0 ∂σ 
                                                                                            
                  = − lim O(σ  )O(σ  ) + lim O(σ  )O(σ −4
                                     −1            2                  −2
                                                           ) + 1 O(σ  ) −O(σ  ) + O(σ  )
                                                                                         2
                            σ  →0                           σ  →0
                  = −∞.

The result now follows from the chain rule since ∂σ  /∂λ > 0.

   Similarly, rewriting (73) in order form of σ ζ yields

                 π 1 = O(1)O(σ −2
                               ζ )−2
                                    1/3 −1/3
                                       3     O(1)O(σ 2ζ )Φ−1
                                                          ζ +2
                                                               −1/3 −2/3
                                                                   3     O(σ −6
                                                                             ζ )Φζ




                                                                      62
and                                                                          !1
                                                r                           3
                     Φζ =                  ζ )+
                                 −9O(1)O(σ 10                ζ ) + 4O(σ ζ )
                                                 3 27O(1)O(σ 20         24      = O(σ 4ζ ).

Taking the derivative with respect to σ ζ yields

           ∂π 1                                                                                                                                 ∂Φζ
                    = −O(1)O(σ −3
                               ζ )−2
                                     4/3 −1/3
                                        3     O(1)O(σ ζ )Φ−1
                                                          ζ +2
                                                               1/3 −1/3
                                                                  3     O(1)O(σ 2ζ )Φ−2
                                                                                     ζ
           ∂σ ζ                                                                                                                                 ∂σ ζ
                                                                                                 ∂Φζ
                           −22/3 31/3 O(σ −7
                                          ζ )Φζ + 2
                                                    −1/3 −2/3
                                                        3     O(σ −6
                                                                  ζ )                            ∂σ ζ

and
                                                       √                                                                   !
           ∂Φζ   1                                       3                            −1/2                              
                = Φ−2           −90   O(1)O(σ 9ζ )   +                20          24
                                                           27 O(1)O(σ ζ ) + 4 O(σ ζ )                     19          23
                                                                                              540 O(1)O(σ ζ ) + 96O(σ ζ )     .
           ∂σ ζ  3 ζ                                    2



The proof of the second statement follows from applying L’Hopital’s rule to this expression.
Because the analytical expressions become rather cumbersome, we refer the reader to the Math-
ematica file provided on the authors’ websites for the remainder of the proof of the second
statement.
   For the case of the public signal, we start by combining (71) and (70) to get
                                                                                                                            
                    π 1 =27σ 6ζ σ 6η σ 2ν Φ3$ + 2σ 2 σ 2ζ Φ$ σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 2η σ 2ν Φ$ 3 + 2σ 4 σ 2ζ σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 2η σ 2ν 6
                            √      √                    √ √               √                                              
                              3                    4/3                                    4/3
                                2 3σ ζ σ 2η σ 4ν σ      2 3 2 3Φ2$ + 2         3 + 3i σ        σ 2ζ σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 2η σ 2ν 2
                         ×                                                                                 
                                              Φ7$ 27σ 6ζ σ 6η σ 2ν + Φ3$ + 2σ 2 σ 2ζ σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 2η σ 2ν 3


where
             v                                                                                                  !
             u                  r                                                                                                                  
             u                                                                                                                              
      Φ$   = t
             3
               3σ 3ζ σ 3η σ ν       81σ 6ζ σ 6η σ 2ν + 12σ 2 σ 2ν σ 2ζ + σ 2η + σ 2ζ σ 2η 3 − 9σ 3ζ σ 3η σ ν       − 2σ 2 σ 2ζ σ 2η + σ 2ν + σ 2η σ 2ν 3 .



    The remaining steps mirror those of the proof for the case with aggregate noise in the private
signal. In either case, the expressions are long and we refer the reader to the Mathematica file
provided on the authors’ websites.


A.12         Comparison with Noise-Trader Model

Consider two modifications to the model in section 1: First, households have rational expecta-
tions:
                                         μi = 0 ∀i.




                                                                              63
Second, in addition to the unit interval of rational households, the economy is inhabited by a unit
interval of noise traders j ∈ [0, 1] inhabit the economy. Noise traders are identical to rational
households in that they have the same preferences (3), budget constraint (4), and information
set (they receive the signal (2) and observe the equilibrium stock price Q). However, when
making their portfolio decisions, noise traders do not maximize their utility but exogenously
and inelastically demand
                                              zj = μj ϑ,                                       (74)
                    
where ϑ ∼ N 0, σ 2ϑ . This behavior makes the supply of stocks stochastic from the perspective
of rational households.

   Because κ = 0 implies K = 0, market clearing requires that the sum of rational households’
and noise traders’ stock demands equals zero:
                                        Z       1             Z       1
                                                    zi di +               μj ϑ dj = 0,                   (75)
                                            0                     0

where μj = 1 ∀j.

Proposition A.2
Shocks to noise-trader demand lower the utility of noise traders but raise the welfare of ratio-
nal households. Noise traders’ demand shocks thus represent a positive externality on rational
households:
                        ∂SW F                    ∂E0 [Uj ]
                               > 0 ∀σ ϑ > 0 and            < 0 ∀μj > 0.
                         ∂σ ϑ                      ∂μj

Proof See Appendix A.12.1.


    The intuition behind this result is a redistribution of wealth between the two types of agents
in the model. Although rational households incur some losses due to the increased variability of
their portfolios, the market compensates them for the higher risk they take in the form of a higher
risk premium. Their welfare increases because they can “lean against” noise traders’ demand
and thus earn higher expected returns on their investments. 21 Noise-trader demand shocks thus
represent a positive rather than negative externality on the welfare of rational households.

   In addition, the size of this externality shrinks to 0 in the limit in which noise-trader demand
shocks become small.
Proposition A.3
As the standard deviation of noise-trader demand approaches 0, its marginal effect on the elas-
  21
     With endogenous capital accumulation (κ > 0), there also exist parameter combinations for which the dead-
weight loss from distortions in the capital stock outweighs the redistribution of wealth from noise traders to
rational households such that the marginal effect on rational households’ utility becomes negative.



                                                              64
ticity of the stock price with respect to productivity goes to 0

                                                       ∂π 1
                                                lim         = 0.
                                                σ ϑ →0 ∂σ ϑ


Proof See Appendix A.12.2.


    To see the intuition for this result, replace K with ϑ in (1.4). Noise-trader demand shocks
are multiplied with ρV  1 [η]
                      1−α2 . For small σ ϑ , both the numerator and the denominator go to 0,
such that the fraction as a whole remains a finite number. (In Appendix A.12.2, we show
that the multiplier on noise traders’ demand shocks is always strictly smaller than ρσ 2ν .) Small
common shocks to noise traders’ demand thus have no first-order effect on the equilibrium
informativeness of stock prices. As a result, they affect neither noise traders’ own utility nor the
welfare of rational households. We show in the appendix that
                                                                              
                                            ∂SW F                      ∂E0 [Uj ]
                                lim                     = lim                      = 0.
                               σ ϑ →0        ∂σ ϑ         σ ϑ →0        ∂μj

Small shocks to noise traders’ demand thus do not give rise to the type of externality we derive
in section 1. In addition, allowing for large shocks to noise-trader demand actually gives rise to
a positive rather than a negative externality.


A.12.1    Proof of Proposition A.2

Because households are now fully rational, their demand schedule is

                                                        E1i [η] − Q
                                               zi =                 .                           (76)
                                                          ρV1 [η]

Taking time-zero expectations of (3), plugging in (4) and (76), and simplifying by law of iterated
expectations yields
                                                 "                #      "                #
                     E1i [η − Q](η − Q)        ρ     (E1i [η − Q])2    1     (E1i [η − Q])2
     E0 [Ui ] = E0                          − E0                      = E0
                            ρV1 [η]            2        ρ2 V1 [η]      2        ρV1 [η]
                   1                                        
              =            V0 [E1i [η − Q]] + (E0 [η − Q])2 ,
                2ρV1 [η]

where we have used that Π = 0 when κ = 0. Using the law of total variance, we can then replace
V0 [E1i [η − Q]] = V0 [η − Q] − V1 [η] and simplify to get

                                     (E0 [η − Q])2 + V0 [η − Q]    1
                          E0 [Ui ] =                            −    = SW F,
                                              2ρV1 [η]            2ρ


                                                          65
where the second equality uses the fact that E0 [Ui ] is no longer a function of i and thus SW F =
R
  E0 [Ui ] di = E0 [Ui ].
Plugging in (11) and the expressions from (77) yields

                              1              1               σ 6ν σ 4ϑ ρ3
                        SW F = σ 2ν σ 2ϑ ρ −                                        .
                              2              2 σ 4ν σ 2ϑ ρ2 + σ 2η σ 2ν σ 2ϑ ρ2 + 1

It follows immediately that
                                                                                 2
                       ∂SW F   σ 8ν σ 5ϑ ρ6 σ 2η + σ ϑ σ 4η σ 3ν σ 2ϑ ρ3 + σ ν ρ
                             =                                                    > 0.
                        ∂σ ϑ      ρ σ 2η σ 2ν σ 2ϑ ρ2 + 1 + σ 4ν σ 2ϑ ρ2 2

To calculate expected utility of noise traders, again take time-zero expectations of (3), plug in
(4) and (74), and simplify to get
                                                 ρ         
                        E0 [Uj ] = E0 μj ϑ(η − Q) − E0 μ2j ϑ2 V1 [η]
                                                       2
                                             ρ 2 2
                                 = −μj γσ ϑ − μj σ ϑ V1 [η] .
                                          2
                                             2

Taking the derivative with respect to μj yields

                                ∂E0 [Uj ]
                                          = −γσ 2ϑ − ρμj σ 2ϑ V1 [η] < 0.
                                 ∂μj



A.12.2    Proof of Proposition A.3

Substituting E1i [η] in (76) with E1i [η] = α0 + α1 si + α2 Q and (2), plugging the resulting
expression into (75), and simplifying yields

                                         Z       1       
                        α0 + α1 η +                   ν i di + (α2 − 1) Q = ρV1 [η]ϑ.
                                              0

Solving this expression for Q and matching coefficients with (11) yields

                                       α0            α1        ρV1 [η]
                              π0 =          , π1 =        , γ=         .
                                     1 − α2        1 − α2      1 − α2

Note that the expressions π 0 and π 1 are identical to (A.1) and (51). Similarly, repeating the
steps in section 1.1, we find that the expressions for (16), 17, and (18) are identical to those in
the near-rational model. However, the expression for γ is now multiplied with ρV1 [η] relative to




                                                           66
its counterpart in (52). Solving the system yields

                          σ −2
                            η ηˉ                                −2 −2 −4
                                                          ν + ρ σϑ σν
                                                        σ −2
          π0 =                         −4 , π 1 =                           , γ = ρσ 2ν π 1 .   (77)
                 σ −2   −2   −2 −2
                   η + σν + ρ σϑ σν                 σ −2     −2    −2 −2 −4
                                                      η + σν + ρ σϑ σν


Taking the derivative of π 1 with respect to σ ϑ in (77) and simplifying yields

                            ∂π 1              2σ 4ν σ ϑ ρ2 σ 2η
                                 =− 2 2 2 2                        .
                            ∂σ ϑ   σ η σ ν σ ϑ ρ + 1 + σ 4ν σ 2ϑ ρ2 2

As σ ϑ approaches 0 the denominator approaches σ 4η while the numerator approaches 0.


A.13    Errors about Higher Moments

Rather than making near-rational errors about the conditional mean of η, we may consider a
model identical to the one in section 1, but in which households make a small common error
about the second conditional moment rather than about the first conditional moment. We could
then rewrite the market clearing condition as
                                        R
                                α0 + α1 si di + α2 Q − Q
                                                         = K.
                                       ρV1 [η] + V

Solving for Q yields
                           α0 − KρV1 [η]     α1        K
                                         +        η−        V = Q.
                              1 − α2       1 − α2    1 − α2
In a model with an exogenous and strictly positive supply of capital, near-rational errors about
the first and second conditional moments are thus isomorphic. However, with an endogenous
capital stock, errors about the second conditional moment break the Gaussian structure of the
model and are more complicated to analyze.


A.14    Benefits of Observing Mistakes

A guiding principle in our analysis of a near-rational household’s incentive to become fully
rational in section 1 was that households have the same information set, regardless of whether
they behave fully rationally or near-rationally. In particular, a rational household can condition
its decisions on si and Q, but does not know the small correlated error it would have made, had
it been near-rational.

    We can relax this assumption by considering the willingness to pay of a rational household at
t = 0 for observing  +ˆi at t = 1. A rational household can benefit from observing this error by
extracting the information it conveys about η (and equivalently about the common component



                                                67
in the error, ). Using (11), we can define

                                              Q − γ ( + ˆi ) − π 0     γˆi
                                      ŝi ≡                          =η−      ,                                          (78)
                                                      π1                 π1

where ŝi is the un-biased signal about η conveyed by  + ˆi .

Proposition A.4
As the standard deviation of the near-rational error goes to 0, a rational household’s willingness
to pay to observe the near-rational error it would have made had it been near-rational goes to

                                                                    1
                                   lim E0 Ui |μi =0,ŝi − E0 Ui |μi =0 = 2 .                                             (79)
                                  σ  →0                                 2μ̂

Proof See Appendix A.14.1.

    The potential gain of observing this additional signal thus goes to one half of the ratio of
common variance to idiosyncratic variance in the error in household expectations. Since none
of the results in section 1 place restrictions on μ̂, the potential incentive to observe  + ˆi is thus
small for a large range of plausible parameters.


A.14.1       Proof of proposition A.4

Lemma A.5
A rational household would pay
                                                                                                                     
                                           π 21 ((π 1 − 1) ηˉ + π 0 ) 2 + γ 2 σ 2 + (π 1 − 2) π 1 σ 2η + σ 2η
   E0 Ui |μi =0,ŝi − E0 Ui |μi =0 =                                                                                     (80)
                                                                           2γ 2 σ 2 μ̂2

to observe the near-rational error it would have made, had it been near-rational.

Proof First, a household using additional signal ŝi has a conditional variance of
                                                                                                   −1
                      V [η|si , Q, ŝi ] ≡ V̂1 [η] = σ −2   −2   2 −2 −2
                                                       η + σν + π1 γ σ  1 + μ̂−2                                        (81)

and holds the posterior expectation
                                                                                     γ                    −2 −2
                                            σ −2
                                              η ηˉ + σ −2
                                                       ν si + π 1 σ  γ (η +
                                                                2 −2 −2
                                                                                     π 1 )   + π 21 σ −2
                                                                                                        γ μ̂ ŝi
           E[η|si , Q, ŝi ] ≡ Êi1 [η] =                                                                            .   (82)
                                                                         V̂1 [η]−1


Second, plugging (4) into (3), taking time-zero expectations, and rearranging yields
                                                                 ρ  
                           E0 Ui |μi =0,ŝi = E0 [zi (η − Q) + Π] − E0 zi2 V̂1 [η],
                                                                   2

                                                             68
                   Ê1i [η]−Q
where zi =                      from (9). It follows that a rational household’s willingness to pay to observe
                     ρV̂1 [η]
ŝi is
                                                          "                                         
                                                                                                    #               !2 
                                                          Ê1i [η] − Q               (Q − 1)2ρ    Ê1i [η] − Q     V̂1 [η]
  E0 Ui |μi =0,ŝi − E0 Ui |μi =0              =     E0                      (η − Q) + κ     − E0
                                                             ρV̂1 [η]                       2    2        ρV̂1 [η]
                                                                                                     "               #          !
                                                               E1i [η] − Q             (Q − 1)2    ρ       E1i [η] − Q 2
                                                     −    E0               (η − Q) + κ            − E0                        V1 [η] .
                                                                  ρV1 [η]                 2        2          ρV1 [η]


Plugging in (2), (11), (14), (15), (78), (81), and (82) and applying the expectations operator
yields the expression in the proof. Note that this calculation is somewhat involved.

   Using this lemma, we now proof the Proposition. From (56), we have
                                                                                   
                                                                 V1 [η] κρσ 2η + 1
                                                         1 − π1 = 2                  .                                                              (84)
                                                                 σ η (κρV1 [η] + 1)


   Solving (22) for V1 [η] yields three roots, one of which is real and in the interval [0, σ 2η ]:
                         √
                         3
                                              √ q                                                              √                    
                           2 9σ 6η σ 4ν σ 2 + 3 σ 6η σ 6ν σ 4 27σ 6η σ 2ν + 4σ 2 σ 2η + σ 2ν 3 2/3 − 2 3 3σ 2η σ 2ν σ 2 σ 2η + σ 2ν
                V1 [η] =                             r                                                                                    .         (85)
                                                                        √ q                                               
                                           62/3 σ 2η 3 9σ 6η σ 4ν σ 2 + 3 σ 6η σ 6ν σ 4 27σ 6η σ 2ν + 4σ 2 σ 2η + σ 2ν 3


From (85), we have
                                                                  O(σ 2 )
                                                   V1 [η] =                − O(σ  ) = O(σ  ).                                                     (86)
                                                                  O(σ  )
Combining (84) and (86) yields 1 − π 1 = O(σ  ). Thus, using (57) and (69), we have

                                 π 0 = O(1 − π 1 ) = O(σ  ),
                                         s                       r
                                           π 1 (1 − π 1 )          π1 σ         1
                                                                                     − 12
                                  γ = O(                  ) = O(         ) = O(π 2
                                                                                 1 σ  ).
                                                 σ 2               σ 2

With these two facts, taking the limit of (80) of Lemma A.5 as σ  → 0 yields
                                                                                                                
                                                                   π 21 O σ 2 + (π 1 − 2) π 1 σ 2η + σ 2η                    1
    lim         E0 Ui |μi =0,ŝi − E0 Ui |μi =0           =        lim                                           + lim π 21 2
   σ  →0                                                         σ  →0                      π1
                                                                                    2 O σ σ  μ̂     2 2              σ  →0      2μ̂
                                                                                               
                                                                                       
                                                                                O  σ 2
                                                                                                         (π 1 − 2) π 1 σ 2η + σ 2η            1
                                                          =        lim π 21                  2
                                                                                               + lim π 21                           + lim π 21 2
                                                                  σ  →0     2 O(π 1 σ  )μ̂     σ  →0       2 O(π 1 σ  )μ̂2        σ  →0  2μ̂


Then using (24) and simply plugging in π 1 = 1 gives (79).




                                                                              69
B      Appendix to Section 2

B.1      Equation of Motion for Capital

Plugging (48) into (42) and integrating over individuals on both sides with market-clearing
conditions (44), (45), and (46) gives

                                       Qt Kt+1 = Qt−1 Rt Kt − Ct + wt Nt .

Plugging in (97), (43), and (47) yields

                                         Kt+1 = (1 − δ k )Kt + It − Gt Kt .



B.2      Deriving the Equilibrium Conditions
Definition B.1                     n                                                  o∞
Given a time path of shocks η jt , jt , $ jt {ν jit , ˆjit : i ∈ [0, 1]} : j = L, S      , an equilibrium in this
                                                                                       t=0
economy is a time path of quantities {{Cit , bit , nit , kit : i ∈ [0, 1]}, Ct , Nt , Kt , Yt , It , Gt , Rt , at , ω t }∞
                                                                                                                         t=0 ,
          j     j
signals {sit , gt : i ∈ [0, 1]}∞
                               t=0 , and prices {Qt , rt , dt , wt }t=0 with the following properties:
                                                                       ∞



    1. {{Cit } , {bit } , {nit } , {kit }}∞
                                          t=0 maximize
                                                 n     households’ olifetime utility (39) given the vector of
                                                                      ∞
       prices, and the random sequences t , $ jt , {ν j it , ˆjit }
                                                   j
                                                                          ;
                                                                              t=0

    2. The demand for capital and labor services solves the representative firm’s maximization
       problem (37) given the vector of prices;

    3. {It }∞
            t=0 is the investment goods sector’s optimal policy, maximizing (38) given the vector
       of prices;

    4. {wt }∞
            t=0 clears the labor market, {Qt }t=0 clears the stock market, {rt }t=0 clears the bond
                                              ∞                                 ∞

       market, and {dt }∞t=0 clears the market for capital services;


            t=0 is determined by the production function (33), and {Kt }t=0 , {Gt }t=0 , {at }t=0 ,
    5. {Yt }∞                                                                  ∞         ∞         ∞

       {Rt }∞t=0 , and {ω t }t=0 evolve according to (B.1), (36), (34), (43), and (35), respectively;
                             ∞


    6. {Ct , Nt }∞
                 t=0 are given by the identities

                                                      Z       1
                                               Xt =               Xit di , X = C, N.                                  (87)
                                                          0




                                                                  70
   After taking the ratio of the first-order conditions with respect to labor and consumption,
we get the marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption:

                                                     1 − o (1 − nit )−1
                                                                        = wt .                                       (88)
                                                       o      Cit−1

   The optimal choice of stock holdings is determined by the familiar asset-pricing equation,

                                                      Eit [Mit+1 Rt+1 ] = 1,                                         (89)

where the stochastic discount factor Mi,t+1 is given by
                                                                                                     1 −γ
                                                −1                   !1− 1                             ψ
                                                                           ψ
                                         Cit+1                C̃it+1                   Uit+1    
                   Mit+1 = δ                                                         h      i 1                ,   (90)
                                          Cit                  C̃it                      1−γ 1−γ
                                                                                   Eit Uit+1

and returns Rt+1 are defined in (43).

    Similarly, by combining the first-order and envelope conditions for bonds, the optimal choice
of bonds holdings is determined by

                                                                           π 0 (bit )
                        Eit [Mit+1 ](1 + rt ) −                                           1         = 1.             (91)
                                                                                       1− ψ
                                                              o(1 − δ)(1 −      1
                                                                                ψ ) C̃ it   Cit−1

Given these conditions of optimality, capital and labor markets clear when conditions (44) and
(46) hold, and the optimal consumption follows from the household’s budget constraint (42).


B.2.1   Detailed Derivation

Agents maximize utility (39) subject to budget constraint (42). State variables in individual
optimization are the holdings of capital and bonds, namely, Uit = Uit (kit , bit−1 ). We denote the
derivatives of the value function with respect to kit and bit−1 by Uikt and Uibt respectively. Thus
the first-order conditions and envelope conditions are as follows:
First-order condition with respect to consumption:
                                                                                 1
                                −1
                                                                  h        i γ− ψ                        1
                                                                    1−γ                    −γ
                            δ)C̃it ψ C̃it oCit−1
                                                                               1−γ
                    (1 −                                  =   δEit Uit+1             Eit [Uit+1 Uikt+1      ].       (92)
                                                                                                         Qt

First-order condition with respect to bonds:

                            γ− 1
                                                                                 
                   1−γ         ψ
                                              −γ                1                                1 −1 0
            δEit [Uit+1 ]   1−γ    Eit       Uit+1       Uikt+1    − Uibt+1             + (1 −     ) π (bit ) = 0.   (93)
                                                                Qt                               ψ

                                                                  71
First-order condition with respect to labor:
                                                                                                    1
                        −1
                                                                                   h         i γ− ψ                         wt
                                                                1−γ                               1−γ         −γ
             (1 −   δ)C̃it ψ C̃it (1   − o)(1 − nit )−1 = δEit Uit+1                                    Eit [Uit+1 Uikt+1      ].    (94)
                                                                                                                            Qt

Envelope condition for capital:
                                                                            1
                                           1           h          i γ− ψ                                Qt−1
                                                 1−γ                1−γ               −γ
                           Uikt =          ψ
                                       Uit δEit Uit+1                           Eit [Uit+1 Uikt+1            Rt ].                   (95)
                                                                                                         Qt

Envelope condition for bonds:
                                                                   1
                                     1         h               i γ− ψ                              1
                                        1−γ                      1−γ          −γ
                       Uibt = Uit δEit Uit+1
                                     ψ
                                                                        Eit [Uit+1 Uikt+1             (1 + rt−1 )].                  (96)
                                                                                                   Qt

Taking the ratio of first-order conditions with respect to labor (94) and consumption (92) gives
(88), where wt is given by
                                                      Yt
                                         wt = (1 − α) .                                     (97)
                                                      Nt
The first-order condition with respect to capital pins down the rental rate as

                                                                                Yt
                                                                 dt = α            .
                                                                                Kt

    Plugging the first-order condition with respect to consumption (92) into the right-hand side
of the envelope condition for capital (95) gives
                                                           1                       1
                                                                                1− ψ
                                       Uikt = Uitψ (1 − δ)C̃it                         oCit−1 Qt−1 Rt .                              (98)

                                           Uikt+1
Iterating (98) to t + 1, plugging            Qt        into the first-order condition with respect to consumption
(92), and rearranging yields
                                                                        1
                  −1
                                                   h            i γ− ψ                        1
                                                                                                        1− 1
                                                 1−γ                              −γ
                C̃it ψ C̃it oCit−1                                                                     −1
                                                                   1−γ
                                       =   δEit Uit+1                       Eit [Uit+1   ψ
                                                                                       Uit+1 C̃it+1ψ oCit+1 Rt+1 ].                  (99)

Using (90) in (99) yields (89).

   Analogously, for bond holdings, combining first-order conditions with respect to bonds (93)
and consumption (92) gives

                            −1
                                                                                γ− 1
                                                                                   ψ      h            i π 0 (b )
                                                                  1−γ                       −γ                 it
                (1 −    δ)C̃it ψ C̃it oCit−1       =       δEit [Uit+1 ]        1−γ    Eit Uit+1 Uibt+1 −         .                 (100)
                                                                                                          1 − ψ1

Combining the first-order condition with respect to consumption (92) and the envelope condition

                                                                        72
for bond holdings (96) gives
                                              1               1
                                                           1− ψ
                                  Uibt = Uitψ (1 − δ)C̃it         oCit−1 (1 + rt−1 ).                    (101)

Substituting (101) into (100) for Uibt+1 simplifies to (91).


B.3     Proof of Lemma 2.1

We proceed in three steps that demonstrate the consistency of the two statements in Lemma
2.1. To economize on notation, we show the equations in this section only for learning about
one type of shock. The analysis readily extends to learning about short-run and long-run risk
as carried out in our estimation.

    First, individual state variables are functions of the set of commonly known state variables
St as they would be in a representative agent economy. Furthermore, households form beliefs
about next period’s innovation to productivity using their private signal and the market price
of capital. Any individual choice by households xi (where x can be consumption c, labor n, or
                                                                                   
capital holdings k 0 ) is thus a function of the state space xi (Sit ), where Sit = St , q̂t , Eit [η t+1 ] .
Plugging this structure into our equilibrium condition results in a form

                                         gl (Sit ) = Eit [gr (Sit , Sit+1 )] .                           (102)

Note here that Sit contains all possible state variables in period t, and hence aggregate variables
can be determined by a subset of this state vector as well.

    Now we show that given the structure on the right-hand side of the equation, the left-hand
side is a function of the state space Sit . We replace the function inside the expectation on the
right-hand side by its Taylor series:
                                                                    
                  gr Sit , Kt+1 , ω t , η t+1 , ϕt+1 , q̂t+1 , Eit+1
                                        X cι (Sit )
                                   =                   (Kt+1 − K0 )ι1 ω ιt2 η ιt+1
                                                                                3
                                                                                   ϕιt+1
                                                                                      4    ι5
                                                                                         q̂t+1  ι6
                                                                                               Eit+1 ,
                                           ι
                                                 ι!

where K0 is the level of capital at the deterministic steady state, Eit = Eit [η t+1 ], cj (Sit ) denotes
the (state-t dependent) coefficients of the Taylor series, and ι = (ι1 , ι2 , ι3 , ι4 , ι5 , ι6 ) a multi-index
for the expansion.

    Now we take near-rational expectations conditional on sit and q̂t . As Lemma B.2 shows,
the conditional expectation is a sufficient statistic for the entire posterior distribution due to
normality and a constant conditional variance. The terms depending on Kt+1 and ω t are known
at time t and can thus be taken outside the expectations operator. Moreover, we get a series


                                                          73
of terms depending on the conditional expectation of ϕt+1 . Because ϕt+1 is unpredictable for
an investor at time t and all shocks are uncorrelated with each other, the first-order term is
0, and all the higher-order terms depending on Eit [ϕt+1 ] are just moments of the unconditional
distributions of ϕ. The same is true for the terms depending on q̂t+1 , and Eit+1 . The only terms
remaining inside the expectations operator are then those depending on η t+1 . We can thus write

                                                   ∞
                                                   X ĉι (Sit , Kt+1 , ρω t−1 + η t )
                     Eit [gr [Sit , Sit+1 ]] =                                        Eit [η t+1 ]
                                                                    ι!
                                                    ι=0

                                                = gl (Kt , ω t−1 , η t , ϕt , q̂t , Eit ),

where the coefficients ĉι (Sit , Kt+1 , ω t ) collect all the terms depending on the Kt+1 , ω t , and
higher moments of the shocks η t+1 and Eit+1 . The third line follows from the second since
all expectations of higher-order monomials of η t+1 are known. This step again follows from the
conditional normality with constant variance and known (deterministic) higher moments. Hence
we only need to keep track of the expectation of the innovation to productivity but its higher
conditional moments are constant.

   Finally, in deriving the set of individual state variables, we notice that contingent-claims
trading eliminates any meaningful distribution of capital across time, and thus show the consis-
tency of the individual state space.


    Second, we show that aggregate quantities depend on known state variables as well as the av-
erage expectation of next period’s innovation to productivity q̂. Therefore, consider an aggregate
variable of the form                            Z
                                       ˉ S)
                                       X( ˉ = xi (Si )di,                                    (103)

where Xˉ can represent labor (as in (46)), consumption (87), or capital (44). Again, we plug in
the Taylor series representation for individual state variables:
                      Z               Z X
                                           cι
                         xi (Si )di =         (Kt − K0 )ι1 ω ιt−1
                                                               2
                                                                  η ιt3 ϕιt4 q̂tι5 Eitι6 di.
                                        ι
                                           ι!

Only the last term differs across households, and thus all other variables can be taken outside
the integral. Integrating over individual expectations can be rewritten as
                 Z                 Z                             ι
                                                                               !Z
                                                                 X         ι
                     Eitι di   =       (Eit − q̂t + q̂t ) di =
                                                          ι
                                                                                      (Eit − q̂t )k diq̂tι−k .
                                                                 k=0
                                                                           k

Again, all moments of Eit − q̂t , which only depends on ν it , are known and thus the integral only
depends on q̂. Therefore, equation (103) holds.



                                                              74
    Using these insights, we solve the model using standard perturbation techniques. Pertur-
bation methods approximate equilibrium policy functions by their Taylor series around the
deterministic steady state. To arrive at the coefficients of the Taylor series, we bring all equilib-
rium conditions into the appropriate form shown in equation (102). Successively differentiating
the equation, evaluating at the steady state, and solving the resulting system of equations for
the coefficients in the Taylor series delivers the approximate solutions for the equilibrium policy
functions and prices.


B.4    Details on Signal Extraction
Lemma B.2
Given Lemma 2.1 and Condition 2.2, households’ equilibrium expectations of η jt+1 for j = S, L
are independent of the aggregate dynamics of the model. Due to the normality of conditioning
variables sjit and q̂tj for j = S, L respectively, the resulting conditional distributions are Gaussian
and identical to the linear Gaussian setup in section 1.



   Proof Given Lemma 2.1 and Condition 2.2, households infer q̂tS and q̂tL from asset prices
and macroeconomic quantities. It follows immediately that
                   h      i   h                         i     h                  i
                Eit η jt+1 = E η jt+1 |sSit , sL
                                               it , S t   = E   η j
                                                                     |s j
                                                                  t+1 it t, q̂ j
                                                                                                for j ∈ {S, L},

where q̂tj is defined by (49).

   We can thus guess that the rational expectation of η jt+1 is the linear function

                                        Eit [η jt+1 ] = αj0 + αj1 sjit + αj2 q̂tj ,

where αj0 , αj1 , and αj2 are the optimal weights on the prior, the private signal, and the average
expectation,
         h respectively.
                  i           Substituting in (49), taking the integral across individuals, and solving
   R        j
for Eit η t+1 di gives

                           Z
                                                     αj0             αj1                       αj2
                               Eit [η jt+1 ]di =              +             ηj +
                                                                           j t+1
                                                                                                       jt .
                                                   1 − αj2         1 − α2                    1 − αj2

Adding jt on both sides of the equation, substituting (49) and simplifying yields

                                        1 − αj2             αj0                1
                                                   q̂tj −         = η jt+1 +         jt .
                                           αj1              αj1                αj1

Thus with the normality of the fundamental shock jt and the demand statistics q̂tj , the forms


                                                              75
for expectations and conditional variances following from Bayes’ rule are identical to the linear
setup.



C     Appendix to Section 3

C.1    Moment Generation and Standard Errors

For the macroeconomic and financial moments listed in Table 3 we use annual data from 1929 to
2008. For the first five moments , concerned with the dynamics of expectations, we use quarterly
data from 1969 to 2008.

    In Table 3, E[.], σ(.), and cor(., .) denote time-series means, standard deviations, and cor-
relations, respectively. d stands for the first difference in the time series (e.g., σ(dy) stands for
the standard deviation of output growth). ACF [.] refers to the first-order autocorrelation. Ei [.]
denotes the one-period-ahead forecast from forecaster i, E[.]ˉ denotes the cross-sectional average
of Ei [.], and σ xs (.) denotes the time-series average of the cross-sectional standard deviation of
one-period-ahead forecasts.

    Fore example, σ xs (Ei [dy]) is the time-series average of the cross-sectional standard deviation
in forecasted GDP growth one period ahead. Because forecasts in the data are for the current
quarter rather than the current month we divide these series by factor three for consistency.
This scaling is not an issue for the remaining variables as they are all calculated as ratios or
correlations.

   Standard errors of the moments and moment ratios are calculated by block-bootstrapping the
truncated dataset from 1969 to 2008 times across years (following defaults of Stata’s “bootstrap”
command). In robustness checks we have also experimented with GMM standard errors and
obtained similar results.


C.2    Welfare Calculations
Lemma C.1
The share increase in lifetime consumption that makes a household indifferent with respect to
the implementation of a given policy experiment at time 0 can be written as
                                                         
                                                        ˉ0
                                          log Û0 − log U
                                     λ=                        ,
                                                      o
                h n               o∞ i                                              n       o
                                           ˉ0 = E0 U Cˉit , n    ∞ 
where Û0 = E0 U       Ĉit , n̂it       , U                ˉ it t=1 , and the sequences Ĉ, n̂
                                    t=1
refer to the household’s sequences of consumption and labor if the policy is implemented, and



                                                 76

    ˉ n
    C, ˉ are the corresponding sequences if the policy is not implemented.

Proof First note that the utility function (39) is homogeneous of degree o in consumption:
                                n                  o∞ 
                            U        eλ Cit , nit          = eoλ U ({Cit , nit }∞
                                                                                t=1 ) .
                                                     t=1

Using this property, it follows that the share increase in consumption, λ, that compensates the
household for not adopting the policy can be written as

                                                               ˉ0 .
                                                     Û0 = eoλ U

The lemma follows from solving this equation for λ.


C.3      Data Sources

Consumption (Ct ). Per-capita consumption data are from the National Income and Prod-
uct Accounts (NIPA) annual data reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The
data are constructed as the sum of consumption expenditures on nondurable goods and services
(Table 1.1.5, Lines 5 and 6) deflated by corresponding price deflators (Table 1.1.9, Lines 5 and 6).


Physical Investment (It ). Per-capita physical investment data are also from the NIPA tables.
We measure physical investment by fixed investment (Table 1.1.5, Line 8) minus information-
processing equipment (Table 5.5.5, Line 3) deflated by its price deflator (Table 1.1.9, Line 8).
Information-processing equipment is interpreted as investment in intangible capital and is there-
fore subtracted from fixed investment.


Output (Yt ). It is the sum of total consumption and investment, that is, Ct + It . We exclude
government expenditure and net export because they are not explicitly modeled in our economy.


Labor (Nt ). It is measured as the total number of full-time and part-time employees as reported
in the NIPA Table 6.4. Data are annual.


Stock market return (Rt ) and Risk-free rate. (rt ) The stock market returns are from the
Fama-French dataset available online on K. French 0 s webpage at
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/ftp/F-F Research Data Factors.zip.
The nominal risk-free rate is measured by the annual three-month T-bill return. The real stock
market returns and risk-free rate are computed by subtracting realized inflation (annual CPI
through FRED) from the nominal risk-free rate.

                                                           77
Tobin0 s Q (Qt ). Data on Tobin0 s Q are from the Flow of Funds (FoF) and are obtained
directly from the St. Louis Fed by dividing the variable MVEONWMVBSNNCB (Line 35 of
Table B.102 in the FoF report) by TNWMVBSNNCB (Line 32 of table B.102 in the FoF report).


Forecast Data GDP and consumption forecast data for the period 1969-2010 are down-
loaded from the Survey of Professional Forecasters provided by the Philadelphia Federal Reserve
at https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-
forecasters/historical-data/individual-forecasts We construct our forecasted GDP and consump-
tion growth rates using the forecast for the current quarter, i.e. the quarter when the survey
is conducted. The survey’s questionnaires are usually sent out at the end of the first month of
each quarter (after NIPA advance report), and the associated response deadlines are the second
to third week of the middle month of each quarter. As a result the forecasters are essentially
providing a 6-week ahead forecast. For more detail please see the documentation listed on the
above URL. The forecast file contains data from many forecasters that appear to forecast only
on an occasional basis and in particular these forecasts often appear highly volatile. To screen
out these, potentially less serious, forecasters we consider only data from forecasts that are in
the sample for at least 80 consecutive quarters and fulfill the basic requirement of a rational fore-
caster that over a long horizon the variance of the forecast be strictly smaller than the variance
of the forecasted variable. These criteria leave us with a total of 38 time series of forecasts.


C.4               ˉ using tests of the Permanent Income Hypothesis
       Estimating λ

Fuchs-Schuendeln and Hassan (2015) argue that although many studies reject the Permanent
Income Hypothesis (PIH), it appears that households behave more rationally when the stakes are
high. Specifically, when the welfare loss (as measured by equivalent variation) is economically
large, studies tend to find support for the PIH. Fuchs-Schuendeln and Hassan (2015) calculate
this equivalent variation by comparing two households. The first rationally smooths a pre-
announced income change (such as a bonus paid in December) over the course of the entire
year. The second has the same baseline consumption, but consumes the extra income in the
same period it is received. The equivalent variation is defined as the additional consumption
amount that would have to be given to the second household to make it as well off as the first,
expressed as a fraction of baseline consumption. In this appendix we replicate Fuchs-Schuendeln
and Hassan’s calculations using the same Epstein and Zin (1989) utility function used in the
main text (39) and an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of ψ = 2 as in Table 1.




                                                 78
     The first household’s utility is given by:
                                                                                                    !     1
                                              11
                                              X             x    1
                                                                                    1− 1              1− 1
                                                                                                            ψ
                                                    δ t (y + )1− ψ + δ 12 U rational
                                                                                         ψ
                U rational =      (1 − δ)
                                                            12
                                              t=0

Where y is the baseline consumption level and x is the extra amount of consumption received in
a natural experiment. The second household has the same baseline consumption, but consumes
the extra income in the same period it is received (December). Thus, its utility is given by:

                                                                                      !                                             !     1
                                   10
                                   X                     1                        1
                                                                                                                           1− 1       1− 1
                                                                                                                                            ψ
                                                      1− ψ                     1− ψ                                             ψ
U   hand−to−mouth
                    =   (1 − δ)          δ (y + z)
                                          t
                                                             + δ (y + x + z)
                                                                  11
                                                                                          +δ   12
                                                                                                        U   hand−to−mouth

                                   t=0

where z is the additional amount of consumption we would have to give to the “hand-to-mouth”
consumer such that U rational = U hand−to−mouth and the equivalent variation as a percentage of
permanent consumption is z/y × 100.

    In some studies, the increases in income are assumed to be permanent. In these cases we
assume the change occurs in the middle of the year and the additional income x accrues in the
last six months. In some other cases the additional income is paid over two or three months. In
each case we assume that these payments are made at the end of the year.

    The results of these calculations are given in Table 1. For each of 17 published studies it
gives the size of the change in income (x), the baseline income (y), as well as the horizon over
which the additional income is paid. The last two columns show whether the study rejects the
PIH as well as the equivalent variation as a percentage of y.

   Below we list for each study how the values for x and y are calculated (see Fuchs-Schuendeln
and Hassan (2015) for additional details).


     • Parker (1999) (social security tax):
       Assume there is a permanent change in the social security tax rate in the middle of the
       year.
       x = 34.06 (Table 2, this is the average individual tax rates times the pre-tax monthly
       income of 2241 times six to calculate the value for half of a year)
       y=1449 (Table 2, average monthly expenditures of a household)

     • Shea (1995):
       x = 83.88 (Table 2, expected wage growth due to education times annual income divided
       by two to give increase to income in the middle of the year)
       y = 2330 (Table 2, average annual household income deflated to 1982 US-dollars)

     • Souleles (2002):

                                                             79
Appendix Table 1: Studies of the Permanent Income Hypothesis (PIH) Sorted by Equivalent
Variation (EV) as a Percentage of Permanent Consumption

  Paper                                    x             y       Paid over   Reject PIH   EV (%)
  Parker (1999) (social security tax)    34.06          1449     6 months        yes       0.00
  Shea (1995)                            83.88          2330     6 months        yes       0.00
  Souleles (2002)                         234            3587
                                                           2     6 months        yes       0.00
  Aaronson et al. (2012)                  474           2154     6 months        yes       0.01
  Agarwal and Qian (2014)                 511           6644     1 month         no        0.01
  Johnson et al. (2006)                   480           47021
                                                          12     1 month         yes       0.03
  Agarwal et al. (2007)                   300           1635     1 month         yes       0.06
  Broda and Parker (2014)                 898           537000
                                                          133    1 month         yes       0.09
  Stephens (2008)                        2436           3325     6 months        yes       0.09
  Scholnick (2013)                      4508.76        5379.58   6 months        yes       0.11
  Parker et al. (2013)                   970.8          10601
                                                          3      1 month         yes       0.13
  Coulibaly and Li (2006)                1662           1785     6 months        no        0.14
  Parker (1999) (social security cap)     990           1449     3 months        yes       0.22
  Souleles (1999)                         874            3587
                                                           2     1 month         yes       0.37
  Browning and Collado (2001)            817232
                                            7          222674    2 months        no        0.76
  Souleles (2000)                       −1960          777.79    6 months        no        1.40
  Hsieh (2003)                          2048            1786     1 month         no        1.63


     x = 234 (Average change of quarterly withholding using the WHOLDP measure times
     two)
     y = 3587/2 (Table 1, real gross households earnings in 1983 dollars)

   • Aaronson, Agarwal and French (2012):
     x = 474 (The permanent wage change increases earning by 237 dollar per quarter and we
     assume the consumer receives the wage increase in the middle of the year)
     y = 6462/3 (Table 2, average quarterly spending in 2006 dollars)

   • Agarwal and Qian (2014):
     x = 511 (Table 1, Panel A, average monthly benefit of treatment group in experiment)
     y = 6644 (Table 1, Panel A, average monthly income of treatment group in 2016 dollars)

   • Johnson and Parker (2006):
     x = 480 (Table 1, tax rebate for consumers with a positive tax rate)
     y = 47021/12 (Table 1, annual income divided by twelve)

   • Agarwal, Liu and Soulles (2007):
     x = 300 (page 1, average monthly income for singles)
     y = 327 * 5 (The average consumer in this study uses 327 dollars of credit per month, but
     the authors cite Chimerine 1997 to indicate that credit is about 20 percent of spending)


                                                  80
• Broda and Parker (2014):
  x = 898 (Table 2, average tax rebate given the rebate is greater than zero)
  y = 179*30/7*100/19 (Table 2, average weekly spending multiplied by 30/7 to compute
  monthly spending. Y is scaled by 100/19 to adjust for the fact that data from the Nielson
  Consumer Panel does not capture all consumption goods)

• Stephens (2008):
  x = 2436 (Table 1, value of six months of vehicle loan payments)
  y = 3325 (Table 1, average annual after tax income per consumer paying off vehicle loan)

• Scholnick (2013):
  x = 4508.76 (Table 1, value of the average final mortgage payment times six)
  y = 5379.58 (Online Appendix, average income of treatment group families)

• Parker, Souleles, Johnson and McClelland (2013):
  x = 970.8 (Table 6, average tax rebate given the rebate is greater than zero)
  y = 10601/3 (Table 6, average quarterly consumption divided by three)

• Coulibaly and Li (2006):
  x = 1662 (Table 1, average payment multuplied by six to compute half a year of payments)
  y = 1785 (Table 1, average consumption from sample)

• Parker 1999 (Social Security Cap):
  Assume the household reaches the social security cap in the last three months of the year
  and does not pay any social security tax.
  x = 990 (The temporary increase in income for the last three months of the year)
  y = 1449 (Table 2, average monthly expenditures of a household)

• Souleles (1999):
  x = 874 (Table 1, Mean real refund for households in CEX data in 1982-1984 dollars)
  y = 3587/2 (Real gross annual earnings divided by twelve to compute monthly value from
  Souleles (2002))

• Browning and Collado (2001):
  x = 408616*4/14 (Table A2, a bonus of 1/14 of annual earnings is paid twice a year, so
  there are two months where 1/7 of annual income is received)
  y = 668022/2 (Table A2, total quarterly expenditures divided by 3)

• Souleles (2000):
  x = -1960 (Household expeditures for college when it is positive)
  y = 777.79 (There is an absence of expenditure and income data in the paper, so we
  calculate the equivalent variation using average quarterly spending from Johnson, Parker,
  and Souleles (2006).)

                                           81
• Hsieh (2003):
  x = 2048 (Table 1, Alaska bonus in 1982-1984 dollars)
  y = ((713 + 1107) + (643 + 1109)/2) (Table 1, average monthly spending over two periods
  of time provided by author)




                                         82
