NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT RISK AND DISASTER RISK
Francois Gourio
Working Paper 17026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

I thank Hui Chen, Simon Gilchrist, Nobu Kiyotaki, Harald Uhlig, Karl Walentin, Vlad Yankov, and
participants in presentations at Boston University, ECB, Paris school of Economics, the CEPR-EABCN
December 2010 conference, and SED 2010 for comments. Michael Siemer provided outstanding research
assistance. NSF funding under grant SES-0922600 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Francois Gourio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Credit Risk and Disaster Risk
Francois Gourio
NBER Working Paper No. 17026
May 2011
JEL No. E22,E32,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
Corporate credit spreads are large, volatile, countercyclical, and significantly larger than expected
losses, but existing macroeconomic models with financial frictions fail to reproduce these patterns,
because they imply small and constant aggregate risk premia. Building on the idea that corporate debt,
while safe in normal times, is exposed to the risk of economic depression, this paper embeds a trade-off
theory of capital structure into a real business cycle model with a small, time-varying risk of large
economic disaster. This simple feature generates large, volatile and countercyclical credit spreads
as well as novel business cycle implications. In particular, financial frictions substantially amplify
the effect of shocks to the disaster probability.

Francois Gourio
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
fgourio@bu.edu

1

Introduction

The large widening of credit spreads during the recent crisis has drawn attention to their important
allocative role: for many large corporations, the bond market is the “marginal source of finance”.
Macroeconomic models such as Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) emphasize the role of
credit spreads: as a firm’s net worth falls, its probability of default rises and the credit spread
increases, leading to a decline of capital expenditures. The importance of this financial accelerator
mechanism is underscored by some recent estimation exercises.1 However, this model, like most
macroeconomic models with financial frictions, is at odds with several well-documented patterns
of credit spreads, known as the “credit spread puzzle” in the empirical finance literature.2 In the
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist model, the average return on a portfolio of corporate bonds is
essentially the risk-free rate, because aggregate risk premia are small. Equivalently, the credit
spread corresponds exactly to the probability of default. In contrast, in the data the probability
of default of an investment grade bond is much smaller than the spreads: the probability is about
0.4% per year (and there is substantial recovery upon default, around 50%), but spreads average
around 100bp.3 These large spreads suggest the importance of a large, potentially time-varying
risk premium. These spreads are moreover quite volatile, with a standard deviation around 40bp
per year, and they are countercyclical. While the level of spreads was particularly elevated during
the recent financial crisis, the cyclicality of spreads is a recurring feature of U.S. business cycles.45
This paper studies the eﬀect of financial frictions in a model that reproduces the key features
of credit spreads. By their very nature, corporate bonds are sensitive to the risk of large economic
recessions. Building on this idea, I embed a simple trade-oﬀ model of capital structure, where
the choice of defaultable debt is driven by taxes and bankruptcy costs, into a real business cycle
(RBC) model, and assume that there is a small, exogenously time-varying risk of large economic
disaster, following the work of Rietz (1988), Barro (2006), Gabaix (2007), and Gourio (2010).
The risk of disaster captures the possibility of a large recession such as the Great Depression.6
1

See Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2009), and Gilchrist, Ortiz and Zakrajek (2009).
See Huang and Huang (2003), Hackbarth, Miao and Morellec (2006), Chen (2008), Chen, Collin-Dufresne and
Goldstein (2009), among others.
3
This is the spread of a BAA-rated corporate bond over a AAA-rated corporate bond (rather than a Treasury),
so as to net out diﬀerences in liquidity.
4
Philippon (2008), Gilchrist, Yankov and Zakrajek (2009), Mueller (2009), among others, show that credit
spreads are highly correlated with, and forecast, investment and output.
5
Some researchers argue that the variation in credit spreads during the 2008 financial crisis is driven by the
deteriorating balance sheets of banks and other financial institutions, who may be the marginal investors in these
markets. However, corporate bonds are not exotic assets: any household can buy directly a mutual fund or an
ETF of corporate bonds.
6
The probability of economic disaster can be interpreted either as a rational, objective belief, but an alternative
2

1

The capital structure choice modifies the standard RBC model equilibrium in two ways. First,
the standard Euler equation is adjusted to reflect that investment is financed using both debt and
equity, and the user cost of capital hence takes into account expected discounted bankruptcy costs
as well as the tax savings generated by debt finance. Second, an additional equation determines
the optimal leverage choice, by equating the marginal expected discounted (tax) benefits and
(bankruptcy) costs of debt. The model remains highly tractable and intuitive, which allows to
evaluate the role of defaultable debt and leverage choice on quantities and prices in a transparent
fashion. In particular, the model encompasses the standard real business cycle model as a special
(limiting) case.
The first result is that time-varying disaster risk generates large, volatile and countercyclical
credit spreads, which are significantly larger than default probabilities. The second main result
is that financial frictions amplify substantially — by a factor of about three — the response of
the economy to a shock to the disaster probability. Consistent with the extant literature, this
amplification eﬀect does not arise if the economy is subjected to TFP shocks. Hence, it is
the interaction between the trade-oﬀ model, a staple of corporate finance, and time-varying
disaster risk which generates novel, quantitatively appealing implications for both asset prices
and quantities.
The key mechanism is as follows. When the probability of economic disaster exogenously increases, the probability of default rises (holding constant the leverage policy). A higher probability
of default directly raises expected discounted bankruptcy costs. However, expected discounted
bankruptcy costs also rise through a second channel: agents anticipate that defaults are now
more systematic, i.e. more likely to be triggered by a bad aggregate shock rather than a bad
idiosyncratic shock. This higher systematic default risk increases the risk premium on corporate
debt, making it more expensive ex-ante to raise funds for investment. Overall, higher expected
discounted bankruptcy costs increase the user cost of capital, leading to a reduction in investment.
In equilibrium, firms also cut back on debt and substitute for equity, but since debt is cheaper
due to the tax advantage, the user cost of capital has to rise. To sum up, higher disaster risk
worsens financial frictions because debt is not eﬃcient when disaster risk is high.
The model has several implications. First, eliminating the deductibility of interest expenses
from taxable corporate income leads to a reduction in macroeconomic volatility and hence to
“behavioral” interpretation is that the probability of disaster reflects time-varying pessimism. This simple modeling
device captures the idea that aggregate uncertainty is sometimes high, and that some asset price changes are not
obviously related to current or future productivity, i.e. “bubbles”, “animal spirits”.

2

significant welfare gains. Second, making debt payments contingent on disaster realizations (as
has been recently suggested by several commentators) reduces volatility substantially: this simple
change eliminates the amplification eﬀect of financial frictions. Third, a high level outstanding
debt makes the economy more fragile, as any negative shock is likely to lead a significant share
of firms into default, which is ineﬃcient. A consequence is that a low perceived risk of economic
disaster, which leads to higher leverage, makes the economy less resilient to shocks — consistent
with a widely held view regarding the recent recession.
In contrast to most of the literature, which focuses on small entrepreneurial firms which cannot
raise equity easily and rely on bank financing, this model is designed to capture the richer margins
that large US corporations use to raise capital. In my model, firms always pay dividends (unless
they default), and no borrowing constraint binds. The relative attractiveness of debt and equity
finance varies over time, leading to variation in the user cost of capital. My model thus is not
subject to a standard critique of financial frictions models, that most firms do pay dividends and
are “thus” unconstrained. Nor does my model rely on a significant heterogeneity between small,
productive, constrained firms on the one hand, and large, unproductive, unconstrained firms on
the other hand. Incorporating these realistic elements would of course be interesting, but it is
not required. This suggests that the model mechanism is quite robust. My model is also at least
qualitatively consistent with several stylized facts on the correlation of corporate defaults: first,
the “excess clustering” documented byDas et al. (2007), and second the significant probability
of large default losses on portfolios of corporate bonds estimated by Duﬃe et al. (2009). Last,
it is important to note that while many firms do not access the corporate bond market directly
and instead rely on bank loans, a significant fraction of these loans are securitized (e.g. through
CLOs) and hence trade on a market that is similar to the corporate bond market.
Organization of the paper
The rest of the introduction discusses the related literature. Section 2 sets up the model. Section 3 studies its quantitative implications. Section 4 considers some implications and extensions
of the baseline model. Section 5 concludes. An online appendix provides additional robustness
results and details the numerical method.
Related literature
This paper is related to four diﬀerent branches of literature. First, the paper draws from the
recent literature on “disasters” or rare events (Rietz (1988), Barro (2006), Gabaix (2007), Wachter
(2008), and the criticisms of Julliard and Ghosh (2008) and Backus, Chernov and Martin (2009)).
In particular, the model is a direct, but significant, extension of Gourio (2010), who studied a
3

frictionless real business cycle model with time-varying disaster risk.
Second, the paper builds on the large macroeconomic literature studying general equilibrium
business cycle models with financing constraints (Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997)). Some recent studies in this vein are Chugh (2010), Gomes and Schmid (2008),
Jermann and Quadrini (2008), Mendoza (2010), Miao and Wang (2010), and Liu, Wang and
Zha (2009). In contrast to many studies such as Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) that
completely shut down equity financing and focus on the accumulation of internal funds, in my
model firms are able to raise equity costlessly. (Amdur (2010), Covas and Den Haan (2009), and
Hennessy and Levy (2007) also study the business cycle behavior of capital structure.) Several
of these papers analyze linearized DSGE models, where asset prices are much less volatile than
in the data, and aggregate risk premia are small and nearly constant. Because the economic
mechanism of these models often features asset prices, it seems important to examine the eﬀect
of financial frictions in a model where asset prices more closely mimic the data.
Third, the paper considers the real eﬀects of a particular shock to uncertainty (a change in
the probability of disaster). The negative eﬀect of uncertainty on output has been studied most
recently by Bloom (2009), who emphasizes the “wait-and-see” eﬀect driven by lumpy hiring and
investment behavior. My model focuses on changes in aggregate uncertainty and the mechanism
is diﬀerent: desired investment falls through a general equilibrium eﬀect and by exacerbating
financial frictions. A related mechanism has recently been explored in the studies of Arellano, Bai
and Kehoe (2010) and Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajek (2010), who consider changes in idiosyncratic
uncertainty as in Bloom (2009), but in a setup with credit frictions. I compare this mechanism
and my mechanism in more detail in section 4.6.
Fourth, the paper relates to the vast literature on the “credit spread puzzle” (e.g. Leland
(1994), Huang and Huang (2003), Hackbardt, Miao and Morellec (2006), Chen (2010), Chen,
Collin Dufresne and Goldstein (2009), and Bhamra, Kuehn and Strebulaev (2009a, 2009b)). As
discussed in the introduction, this literature documents that the prices of corporate bonds are too
low to be accounted for in a risk-neutral model, and considers various risk adjustments, borrowed
either from the long-run risk or the habits literature, to improve the fit of prices. Perhaps
surprisingly, there is, to my knowledge, no model that studies the contribution of disaster risk
to the credit spread puzzle. Moreover, the literature does not consider investment and is not set
in general equilibrium, making it diﬃcult to evaluate the macroeconomic impact of the financial
frictions. On the other hand, this literature studies the asset pricing implications in more detail
and incorporates long-term debt.
4

2

Model

I first present the household problem, then the firm problem, and finally define the equilibrium
and asset prices.

2.1

Household

The representative household has recursive preferences over consumption and leisure, following
Epstein and Zin (1989):
1
¶ 1−
µ
1−
¡
¢
1−

 = (1 − )( (1 −  )1− )1− +  +1 1−

(1)

Here  is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) over the consumptionleisure bundle, and  measures risk aversion towards static gambles over the bundle. When
 = , the model collapses to expected utility. While the additional flexibility of recursive utility
is useful in calibrating the model, the key qualitative results can be obtained with standard CRRA
preferences (See section 4.5).
The household supplies labor in a competitive market, and trades stocks and bonds issued by
the corporate sector.7 The budget constraint reads
 +   +   ≤   +  −1 + −1 ( +  ) −  

(2)

where  is the real wage, −1 is the quantity of debt issued by the corporate sector in period
 − 1 at price −1 , each unit of which is redeemed in period  for  ,  is the quantity of equity
shares,  is the price of equity,  is the dividend, and  is a lump-sum tax. The number of
equity shares  is normalized to one. In the absence of default,  = 1 but   1 if some bonds
are not repaid in full. The household takes the process of  as given, but it is determined in
equilibrium by default decisions of firms, as we will see later.
Intertemporal choices are determined by the stochastic discount factor (a.k.a. marginal rate
7

It is possible to introduce government bonds as well. If the government finances this debt using lump-sum
taxes and transfers, Ricardian equivalence holds, and government policy does not aﬀect the equilibrium allocation
and prices.

5

of substitution), which prices all assets:

+1 = 

µ

+1


¶(1−)−1 µ

1 − +1
1 − 

¶(1−)(1−)

The labor supply decision is governed by the familiar condition:
 =

2.2

−
+1

¡ 1− ¢ −
1−
 +1

1 −  

 1 − 

(3)

(4)

Firms

I first describe the general structure of the firm problem, then we fill in the details.
2.2.1

Summary

There is a continuum of mass one of perfectly competitive firms, which are all identical ex-ante
and diﬀer ex-post only in their realization of an idiosyncratic shock. For simplicity, we assume
that firms live only for two periods. Firms purchase capital at the end of period  in a competitive
market, for use in period  + 1. This investment is financed through a mix of equity and debt.
In period  + 1, the aggregate shocks and the idiosyncratic shock are revealed, firms decide on
employment and production, and then sell back their capital. Two cases arise at this point: (1)
the firm value is larger than outstanding debt: the debt is then repaid in full and the residual
value goes to shareholders as dividends; or (2) the firm value is smaller than outstanding debt:
in this case the firm declares default, equityholders receive nothing, and bondholders capture the
firm’s value, net of some bankruptcy costs. In all cases, the firms disappear after production in
period  + 1 and new firms are created, which will raise funds and invest in period  + 1 and
operate in period  + 28
The timing assumption clarifies the mechanism, because a default realization does not aﬀect
employment, output and profits. Ex-ante however, default risk aﬀects the cost of capital to the
firm and hence its investment decision. This investment decision in turns aﬀects employment
and output, and in general equilibrium all quantities and prices. In section 4.1, we consider an
extension where default aﬀects employment and production.
8
The assumption that firms live two periods, while obviously unrealistic, leads to substantial simplification of
the analysis, which is useful to solve the model but also to clarify its implications. An important direction of
future research is to incoporate long-lived firms and long-term debt in the model. Based on section 3.1 below, I
conjecture that the model mechanism would still be quantitatively relevant.

6

Since firms are ex-ante identical, they will all make the same choices. Because both production
and financing technologies exhibit constant return to scales, the size distribution of firms is
indeterminate, and has no eﬀect on aggregate outcomes.
2.2.2

Production

All firms operate the same constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function using
capital and labor. The output of firm  is
 =  (  )1− 
where  is aggregate total factor productivity (TFP),  is the individual firm capital stock, and
 is labor. Both input and output markets are competitive and frictionless.
2.2.3

Productivity shocks

To model the possibility of large recessions, I assume that the aggregate TFP process in this
economy is driven not only by the usual “small” normally distributed shocks standard in RBC
theory, but also by rare large negative shocks.9 Formally,
log +1 = log  +  + +1 + +1 log(1 −   )
where {+1 } is  (0 1) and +1 is an indicator equal to 1 if a disaster happens, and 0
otherwise. I will also assume that the realization of disaster directly aﬀects the capital stock (see
the next paragraph). The probability of a disaster at time  + 1 is denoted   This probability
of disaster  follows itself a Markov chain with transition matrix  The  aggregate shocks
{+1  +1  +1 } are assumed to be independent, conditional on  
2.2.4

Depreciation shocks

Firms decide on investment at time  but the actual quantity of capital that they will have to
operate at time  + 1 is random, and is aﬀected both by realizations of aggregate disasters +1

as well as an idiosyncratic shock +1 . Specifically, if a firm  picks +1
at time  (where 
9

For parsimony and tractability, these rare disasters are modeled as one-time permanent jump in TFP; Gourio
(2011) considers various extensions and shows that the key results are largely unaﬀected if disasters are modeled
as smaller shocks that are persistent, and are followed by recoveries, provided that risk aversion is increased
somewhat.

7


stands for wish), it actually has +1 = +1
(1 − +1  )+1 to operate in period  + 1 and

(1 − )+1 units of capital to resell. The idiosyncratic shock +1 is  across firms and across
time, and drawn from a cumulative distribution function , with mean unity.
2.2.5

Discussion of the assumptions regarding disasters

Barro (2006) and Barro and Ursua (2008) identify numerous large negative macroeconomic shocks
in a cross-section of countries, which are usually caused by wars or economic depressions. In a
standard neoclassical model there are two simple ways to model macroeconomic disasters — as
destruction of the capital stock, or as a reduction in total factor productivity. My formulation
allows for both.
TFP appears to play an important role during economic depressions (Kehoe and Prescott,
2007). While economists do not understand well the sources of fluctuations in total factor productivity, large and persistent declines in TFP may be linked to poor government policies, such
as expropriation, confiscatory taxes, or trade policies. They may also be caused by disruptions
in financial intermediation, if these lead to ineﬃcient capital allocation.
Capital destruction is clearly realistic for wars or natural disasters, but it can also be interpreted more broadly. Perhaps it is not the physical capital but the intangible capital (customer
and employee value) that is destroyed during prolonged economic depressions.
At the heart, the model mechanism requires two ingredients: (1) that disasters are clearly bad
events, with high marginal utility of consumption; (2) that the return on capital is low during
disasters. These assumptions are certainly realistic. Introducing a large TFP shock is the simplest
way to obtain (1) in a neoclassical model, and introducing a depreciation shock is the simplest
way to obtain (2). An alternative to depreciation shocks is to introduce steep adjustment costs:
since investment falls significantly during disasters, the price of capital would also fall, generating
endogenously a low return on capital during disasters.
2.2.6

Capital structure choice

The choice of equity versus debt is driven by a standard trade-oﬀ between default (bankruptcy)
costs and the tax advantage of debt. Specifically, I assume that bondholders recover a fraction 
of the firm value upon default, where 0    1. Moreover, a firm which issues debt at a price
 receives  where   1 That is, for each dollar that the firm raises in the bond market, the
government gives a subsidy  − 1 dollar. For simplicity, I assume that the subsidy takes place at
8

issuance.10
The bond price  is determined at time of issuance, taking into account default risk, and hence
depends on the firm’s choice of debt and capital as well as the economy’s state variables. Equity
issuance is assumed to be costless. When  =  = 1 the capital structure is indeterminate and
the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds. When  = 1, the firm finances only through equity, since
debt has no advantage. As a result, there is no default, and we obtain the standard RBC model.
When  = 1, or more generally  ≥ 1, the firm finances only through debt, since default is not
costly enough. I will assume   1, a necessary assumption to generate an interior choice for
the capital structure.
2.2.7

Employment, Output, Profits, and Firm Value

To solve the optimal financing choice, we first need to determine the profits and the firm value.
(The distribution of firm value determines the probability of default and hence the lending terms
the firm can obtain ex-ante.) The labor choice is determined through static profit maximization,
given the realized values of both productivity and capital stock, and given the aggregate wage:
©
ª
 (   ;  ) = max  (  )1− −   
 ≥0

which leads to the labor demand
 = 

µ

1− (1 − )


and the output supply
 =  (  )1− = 

Ã

¶ 1

(1 − )



(5)



! 1−




These equations can then be aggregated. Define aggregates through  =

R1
0

   =

R1
0

 

etc., we obtain that  =  (  )1−  i.e. an aggregate production function exists, and it has
exactly the same shape as the microeconomic production function. Aggregating equation (5)
shows that the wage satisfies the usual condition  = (1 − )  . The law of motion for capital


is obtained by summing over  the equation +1 = +1
(1 − +1  )+1  Since all firms are



identical ex-ante, and they will make the same investment choice +1
= +1
, and since +1
10

In reality, interest on corporate debt is deductible from the corporate income tax, hence the implicit subsidy
takes place when firms’ earnings are taxed.

9

has mean unity, idiosyncratic shocks average out and the aggregate capital is

(1 − +1  )
+1 = +1

Profits at time  + 1 are given by

 +1 = +1 − +1 +1 = +1 = +1

Ã

(1 − )
+1
+1

! 1−


= +1 

+1

+1

i.e. each firm receives factor payments proportional to the quantity of capital it has, and to the
+1
aggregate marginal product of capital  
. The total firm value at the end of the period is
+1

+1 =  +1 + (1 − )+1
Define the aggregate return on capital as


+1

µ
¶
+1

= +1 1 −  + 
+1

(6)

³
´
+1
= (1 − +1  ) 1 −  +  +1  The individual



= +1 +1
 The firm value is thus
return on capital is +1





+1
= +1 +1
+1

+1 = +1

>From ease of notation, I will from now on abstract from the firm subscript  since all firms are
identical and diﬀer only ex-post in their realization of 
2.2.8

Investment and Financing Decisions

All firms make the same choices for capital, debt, and hence equity issuance, which are linked

through the budget constraint  +1 +  = +1
 To find the optimal choice of investment

and financing, we first need to find the likelihood of default, and the loss-upon-default, for any
possible choice of investment and financing. This determines the price of corporate debt. Taking
as given this bond price schedule, the firm can then decide on optimal investment and financing.
More precisely, the firm will default if its realized value +1 , which is the sum of profits and
the proceeds from the sale of undepreciated capital, is too low to repay the debt +1 . This will
occur if the firm’s idiosyncratic shock  is smaller than a cutoﬀ value, which itself depends on the
realization of aggregate states (+1  +1  +1 ). Mathematically, at time  + 1 the value of firms

10



which finish operating is +1 = +1 +1
+1
 hence default occurs if and only if

+1 

+1 
=


+1 +1

∗+1 

If a disaster is realized (+1 = 1), the return on capital is lower and the default threshold ∗+1
is higher, and more firms default. Given this default rule, the bond issue is priced ex-ante using
the representative agent’s stochastic discount factor:
Ã

 =  +1

ÃZ

∞


() +
+1
∗+1

Z

∗+1

!!



+1
+1
()

0



In this equation, the first integral gives the value of the debt in the full repayment states. These
states depend on the realization of shocks occurring at time  + 1 notably disasters, through the
threshold for default ∗+1 . The second term gives the average recovery in default states, divided
among all the bondholders and net of bankruptcy costs. The bond price can be rewritten as

R

µ
µ
¶¶


¡ ∗ ¢ +1
¡ ∗ ¢
+1
 =  +1 1 −  +1 +
Ω +1

+1

(7)

() Note the following properties of Ω, which follow from the fact that 
R∞
is a c.d.f. with mean unity: (i) Ω() = 1 −  (); (ii) lim→∞ Ω() = 1; (iii) Ω0 () = ()
where Ω() =

0

We can now set up the firm’s problem at time  : it must decide how much to invest, how

much debt to issue (and hence how much of the investment is financed through equity), so as to
maximize the expected discounted equity value:
max

 
+1 +1


 (+1 max (+1 − +1  0)) −  

(8)

subject to:

 +1 +  = +1


(9)



+1

+1 = +1 +1

(10)

Equation (9) is the funding constraint: investment must come out of equity   or the sale of
bonds (including the subsidy)  +1  The objective function (8) takes into account the option
of default for equityholders. Given that the firm defaults if +1  ∗+1  we can rewrite this

11

problem as:
⎛

⎛

max  ⎝+1 ⎝

+1 +1

∗+1 =

 :



+1
+1

+1



+1 +1

+ ( −



1) +1
+1
Ω(∗+1 )

¡
¡
¢¢
+ ( − 1) +1 1 −  ∗+1

⎞⎞


⎠⎠ − +1


(11)

¡
¢


+1
; the
In this expression, the first term is the expected discounted firm value,  +1 +1
second term (which is negative since   1) is expected discounted bankruptcy costs; and the


third term is the expected discounted tax shield. The last term +1
is simply the cost of invest¡
¢


ment. By contrast, in a frictionless model, the firm would simply maximize  +1 +1
+1
−


+1
. The diﬀerence is that the firm also takes into account the value of tax subsidies and default

costs in making its decisions. Default costs are born by debt holders ex-post, but expected default
costs are passed on into debt prices ex-ante, implying that equity holders actually bear the costs
of default.

To solve this program, we simply take the first-order conditions with respect to +1
and

+1 . The first-order condition with respect to +1
yields,

¡
¡
¡
¡
¢¢¢¢

1 + ( − 1) Ω(∗+1 ) + ( − 1) ∗+1 1 −  ∗+1
= 1
 +1 +1
Recall that


+1

(12)

´
³
+1
= (1 − +1  ) 1 −  +  +1 is the familiar expression for the unlevered

physical return on capital, adjusted to reflect the possibility of disasters. In a model without
¡
¢

financial frictions, the standard Euler equation implies  +1 +1
= 1; here, equation (12)

is modified to take into account the bankruptcy costs (the second term), which raise the cost of
capital, and the tax shield (the third term), which reduces it. When  =  = 1, we return to the
standard equation, corresponding to the case of an unlevered firm. Overall the firm has always
access to cheaper financing than in the frictionless (all-equity financed) model, since it always has
the possibility to not take any debt. As a result, the steady-state capital stock is always higher
when   1 than in the frictionless version.
The first order condition with +1 is
¡
¡
¢¢
(1 − )  +1 ∗+1  ∗+1 =

¶
µ
¡
¡
¡
¢¢¢
1
 +1 1 −  ∗+1
1−



12

(13)

This equation determines the optimal financing choice between debt and equity.11 The left-hand
side is the marginal cost of debt, i.e. an extra dollar of debt will increase the likelihood of default,
and the associated bankruptcy costs. The right-hand side is the marginal benefit of debt, i.e. the
higher tax shield in non-default states. Importantly, both the marginal cost and the marginal
benefit are discounted using the stochastic discount factor +1 . The importance of this riskadjustment is consistent with the empirical work by Almeida and Philippon (2007), who note
that corporate defaults are more frequent in “bad times” and as a result the ex-ante marginal
cost of debt is higher than a risk-neutral calculation would suggest. This risk-adjustment will
play a substantial role in the analysis below: for a given debt level, an increase in the probability
of disaster increases expected discounted default costs, not only because defaults become more
likely, but also because they are more likely to occur during bad aggregate times.

Define desired leverage +1 = +1 +1
 which is decided at time  The firm defaults if

+1
 +1 i.e. if the return on capital is low relative to the leverage.

2.3

Equilibrium

The equilibrium definition is standard. First, the labor market clears:
(1 − )

(1 − )

=  =


 (1 −  )

(14)

Second, the goods market clears, i.e. total consumption plus investment plus bankruptcy costs
equals output,
 +  + (1 − )Ω(∗ ) =  

(15)

This equation implies that a wave of defauls leads to large bankruptcy costs and induces a negative
wealth eﬀect. In order to clarify the mechanism, I initially abstract from this eﬀect, by assuming
that the default cost is a tax, i.e. it is transferred to the government, which then rebates it to
household using lump-sum transfers ( in equation 2). Then, the resource constraint is simply
 +  =  
11

(16)

A second order condition is required to ensure that this condition is suﬃcient. Some regularity condition must
()
be imposed on the distribution  e.g. the function  → 1−()
is increasing. Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist
(1999) make the same assumption in the context of a related model. Most distributions (such as the log-normal
distribution) satisfy this assumption.

13

Under this simplification, equations (12) and (13) are the only departures of our model from
the standard real business cycle model: first, the Euler equation needs to be adjusted to reflect
the tax shield and bankruptcy costs; second, the optimal leverage is determined by the trade-oﬀ
between costs and benefits of debt finance. To summarize, the equilibrium is characterized by the
equations (14), (16), as well as (12) and (13) and the definition of the stochastic discount factor
(1) and (3).
2.3.1

Recursive Representation

It is useful, both for conceptual clarity and to implement a numerical algorithm, to present a
recursive formulation of this equilibrium. This can be done in three steps. First, make the
simplifying assumption that the bankruptcy cost is a tax, instead a of a real resource cost. Second,
note that the equilibrium can be entirely characterized from time  onwards given the values of
the realized aggregate capital stock   the probability of disaster   and the level of total factor
productivity  , i.e. these are the three state variables.12 Hence, the model has the same states as
the frictionless real business cycle (RBC) model. Third, examination of the first-order conditions
shows that they can be rewritten solely as a function of the detrended capital  =   and  
This is a standard simplification in the stochastic growth model when technology follows a unit
root, which also applies to our framework.
As a result the equilibrium policy functions can be expressed as functions of two state variables
only,  and . Compared to the standard RBC model, we have an additional equilibrium policy
function to solve for, the desired leverage ( ) and correspondingly, we have an additional firstorder condition (equation (13)). Last, the first-order condition determining optimal investment,
i.e. the standard Euler equation (equation 12)), is modified to take into account the marginal
financing costs. The full list of equations of this recursive representation is in appendix.
2.3.2

Asset Prices

Any payoﬀ can be priced using the stochastic discount factor, given by the representative agent’s
marginal rate of substitution. I focus here on four assets: a pure risk-free asset, a short-term
government bond which may default during disasters, the corporate bond, and the equity. All
12

The level of outstanding debt  at the beginning of period is not a state variable, since it does not aﬀect
production or investment possibilities. It does aﬀect default, but because defaults do not aﬀect production, and
bankruptcy costs are not in the resource constraint, the realization of default does not matter in itself — what
matters is the possibility of default going forward. Here we rely on two assumptions: (1) the default cost is a tax;
(2) default takes place after production.

14

these assets last only one period. The price of the risk-free asset can be calculated as the
expectation of the stochastic discount factor,  =  (+1 )  Following Barro (2006), the
government bond is assumed to default by a factor ∆ during disasters, and hence its price is
 =  (+1 (1 − +1 ∆))  The payoﬀ to a diversified portfolio of corporate bonds, used in
the household budget constraint (equation (2)), is


¡
¡
¢ +1
¢
+1
Ω ∗+1 
+1 = 1 −  ∗+1 +
+1

(17)

¡
¢
and the corporate bond price is  =  =  +1 +1  Last, the equity value is (equation

(11)):

¡
¡   ¡
¡
¢¢
¡
¡
¢¢¢¢
 =  +1 +1
+1 1 − Ω ∗+1 − +1 1 −  ∗+1


Given constant return to scale and no equity issuance costs, the equity price satisfies a free entry
condition:  =  .

3

Quantitative results

This section studies the implications of the model presented in the previous section. First, I
present a combination of analytical results and comparative statics to illustrate the workings of
the model. Then, a parametrized version of the model is solved numerically so as to delineate
its predictions for business cycle quantities, for asset returns, an in particular for the level and
volatility of credit spreads, and their relation with investment and GDP.13

3.1

Steady-state comparative statics

To better understand the model, it is useful to perform a “steady-state” analysis, as is commonly
done in macroeconomics, but one that takes into account the risk of disaster. The first step is
the following result.
Proposition 1 Assume that  =    i.e. capital and productivity fall by the same factor in a
disaster Then, a disaster leads consumption, investment, output to also drop by the same factor
 =    while hours do not change. The return on physical capital is reduced by the same factor.
There is no further eﬀect of the disaster on quantities or prices, i.e. all the eﬀect is on impact.
13

Given the nonlinear form of the model, and the focus on risk premia, it is important to use a nonlinear solution
method. The policy functions ( )  ( ) ( ) and ( ) are approximated using Chebychev polynomials
and solved for using projection methods. The appendix details the computational method.

15

Proof. The equilibrium is characterized by the policy functions ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
and ( ) =  ( )1− which express the solution as a function of the probability of disaster
 (the exogenous state variable) and the detrended capital  (the endogenous state variable). The
detrended capital evolves according to the shocks 0  0  0 through
0 =

(1 − 0  ) ((1 − ) + ( ))

(1 − 0   ) +0

Since  =   
0 =

((1 − ) + ( ))

+0

is independent of the realization of disaster 0  As a result, the realization of a disaster does
not aﬀect      since  is unchanged, and hence it leads consumption  =  investment
 =  and output  =  to drop, like  by a factor  =   on impact. Furthermore,
once the disaster has hit, it has no further eﬀect since all the endogenous dynamics are captured

by , which is unaﬀected. The statement regarding returns follows from the expression +1
=
´
³
(1 − +1  ) 1 −  +  +1

+1

To obtain further results, we consider a simplified version of the model, where we shut down

the shocks to the probability of disaster and the TFP shocks +1 . As a result, the only source
of shocks are disaster realizations, which makes it possible to solve for the path of quantities and
returns.
Proposition 2 Assume that  =    that  = 0 and that  =  The economy has a balanced
growth path where          ,  the risk-free rate, the expected return on capital, and the
probability of default, and the credit spread are constant, equal to ∗  ∗  ∗  etc. Along this balanced
growth path, the level of capital, consumption, investment and output         are obtained
by multiplying ∗  ∗  ∗   ∗ by   which is evolves as +1 =  ++1 log(1− ) 
Proof. Given that  = 0 and  is constant, we can conjecture an equilibrium of the form
described in proposition, and it is easy to check that it satisfies the first-order conditions. Along
this balanced growth path,  is constant since it is unaﬀected by disaster realizations; the policy
functions () () () () then imply that these variables are also constant if  = ∗  Given
this, consumption growth and other variables are iid, implying that expected returns and credit
spreads are constant.
A graphical illustration of this result, is that macroeconomic quantities simply grow along
constant trends, without any shocks except for occasional large downward jumps. During these
16

jumps, realized returns on bonds and equity are low, but the dynamics of quantities are unaﬀected.
The discount factor for this simplified version of the model depends only on the disaster realization:
(0 ) =

((1−)−1) (1 − 0   )(1−)−1
−



(1 −  + (1 −   )(1−) ) 1−

and the economy’s steady-state capital-labor ratio  and leverage  =   are determined
by the two equations:
Ã

((1−)−1)

µ


1−+


−

(1 −  + (1 −   )(1−) ) 1−

¶−1 !

(18)

= (1 − ) (1 + ( − 1) Ω (∗ ) + ( − 1) ∗ (1 −  (∗ )))
+ (1 −   )(1−)−1 (1 −  ) (1 + ( − 1) Ω (∗ ) + ( − 1) ∗ (1 −  (∗ ))) 
and
0 = (1 − ) ( ( − 1) ∗  (∗ ) + ( − 1) (1 −  (∗ )))

(19)

+ (1 −   )(1−)−1 ( ( − 1) ∗  (∗ ) + ( − 1) (1 −  (∗ ))) 
with ∗ =


(1− )

and ∗ =





and  = 1 −  + 

capital.

¡  ¢−1


is the standard marginal product of

While these expressions initially appear complicated, they provide significant intuition. First,
note that they are recursive: equation (19) first determines the ratio of leverage to the marginal
product   and equation (18) then determines the marginal product of capital  and hence

 14
.


When there is neither disaster risk nor financial frictions, i.e.  = 0 and  =  = 1, the first
equation collapses to the standard user cost equation,
((1−)−1)

Ã

µ


1−+


14

¶−1 !

= 1

Labor supply and the scale of the economy are then determined by preferences in the standard way. First,
note that
µµ ¶
¶


 1−
= 
−  = 
−



¡  ¢


. Since 
is known, this is one equation
and second the MRS = MPL condition implies 1−
 1− = (1 − ) 
in one unknown  .

17

When there is disaster risk but no financial frictions (as in Gourio (2010)), the steady-state capital
is determined as
((1−)−1)

Ã

µ


1−+


¶−1 ! ³
´ 1−
(1−) 1−
1 −  +  (1 −   )
= 1

Simple algebra shows that a higher probability of disaster  induces to a lower capital stock
provided that the IES is greater than unity: agents are reluctant to invest in the more risky
capital stock. Consider now the case of financial frictions but no disaster risk, equation (19)
reflects simply the trade-oﬀ between the default costs and tax benefits of leverage:
 (1 − ) ∗  (∗ ) = ( − 1) (1 −  (∗ )) 
Last, in the full model, disaster risk aﬀects the amount of desired leverage for two reasons. First,
it changes the distribution of payoﬀs to the investment. Second, it changes the discount rates
which multiply this distribution of payoﬀs (the term (1 −   )(1−)−1 in equation (19)).
3.1.1

The determinants of optimal leverage and investment

Figure 1 uses this simplified version of the model to illustrate the eﬀect of several key parameters on the steady-state values of capital, leverage, default probability and credit spreads. Each
column of this figure corresponds to one parameter; the first column shows the eﬀect of idiosyncratic volatility  . Holding debt policy constant, higher idiosyncratic risk leads to more default
and hence higher credit spreads, increasing the user cost of capital. This leads firms to reduce
investment. In equilibrium, firms also endogenously reduce leverage, which mitigates the increase
in default and in credit spreads, but makes firms rely more heavily on equity issuance, which is
more costly.
The second column shows the eﬀect of the tax subsidy  A higher  directly reduces the user
cost of capital, since holding debt policy constant, the firm is able to raise more capital. Second,
a higher  makes debt relatively more attractive than equity, leading firms to take on more debt
and increase leverage. This higher leverage leads to a higher probability of default and higher
credit spreads.
Finally, the third column shows the eﬀect of increasing the recovery rate parameter . Since
the expected cost of bankruptcy falls, the user cost of investment falls and investment rises.
Holding debt policy constant, a higher  leads to a lower credit spread, since the recovery value
18

is higher. However, since firms take on more debt, the probability of default and credit spreads
go up.
3.1.2

User cost, financial frictions and probability of disaster

Turning now to the eﬀect of the probability of disaster, figure 2 displays the eﬀect of a rise in 
¡ ¢−1
on capital, leverage, credit spreads and the user cost  
, which is  +  in the standard

neoclassical model. Higher disaster risk leads to a reduction in leverage in equation (19), and
hence an increase in the user cost (adjusted for the tax shield and bankruptcy costs) in equation
(18) and a lower capital-labor ratio. The figure compares the frictionless model ( =  = 1 i.e.
the firm is only equity-financed) and the model with the friction (  1). The percentage response
of the steady-state capital stock to a change in the probability of disaster is substantially larger
in the model with the financial friction, reflecting that the user cost is much more aﬀected by an
increase in disaster risk. An increase in disaster risk in itself increases the probability of default,
but also makes the risk of default more likely to be driven by a bad aggregate realization, hence
increases the cost of debt significantly, as reflected by the credit spread.15 Overall, the probability
of disaster  has an eﬀect similar to that of   , which is the shock considered by Arellano, Bai
and Kehoe (2010) or Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajek (2010) in very recent studies. I return to this
comparison in section III.F.

3.2

Parametrization

Parameters are listed in Table 1. The period is one year. Many parameters follow the business
cycle literature (Cooley and Prescott (1995)). The risk aversion parameter is four, in order to get a
reasonable level for the equity premium. Note that this is the risk aversion over the consumptionhours bundle. Since the share of consumption in the utility index is .3, the eﬀective risk aversion
to a consumption gamble is 133 (Swanson (2010)), a very low number by the standards of the
asset pricing literature.
The intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption (IES) is set at 2. There is a
large debate regarding the value of the IES. Most direct estimates using aggregate data find low
numbers (e.g. Hall (1988)), but this view has been challenged by several authors (see among
others Bansal and Yaron (2004), Gruber (2006), Mulligan (2004), Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)). As
15

For high values of the probability of disaster , the credit spread is decreasing in . This counterintuitive result
simply reflects that for very high , firms reduce debt significantly to avoid bankruptcy and associated costs.

19

emphasized by Bansal and Yaron (2004), a low IES has the counterintuitive eﬀects that higher
expected growth lowers asset prices, and higher uncertainty increases asset prices. Section 4.5
analyzes how the results are aﬀected by the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
One crucial element of the calibration is the probability and size of disaster, which follow Barro
(2006, 2009) and Barro and Ursua (2008) closely. The probability of a disaster is 17% per year on
average. For computational simplicity, I summarize the historical distribution of disasters using
a five-point distributions, with disaster sizes ranging from 15% to 57%.16 While these disaster
sizes may seem very large, they are the ones estimated by Barro and Barro and Ursua (2007) in a
large international panel data set. The results of the paper are largely unchanged if the disaster
size is set to be smaller — e.g., perhaps the US faces smaller disasters than most other countries
— but risk aversion is correspondingly increased.
The second crucial element is the persistence and volatility of movements in this probability
of disaster. I assume that the log of the probability follows an AR(1) process:
log +1 =  log  + (1 −  ) log  +   +1 
where +1 is  (0 1)17 The parameter  is picked so that the average probability is 017
per year, and I set  = 75 and the unconditional standard deviation √

1−2

= 150 in order to

roughly match the volatility of credit spreads.
As is standard, I use a log-normal distribution for , the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks.
The three remaining parameters determine the leverage choice:   and   , the variance of
idiosyncratic shocks. Following the corporate finance literature, I set  = 04, consistent with
estimates of recovery rates in “bad times”. The parameters   and  are then picked to match
a target average probability of default and leverage. The target for the probability of default is
0.5% per year. I also set a target for leverage equal to 0.55. In the data leverage is somewhat
smaller, perhaps 0.45. Targeting a leverage of 0.45 leads to an unrealistically large variance of
idiosyncratic shocks   This likely reflects that firm values are more volatile in the model than
in the data. Higher volatility may be driven by fixed costs of production, which are equivalent to
16

The data from Barro and Ursua refers to consumption or output, but my model requires to parametrize the
capital and TFP destruction. It would be interesting to gather further evidence on disasters, and measure  and
  directly. This is beyond the scope of this paper. I concentrate on the parsimonious benchmark case  =   .
Given this assumption, to match a drop of, say, 25% in consumption, requires exactly a drop of 25% of capital
and  hence the Barro and Ursua distribution of GDP losses leads directly to the distribution of capital and
productivity losses. (Because TFP =  1− , the drop in total factor productivity is smaller than 25%.)
17
This equation allows the probability to be greater than one, however I will approximate this process with a
finite Markov chain, which ensures that 0    1 .

20

a higher target for leverage. Alternatively, the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks may exhibit
skewness and/or kurtosis.18

3.3

Impulse response functions

I first illustrate the dynamics of the model in response to the three aggregate shocks: the standard
TFP shock, the disaster realization, and a shock to the probability of disaster. I next discuss how
the model fits both quantities and price data.
3.3.1

The eﬀect of a TFP shock

Figure 3 displays the response of quantities and returns to a one standard-deviation shock to
the level of total factor productivity. (For clarity, this picture, as well as the ones following,
assumes that no other shock is realized.) The response of quantities is similar to that of the
standard real business cycle model: investment rises as firms desire to accumulate more capital,
employment rises because of the higher labor demand, and consumption adjusts gradually, leading
to temporarily high interest rates. The equity return is high on impact, reflecting the sensitivity
of firms’ dividends to TFP shocks due to leverage, but corporate bonds are largely immune to
small TFP shocks - the default and recovery rates are barely aﬀected.19 As a result, the path for
the bond return mirrors that of the risk-free return. There is essentially no change in leverage or
credit spreads, since the trade-oﬀ determining optimal leverage is hardly aﬀected by the slightly
higher TFP.
3.3.2

The eﬀect of a disaster

Figure 4 shows the response of quantities and returns to a disaster which hits at  = 5 The
disaster realization leads capital and TFP to fall by the factors  and   respectively. The
calibration assumes that these parameters are equal, and in this simulation,  =   = 25%
As a result, the transitional dynamics are very simple, as seen in the figure, and as proved in
proposition 1: output, consumption and investment drop on impact by the same factor, and
hours do not change. The return on capital is also -25%, and is divided among equity and debt.
But it is also further reduced by default, which leads to losses since   1 In this simulation,
18

The targets are not exactly matched in the full model because the calibration is done using the “steady-state”
version of the model, studied in the previous section.
19
The default rate is defined as the share of firms in default. Because some of the capital is recovered in defaults,
this is not the realized loss for debholders.

21

approximately 12% of firms are in default, the realized equity return is roughly -52% and the
realized bond return is -4.5%. (The returns we compute are the average across all the firms,
as defined in section 2.3 there are always some firms with very high idiosyncratic shocks which
do not default.) Figure 4 illustrates that both equity and corporate debt are risky assets, since
their returns are very low precisely in the states (disasters) when marginal utility is high, i.e.
consumption growth is low. Consistent with proposition 1, the figure confirms that a disaster
does not generate any transitional dynamics in quantities, leverage, credit spreads, interest rates,
or risk premia: a disaster leads to a once-and-for-all shift in steady-states.
3.3.3

The eﬀect of an increase in the probability of a disaster

The important shock in this paper is the shock to the probability of disaster — i.e. an increase
in perceived risk. Figure 5 presents the responses to an unexpected increase in the probability of
disaster at time  = 5 The higher risk leads to a sharp reduction in investment. Simultaneously,
the higher risk pushes down the risk-free interest rate, as demand for precautionary savings
increases. This lower interest rate decreases employment through an intertemporal substitution
eﬀect. Hence, output decreases because employment decreases, even though there is no change
in current or future total factor productivity, and even though the capital stock adjusts slowly.
Intuitively, there is less demand for investment and this reduces the need for production.
Consumption increases on impact since households want to invest less in the now more risky
capital. Consumption then falls over time. Qualitatively, these dynamics are similar to that in
the frictionless version, but the quantitative results are quite diﬀerent. To illustrate this clearly,
figure 6 superimposes the responses to a shock to the probability of disaster for the frictionless
model ( =  = 1) and for the current model. The response of macro quantities on impact is
approximately three times larger in the model with financial frictions.
As argued in section 3.1, the mechanism through which disaster risk aﬀects the economy is
by changing the expected discounted bankruptcy costs. These become significantly higher, since
default is (i) more likely and (ii) more likely to occur in “bad times”. This increases the user cost
for a given financial policy, leading firms to cut back on investment. Moreover, firms also adjust
their financial policy, reducing debt and leverage.
Because risk increases, risk premia rise as the economy enters this recession: the diﬀerence
between equity returns and risk-free returns becomes larger, and the spread of corporate bonds
over risk-free bonds also rises (see the bottom panel of figure 5). This last result is not fully

22

general, however. The equilibrium level of credit spreads depends on the endogenous quantity
of debt, or leverage that firms decide to take on. For certain parameter values, the endogenous
decrease in leverage leads, paradoxically, to lower credit spreads in response to a higher probability
of disaster. However, for the parameter values that we use, firms do not decide to cut back on
debt too much, and spreads rise with the probability of disaster. The model hence generates the
required negative correlation between credit spreads and investment output. More generally, the
model implies that risk premia are larger in recessions, consistent with the data.

3.4

Business cycle and financial statistics

Tables 2, 3 and 4 report standard business cycle and asset return statistics as well as default
rates and leverage ratios.20 To illustrate the role of disaster risk and time-varying disaster risk,
I solve the model with the benchmark parameter values, under diﬀerent assumptions regarding
the structure of shocks: (i) only TFP shocks, (ii) TFP shocks and disasters, but a constant
probability of disaster; (iii) TFP shocks and disasters, with a time-varying risk of disaster. I also
consider three variant of the model: (a) with the financial friction, (b) with constant leverage,
and (c) with no financial friction. The benchmark model results (a-iii) are indicated in bold in
these tables.


The variant with constant leverage adds the constraint that +1 = +1
, i.e.

firms must pick debt and capital so that their ratio is constant (and equal to the average leverage
in the benchmark model).
The models with only TFP shocks (rows 1 through 3) generate a decent match for quantity
dynamics, as is well known from the business cycle literature. This model, however, generates
rather small spreads for corporate bonds, and these spreads simply account for the average default
of corporate bonds, because aggregate risk premia are very small. The spread is 51bp, twice below
the data, whereas the probability of default is 79bp, larger than the data. Moreover, these spreads
are essentially constant. The risk premium for equity is also very small and equity returns are
not volatile. Note that except for investment, which is somewhat less volatile in the model with
financial friction, the quantity moments are largely unchanged as we go from row 1 to row 3.
Hence, financial frictions do not amplify the response to TFP shocks.21 The smaller volatility of
investment in the model with financial frictions is apparently driven by the higher steady-state
20

The leverage and default probability data are taken from Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009). The
other data (GDP, consumption, investment, and credit spreads) are from FRED. I use BAA-AAA as the credit
spread measure, and obtain similar results as Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein. All series are annualized.
21
The appendix presents a comparison of the impulse response functions to a TFP shock for the diﬀerent models,
which confirms this result.

23

capital stock (as in Santoro and Wei (2010)).
When constant disaster risk is added to the model (rows 4 through 6), the quantity dynamics
are unaﬀected (table 2). Table 3 reveals that credit spreads are significantly larger however,
because defaults are much more likely during disasters, when marginal utility is high. The model
generates a higher equity risk premium and a plausible credit spread: the average spread is 129bp,
and the probability of default is 50bp. However, the volatility of spreads is still close to zero.
This motivates turning to the model with time-varying risk of disaster.
Rows 7 through 9 display the results for the models with time-varying disaster risk. The
variation in the disaster risk does indeed lead to volatile credit spreads, roughly in line with the
data. The equity premium is too low, but it is significant, and similar to that of the model with
constant probability of disaster. Introducing the time-varying risk of disaster also generates new
quantity dynamics: output and especially investment become more volatile. Moreover, credit
spreads are countercyclical. Overall, the model fits well many stylized facts.
It is noteworthy that the model can generate volatile spreads only when disaster risk is timevarying. This suggests that variation in aggregate risk is important and plays a role in shaping
business cycles.22
The amplification eﬀect of disaster risk shock through financial frictions is visible in table
2: while the financial friction model exhibits less volatility than the RBC model when disaster
risk is constant, it has more volatility than the RBC model when disaster risk is added. This
is especially true for investment volatility, which nearly doubles as time-varying disaster risk is
introduced.
The model with constant leverage generates even more volatility of quantities. Because firms
cannot delever easily when the probability of disaster rises, the model generates more movements
in spreads and investment. Finally, the model implies some volatility of leverage, but it falls
somewhat short of the data. However, the one-period nature of firms in this model makes it
diﬃcult to interpret this statistic: the flow and stock of debt are equal in the model, while they
behave diﬀerently in the data (Jermann and Quadrini (2009), Covas and Den Haan (2009)).
It is interesting to quantify the increase in systematic risk that occurs when the disaster probability rises. Figure 7 presents the correlation of defaults that is expected given the probability
of disaster today, i.e.  (+1  +1 ) for any two firms  and  in the model economy.
22

The key mechanism of the model is time-varying aggregate uncertainty. This time-varying aggregate uncertainty comes here from a time-varying probability of disaster, but the model implications are similar if the
uncertainty takes the form of normally distributed shocks. If the shocks are small, risk aversion needs to be
correspondingly higher.

24

In normal times, the probability of disaster is low, and defaults are largely idiosyncratic since
aggregate TFP shocks do not create much variation in default rates. Hence, this correlation is
low. The correlation becomes much higher, however, when the probability of disaster rises. This
is because defaults are now much more likely to be simultaneously triggered by the realization
of a disaster. This higher correlation would show up in some asset prices such as CDO or CLO
(collateralized debt or loan obligations). This higher correlation stems directly from the increase
in aggregate uncertainty, holding idiosyncratic uncertainty constant. This correlation is aﬀected
by firms’ choices, however, since they decide on how much debt to take which aﬀects their default
likelihood: for very large , firms cut back on debt so much that this correlation may fall.
Overall, the model has two main deficiencies: first, the correlation of consumption and output
is too low; second, the equity return is not volatile enough. The latter point is also driven by
the fact that equities are only a one-period asset here, implying that the conditional volatility of
equity returns equals the conditional volatility of dividends (i.e. there is only a cash flow eﬀect
and no discount rate eﬀect).

4

Extensions and Robustness

This section considers some implications and extensions of the baseline model, and the sensitivity
of the quantitative results to parameter changes.

4.1

Default crises and time-varying resilience of the economy

For the purpose of analytical clarity, the benchmark model assumes that default does not aﬀect
output: (i) bankruptcy costs are a tax rather than a real resource cost, and (ii) a firm in default is
as productive as a firm in good standing. This section relaxes these two assumptions: (i) in reality,
bankruptcies are costly: costs include legal fees as well as the loss of intangible capital such as
customer goodwill; (ii) firms in default are likely less productive as they need to reorganize and are
constrained in their relations with suppliers and customers. Relaxing either of these assumptions
implies that an economy with a high level of outstanding debt is prone to “default crises”: any
negative shock may drive many firms into default, which further degrades the economy. The exact
eﬀect of (i) and (ii) is however diﬀerent: (i) is a pure wealth eﬀect, while (ii) reduces productivity
and hence labor demand. Neither (i) nor (ii) aﬀects the default decision ex-post, since the outside
option of equity holders is zero.

25

An important implication of this extension of the model is that the economy’s sensitivity to
shocks (or resilience) is time-varying. For instance, as discussed in the previous section, a low
probability of disaster leads firms to pick a high leverage. This makes the economy less resilient,
i.e. its investment and output will fall more should a bad shock occur. This is consistent with a
widely held view that during the 2000s, perception of risk fell, leading firms to increase leverage
and making the 2008 recession worse.
Formally, we make the following two changes to the model. The first is to assume that a share
 of the bankruptcy costs is a real resource cost. The second is that firms in default have lower
productivity, by a factor (1 − )  These two changes do not aﬀect the expression for the default
threshold ∗+1 =

+1
  Total
+1
+1

output, taking into account the lower productivity of firms in

default, is now
 = ( ) (  )1−
The resource constraint now reads

¢¢
¡¡

1 − (1 − )Ω(∗+1 )

¡
¢
 +  + (1 − )Ω ∗+1   =  
We also need to modify consequently the firm value and bond price equations and the associated
first order conditions; these equations are available in the appendix. As a result of this change,
the quantity of debt  is now an additional state variable.
Figure 8 illustrates the negative eﬀect of outstanding debt on the economy for the case  = 05
and  = 0 i.e. firms in default are more productive. (The appendix presents an examples for
the case of  = 0 and  = 05, i.e. bankruptcies have real resource costs.) Ceteris paribus, a
larger amount of debt increases default rates, and reduces output, employment, investment and
consumption.

4.2

State-contingent debt

The defining characteristic of debt is that it is not state contingent. In the aftermath of the
2008 financial crisis, several economists have proposed that debt should be conditioned on large
aggregate shocks. This section evaluates this proposal by allowing firms in the model to issue
debt which repayments are contingent on the disaster realization 0 

26

The model is easily modified; first, the budget constraint now reads,



=  +  +1
+  +1

+1



(resp. +1
) is the face value of the debt to be repaid in non-disaster (resp. disaster)
where +1

states, and  (resp.  ) the associated price:
Ã

 =  (1 − +1 )+1

ÃZ

∞


() +
+1
∗+1

Z

∗+1

!!



+1
+1
()

0



where (1 − +1 ) is a dummy equal to 1 if no disaster happens, and similarly for  Taking
first-order conditions leads to the following characterization of the equilibrium: first, the Euler
equation is
⎛

⎛

¡
¡
¢¢
1 + ( − 1) 
(1 − +1 ) 1 −  ∗+1
+1
⎜
⎜
¡
¡
¢¢
⎜
 ⎜
 ⎜+1 +1
⎜
+ ( − 1) +1 +1 1 −  ∗+1
⎝
⎝
+ ( − 1) Ω(∗+1 )

⎞⎞

⎟⎟
⎟⎟
⎟⎟ = 1
⎠⎠

and second, optimal debt is determined through the two equations:
¢
¡
¡
¢¢¢
¡
−1 ¡
 (1 − +1 )+1 1 −  ∗+1
= (1 − )  +1 Ω0 (∗+1 ) (1 − +1 ) 

¡
¡
¢¢¢
¡
¢
−1 ¡
 +1 +1 1 −  ∗+1
= (1 − )  +1 Ω0 (∗+1 )+1 

The Euler equation interpretation is similar to that of the benchmark model; the investor takes
into account the total user cost of debt, which now must take into account the diﬀerent leverage
in disaster vs. non-disaster states. The optimal leverage condition simply says that, rather than
equating expected discounted marginal costs and benefits of debt over all the states together,
the firm can now equate these expected marginal costs and benefits conditional on the disaster
happening or not. This added flexibility will lead the firm to issue little debt that is payable
in disaster states, since bankruptcy is much more likely and costly in these states. As a useful
special case, suppose that there are no TFP shocks or shocks to , then the expectations are just
expectations over the idiosyncratic shocks  and the first-order condition states, if we denote
∗
default cutoﬀ in non-disaster states by ∗
+1 and in disasters by +1 :

¡
¢¢
−1¡
1 −  ∗
= ( − 1) Ω0 (∗
+1
+1 )

27

¡
¢¢
−1¡
1 −  ∗
= ( − 1) Ω0 (∗
+1
+1 )


∗
implying that ∗
+1 = +1  i.e.


+1
 (1− )
+1


=


+1

+1



or +1
= +1
(1 −  ) Hence, the firm targets

the  default probability, conditional on a disaster happening, and conditional on no disaster
happening. This implies a much lower face value of debt in disasters.
Figure 9 compares the response of the model with state-contingent debt to an increase in disaster risk, with the response of the benchmark model. The amplification eﬀect largely disappears,
and the model implies now no more volatility in investment than the frictionless RBC model.
Hence, while the assumption that private contracts are not made contingent on aggregate realizations is made in many models (such as Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) or Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997)), this result suggest that it is far from innocuous. Krishnamurthy (2003) similarly
found that allowing for conditionality reduces or eliminate the amplification eﬀect of financial
frictions.
The benefits of debt conditionality in reducing volatility in response to shocks to disaster risk,
comes on top of the obvious advantage that, should a disaster happen, there will be fewer defaults,
which are likely to be costly (as in the previous section). This suggests that debt conditionality
is likely valuable, provided that disasters can be well defined in a contract.

4.3

Welfare cost of the tax shield

Following a large literature in corporate finance, the model features as a prime determinant of
capital structure the tax subsidy to debt, or tax shield. The tax shield is ineﬃcient in the model
for two reasons. First, the tax shield lowers the user cost of capital and hence encourages capital
accumulation. However, the competitive equilibrium of the model without taxes is already Pareto
optimal, hence the subsidy leads to overaccumulation of capital. Second, the tax shield also
amplifies fluctuations in aggregate quantities, including consumption, and hence reduces welfare.
Table 8 illustrates this eﬀect by displaying the volatility of output, investment and employment,
for various values of  Both in terms of steady-states and in terms of fluctuations then, the
tax subsidy generates deadweight losses. A figure in appendix gives the welfare cost of the tax
subsidy, as a function of . For our benchmark calibration of  = 1062, removing the tax shield
entirely would increase welfare substantially, equivalent to a permanent increase of consumption
of approximately 3.52%.

28

4.4

Capital adjustment costs

While the benchmark model abstracts from adjustment costs in the interest of simplicity, introducing them is useful to generate further volatility in the value of capital. In particular, the model
implies that an increase in the probability of disaster has essentially no eﬀect on realized equity
returns or bond returns.23 This implication is overturned if there are adjustment costs, because
the price of capital then falls following an increase in the probability of disaster, since investment
and marginal Q fall. It is simplest to consider an external adjustment cost formulation. Suppose
that capital goods are produced by a competitive investment sector which takes  consumption
³ ´
goods at time , and  capital goods at time  and generates +1 = (1 − ) + Φ  
capital goods next period. These capital goods are then sold in a competitive market to final
goods producing firms at a price given by:  =

Φ0

1




 The

same formulas as in the model then


apply, with the proviso that the return on capital +1
is now


+1
=


  and ∗+1 =
and  =  +1

Ã

+1

+ 
(1 − ) +1
+1



+1
   
+1
+1 

=

+1
  
+1


!

(1 − +1  )

Following Jermann (1998), I set Φ() =

1−

0 + 1 1− , where 0 and 1 are picked to make the steady-state investment rate and marginal
Q independent of .
Tables 5 through 7 report model moments for two values of , and a figure in appendix
compares the impulse response function of the benchmark model (without adjustment costs) and
the model with adjustment costs ( = 1), when the shock is an increase in the probability of
disaster. As expected, adjustment costs smooth the response of investment and output. The
qualitative dynamics, as well as the asset prices, remain similar. When the probability of disaster
rises, the return on equity is now lower, and the return on the corporate bond is also slightly
lower, reflecting the fall in the resale value of capital and the ensuing higher default rate.

4.5

Role of the IES and risk aversion

While the households are assumed to have recursive utility, the model can also be solved in the
special case of expected utility. When the elasticity of substitution is kept equal to 2, and the
risk aversion is lowered to 5 to reach expected utility, the qualitative implications are largely
23

Technically, the only eﬀect is through a decrease in the supply for labor which pushes the wage up, leading to
slightly lower profits and hence slightly higher default rates.

29

unaﬀected. Tables 5 through 7 report the model moments with this specification. Because risk
aversion is lower, all risk premia are lower, and the response of quantities to a probability of
disaster shock is also smaller since agents care less about risk.24
In contrast, when the elasticity of substitution is small, a shock to the probability of disaster
may lead to diﬀerent qualitative eﬀects. When the IES is low enough, investment, output and
employment rise (rather than fall) as the probability of disaster rises. The intuition is that higher
risk makes people save more, despite the fact that the capital is more risky. In the frictionless
model, the threshold value for the IES is exactly unity. In the model of this paper, higher
uncertainty has a more negative eﬀect on investment demand, and hence the threshold value for
the IES is lower than unity. Hence, for a certain range of values of IES below unity, the financial
friction model implies that higher disaster risk lowers economic activity, while the frictionless
model implies the opposite — an extreme example of the potential importance of financial frictions.
Tables 5 through 7 report the model moments with a low IES (.25), which generates the opposite
comovement. This specification is unattractive, since it implies that risk premia are procyclical,
contrary to the data.

4.6

Comparison with idiosyncratic uncertainty shocks

Following Bloom (2009), several recent studies consider the eﬀect of an increase in idiosyncratic
uncertainty,   in our notation. While Bloom (2009) focused on the transmission of this shock
through adjustment costs frictions, Arellano, Bai and Kehoe (2009), and Gilchrist, Sim and
Zakrajek (2010) use default risk frictions, similar to my model. The shock to disaster risk is also
an increase in uncertainty, and hence has a qualitatively similar eﬀect. For instance, comparing
figures 1 and 2 shows that the two parameters  and   have similar eﬀects on steady-states.
However, the channel through which the mechanism operates is somewhat diﬀerent in my model,
because an increase in aggregate uncertainty makes defaults more systematic and hence aﬀects
the bond risk premium.
To illustrate the diﬀerences in the mechanism, we can think of three experiments. First,
the response of the economy to a shock to   is essentially unaﬀected by the coeﬃcient of risk
aversion. In contrast, as shown in section III.E, the response to an increase in disaster risk in
24

There is one qualitative change, but it is hard to discern in most statistics. A shock to the probability
of disaster increases consumption, hence with expected utility it is a “good state”, i.e. low marginal utility of
consumption state. This is not the case with Epstein-Zin utility, since the future value is lower, making a high
probability of disaster state a “bad state” (high marginal utility of consumption). This in turn implies that assets
which pay oﬀ well in that state have higher risk premia rather than lower risk premia.

30

my model is stronger when risk aversion is larger. Second, in the frictionless version, an increase
in disaster risk leads to a recession, whereas an increase in idiosyncratic risk has no eﬀect on
economic activity.25 Finally, suppose that we consider a shock to disaster risk, such that high
disaster risk states have low idiosyncratic volatility, making the total quantity of risk constant
over time. In essence, we are changing only the relative importance of aggregate and idiosyncratic
risk, and hence the  across firms. This shock reduces investment and output, if risk
aversion is positive, even though total risk does not change at the microeconomic level. The
appendix produces the impulse responses corresponding to these three experiments.
The aim of this discussion is not to argue that idiosyncratic uncertainty shocks are unimportant, but that the channel through which they operate is diﬀerent than the channel through
which aggregate uncertainty shock operate, at least in this model. The two approaches have
diﬀerent strengths: my model connects well with the evidence on the behavior of credit spreads,
correlation risk and aggregate risk premia. In contrast, the studies of Arellano et al. and Gilchrist
et al. focus on more realistic microeconomic heterogeneity, and take into account the eﬀect of
uncertainty on reallocation and on the labor wedge among other issues.

4.7

Samples with disasters

So far the results reported are calculated in samples which do not include disasters. Large
excess returns arise for two reasons: first, a standard risk premium; second, a sample selection
(“Peso problem”) since the sample does not include the lowest possible return realizations. To
quantify the importance of the second eﬀect, tables 5 through 7 report the model moments in
the benchmark model if the sample includes disasters. Quantities and returns are of course more
volatile since they include some large realizations. The average excess returns on equities is 1.38%
(vs. 2.30% in a sample without disasters). Similarly, the average return on corporate bonds is
0.44% (vs. 0.60% in a sample without disasters (unreported in tables)). The dynamics of credit
spreads and leverage are completely unaﬀected.
25

In some models, an increase in uncertainty would lead to a boom by leading to labor reallocation among firms
with decreasing return to scale. But in the model of this paper, idiosyncratic shocks literally wash out because of
the combined assumptions of constant return to scale and frictionless labor market.

31

5

Conclusion

There are two main contributions. First, the paper embeds the standard capital structure trade-oﬀ
theory, in a tractable equilibrium business cycle model. The trade-oﬀ model is a well established
theory in corporate finance, and is a promising financial friction for macroeconomics, because it
applies to all firms, large and small, and does not rely on binding borrowing constraints. Second,
the paper studies the reaction of the economy to an increase in disaster risk. Time-varying
disaster risk is essential to replicate the level, volatility and countercyclicality of credit spreads,
and the fact that credit spreads are much larger than expected losses (or expected probabilities
of default). Moreover, the trade-oﬀ friction substantially amplifies, by a factor of about three,
the response of macroeconomic aggregates to disaster risk. The key mechanism is that defaults
are expected to be more systematic, increasing risk-adjusted bankruptcy costs and hence the user
cost of capital.
A natural direction in which to extend the analysis is to consider long-lived firms which
may issue long-term debt. In the current version, firms are able to readjust leverage costlessly
each period. In reality, it may be diﬃcult to restructure the debt. This would likely generate
endogenous persistence through firms’ net worth.

32

References
[1] Almeida, Hetor, and Thomas Philippon, 2007. “The Risk-Adjusted Costs of Financial Distress”, Journal of Finance.
[2] Amdur, David, 2010. “A Business Cycle Model of Aggregate Debt and Equity Flows”, Mimeo
Georgetown.
[3] Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai and Patrick Kehoe, 2010, “Financial Markets and Fluctuations
in Uncertainty”, Mimeo, U of Minnesota.
[4] Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov and Ian Martin, 2009. “Disasters Implied by Equity Index
Options”, Mimeo NYU.
[5] Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004. “Risks for the long run: A potential explanation of
asset pricing puzzles.” Journal of Finance 59, 1481—1509.
[6] Barro, Robert, 2006. “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121, 823—866.
[7] Barro, Robert, Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, and Jose Ursua, 2009. “Crises and Recoveries
in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters”. Mimeo.
[8] Barro, Robert, and Jose Ursua, 2008. “Macroeconomic Crisis since 1870.” Brookings Paper
on Economic Activity.
[9] Bhamra, Harjoat, Lars-Alexander Kuehn and Ilyan Strebulaev. “The Aggregate Dynamics
of Capital Structure and Macroeconomic Risk”, 2009, Review of Financial Studies.
[10] Bhamra, Harjoat, Lars-Alexander Kuehn and Ilyan Strebulaev. “The Levered Equity Risk
Premium and Credit Spreads: A Unified Framework”, 2009 Review of Financial Studies.
[11] Bloom, Nicholas, 2009. “The eﬀect of uncertainty shocks.” Econometrica, 77(3):623—685.
[12] Campbell, John, and John Cochrane, 1999. By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107, 205—251.
[13] Campbell, John Y., and Robert Shiller. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
Future Dividends and Discount Factors.” Review of Financial Studies, 1988, 1, pp. 195-227.

33

[14] Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy S. Fuerst (1997), “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis, American Economic Review
87, 893-910.
[15] Chen, Hui. 2010 “Macroeconomic Conditions and the Puzzles of Credit Spreads and Capital
Structure”. Journal of Finance.
[16] Chugh, Sanjay. 2010. “Firm risk and leverage-based business cycles.” U of Maryland, Mimeo.
[17] Cooley, Thomas and Edward Prescott, 1995. “Frontiers of Business Cycle Research”. Princeton University Press.
[18] Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini, 2004, Aggregate consequences of limited contract
enforceability, Journal of Political Economy 112, 817-847.
[19] Covas, Francesco and Wouter den Haan (2009). “The Cyclical Behavior of Debt and Equity
Finance”, American Economic Review.
[20] Das, Sanjiv, Darrell Duﬃe, Nikunj Kapadia, and Leandro Saita, 2007. “Common Failings:
How Corporate Defaults Are Correlated”, Journal of Finance, 62(1):93-118
[21] Duﬃe, Darrell, Andreas Eckner, Guillaume Horel, and Leandro Saita, 2009. “Frailty Correlated Default”, Journal of Finance, 64(5):2089-2123.
[22] Epstein, Larry G. and Zin, Stanley E. "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework." Econometrica,
1989, 57(4), pp. 937-969.
[23] Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerron-Quintana, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, and Martin
Uribe, 2011. “Risk matters: the real eﬀect of volatility shock”, American Economic Review.
[24] Gabaix, Xavier, 2007. “Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles
in macro-finance.” Mimeo, NYU.
[25] Simon Gilchrist, Jae Sim and Egon Zakrajsek, 2010. “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
Investment Dynamics.” Mimeo, BU.
[26] Simon Gilchrist, Vladimir Yankov, Egon Zakrajšek, 2009. “Credit market shocks and economic fluctuations: Evidence from corporate bond and stock markets.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 56(4):471-493.
34

[27] Joao F. Gomes and Lukas Schmid. 2009. “Equilibrium credit spreads and the macroeconomy.” Mimeo, Wharton.
[28] Gourio, Francois. 2008. “Disasters and Recoveries.” American Economic Review - Papers
and Proceedings, 98(2): 68-73.
[29] Gourio, Francois, 2008b. “Time Series Predictability in the Disaster Model.” Finance Research Letters, 5(4): 191-203.
[30] Gourio, Francois, 2010. “Disaster risk and business cycles.” Mimeo.
[31] Gruber, Jonathan. 2006. “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11945.
[32] Hackbarth Dirk, Jianjun Miao, and Erwan Morellec, 2006. ““Capital Structure, Credit Risk,
and Macroeconomic Conditions” Journal of Financial Economics, 82, 519—550.
[33] Hall, Robert, 2009. “The High Sensitivity of Economic Activity to Financial Frictions”,
Mimeo, Stanford.
[34] Hennessy, Christopher and A. Levy (2007). “Why Does Capital Structure Choice Vary with
Macroeconomic Conditions?”, Journal of Monetary Economics..
[35] Huang, J., and M. Huang, 2003, “How Much of the Corporate-Treasury Yield Spread is Due
to Credit Risk?,” Working paper, Stanford University.
[36] Jermann, Urban J., 1998. “Asset Pricing in Production Economies.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 41(2):257-275.
[37] Julliard, Christian and Anita Gosh, 2008. “Can Rare Events Explain the Equity Premium
Puzzle?”, Mimeo LSE.
[38] Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primicieri and Andrea Tambalotti, 2009. “Investment Shocks
and the Relative Price of Investment”. Journal of Monetary Economics.
[39] Krishnamurthy, Arvind. 2003 “Collateral constraints and the amplification mechanism”.
Journal of Economic Theory, 111(2):277-292.
[40] Liu Zheng, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha, 2009, Do Credit Constraints Amplify Macroeconomic
Fluctuations?, working paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
35

[41] Martin Lettau and Sydney Ludvigson. Time-varying risk premia and the cost of capital:
An alternative implication of the q theory of investment. Journal of Monetary Economics,
49(1):31 —66, 2002.
[42] Philippon, Thomas, 2009. “The Bond Market’s Q”. Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[43] Martin, Ian, 2008. “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing with Higher Cumulants”. Mimeo,
Stanford.
[44] Mendoza, Enrique, 2010. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage” American Economic
Review.
[45] Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
Rates, Journal of Finance 29, 449-47.
[46] Miao, Jianjun, and Pengfei Wang. 2010. “Credit risk and business cycles.” Mimeo, Boston
University.
[47] Rietz, Thomas, 1988. “The equity premium: A solution.” Journal of Monetary Economics
22, 117—131.
[48] Santa-Clara and Yan, 2008. “Crashes, Volatility, and the Equity Premium: Lessons from
S&P 500 Options”. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
[49] Santoro, Marika and Chao Wei, 2010. “Taxation, investment and asset pricing.” Forthcoming,
Review of Economic Dynamics.
[50] Swanson, Eric, 2010. “Risk Aversion and the Labor Margin in Dynamic Equilibium Models”,
Mimeo FRS.
[51] Wachter, Jessica, 2008. “Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
market volatility?” Mimeo, Wharton.
[52] Weil, Philippe, 1989. “Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics Nonexpected Utility in
Macroeconomics”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1):29-42.
[53] Weitzmann, Martin, 2007. “Subjective Expectations and Asset-Return Puzzles,” American
Economic Review, 97(4):1102-1130.
36

Parameter
Capital share
Depreciation rate
Share of consumption in utility
Discount factor
Trend growth of TFP
Standard deviation of TFP shock
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Risk aversion
Mean probability of disaster
Distribution of   =  : values
Distribution of   =  : probabilities
Persistence of log()
Unconditional std. dev. of log()

Symbol






1


Idiosyncratic shock volatility
Tax subsidy
Recovery rate


−1



√

1−2

Value
.3
.08
.3
.98
.01
.02
2
4
.017
(.15,.25,.35,.45,.57)
(.333,.267,233,.033,.133)
.75
1.5
0.2267
0.0616
0.4

Table 1: Parameter values for the benchmark model. The time period is one year.

(∆ log  )
Data
2.78
No disaster risk Benchmark
1.80
Constant leverage 1.80
RBC
1.82
Constant
Benchmark
1.81
Disaster risk
Constant leverage 1.81
RBC
1.83
Time-varying Benchmark
2.11
Disaster risk Constant leverage 2.46
RBC
1.86

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

0.65
0.55
0.55
0.56
0.55
0.55
0.56
0.77
0.89
0.60

2.52
1.88
1.89
2.47
1.97
1.97
2.50
3.38
4.62
2.89

0.96
0.33
0.33
0.35
0.34
0.34
0.35
0.83
1.05
0.46


0.61
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.12
-0.23
0.79


0.80
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.86
0.86
0.91

Table 2: Business cycle statistics (annual). Second moments implied by the model, for different versions of the model. The statistics are computed in a sample without disasters. rho(A,B)
is the correlation of the growth rate of time series A and B. The benchmark model is in bold.

37

Data
No disaster risk Benchmark
Cst leverage
RBC
Constant
Benchmark
Disaster risk
Cst leverage
RBC
Time-varying Benchmark
Disaster risk Cst leverage
RBC

( )
0.80
2.46
2.46
2.59
1.21
1.21
1.32
1.31
1.31
1.41

( )
7.60
2.44
2.39
2.54
3.84
3.81
2.65
3.60
3.85
2.65

(spread)
0.94
0.51
0.55
-0.01
1.29
1.32
-0.01
0.98
1.21
-0.01

(spread)
0.41
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.46
1.40
0.00

(Spread,GDP)
-0.37
-0.56
0.64
0.11
-0.65
0.65
-0.03
-0.53
-0.80
-0.07

( )
2.50
0.23
0.23
0.27
0.22
0.22
0.26
2.33
2.58
2.05

Table 3: Financial Statistics, 1. Mean and standard deviation of the risk-free return, the
equity return, and the spread between the corporate bonds and the risk-free bond. The statistics
are calculated in a sample without disasters. The correlation is the correlation between the spread
BAA-AAA and HP-filtered GDP.

Data
No disaster risk Benchmark
Constant leverage
RBC
Constant
Benchmark
Disaster risk
Constant leverage
RBC
Time-varying Benchmark
Disaster risk Constant leverage
RBC

E(Lev)
0.45
0.56
0.57
0.00
0.54
0.55
0.00
0.54
0.54
0.00

Std(Lev)
0.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.00

E(ProbDef)
0.39
0.79
0.86
0.00
0.50
0.53
0.00
0.58
0.49
0.00

Std(ProbDef)
NA
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.23
0.02
0.00

Table 4: Financial Statistics, 2. Mean and volatility of leverage and of probability of default.
The statistics are calculated in a sample without disasters. Data from Chen, Collin-Dufrense and
Goldstein (2009).

(∆ log  )
Data
2.78
Benchmark model
2.11
Samples with disasters
5.47
Adjustment costs ( = 1) 1.75
Adjustment costs ( = 2) 1.58
IES = .5
1.59
IES = .25
1.57
Risk aversion = .5
1.97

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

(∆ log  )
(∆ log  )

0.65
0.77
1.00
0.83
0.90
0.78
0.94
0.69

2.52
3.38
1.58
2.60
2.11
1.58
2.11
2.83

0.96
0.83
0.32
0.62
0.48
0.23
0.51
0.67


0.61
0.12
0.81
0.54
0.73
0.96
0.70
0.39


0.61
0.86
0.80
0.83
0.80
0.96
0.80
0.88

Table 5: Extensions of the model: business cycle statistics (annual).

38

( )
16.20
0.39
0.39
0.33
0.41
0.41
0.33
1.18
1.88
0.34

( )
Data
0.80
Benchmark model
1.31
Samples with disasters
1.30
Adjustment costs ( = 1) 1.31
Adjustment costs ( = 2) 1.32
IES = .5
1.61
IES = .25
1.97
Risk aversion = .5
2.28

( )
7.60
3.60
2.68
3.62
3.62
3.90
4.27
3.68

(spread)
0.94
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.77

(spread)
0.41
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.47
0.46
0.28

(Spread,GDP)
-0.37
-0.53
-0.52
-0.46
-0.37
-0.10
0.21
-0.63

( )
2.50
2.33
2.34
2.17
2.09
2.36
2.40
1.50

Table 6: Extensions of the model: Financial Statistics, 1.

E(Lev)
Data
0.45
Benchmark model
0.54
Samples with disasters
0.54
Adjustment costs ( = 1) 0.54
Adjustment costs ( = 2) 0.54
IES = .5
0.54
IES = .25
0.54
Risk aversion = .5
0.55

Std(Lev)
0.09
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03

E(ProbDef)
0.39
0.58
0.81
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.65

Std(ProbDef)
0.51
0.23
2.55
0.24
0.24
0.23
0.23
0.18

Table 7: Extensions of the model: Financial Statistics, 2.

(∆ log  )
 = 1062 (Benchmark) 2.11
 = 106
2.11
 = 105
2.05
 = 104
2.00
 = 103
1.96
 = 102
1.91
 = 101
1.89
 = 1005
1.87
 = 1002
1.86
 = 1001
1.86
 = 1 (RBC)
1.86

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

(∆ log )
(∆ log  )

3.38
3.41
3.41
3.37
3.30
3.14
3.00
2.94
2.92
2.91
2.89

0.83
0.82
0.77
0.71
0.64
0.57
0.51
0.48
0.47
0.46
0.43

(Lev)
0.54
0.54
0.53
0.51
0.50
0.47
0.43
0.39
0.34
0.30
0.00

Table 8: Eﬀect of tax shield parameter on mean leverage and volatilities of quantities.

39

( )
16.20
1.18
7.05
1.75
2.07
1.11
1.11
0.91

Capital

2.4

3

2

2

1.8

Leverage

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.62
0.55

0.5

0.5

0.6
0.58
0.56

0.45
0.2

Prob. Default

1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08 1.1

0.6

0.4
0.3

0.4

1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08 1.1

0.2

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.2

Credit Spread

2.3
2.25
2.2
2.15

4

2.2

0.3

0.4

2.5
2
1.5
1
1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08 1.1

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1
0.8
0.6
0.2

σ

0.3

0.4

ε

1.02 1.04 1.06 1.08 1.1
χ

θ

Figure 1: Comparative statics on steady-state. Eﬀect of idiosyncratic volatility    tax
subsidy  and recovery rate , on capital, leverage, probability of default (in %), and credit
spread (in %).

0.11
0.105
0.1

User cost

Capital (% change from p=0)

0
−5
−10
−15
−20

0.095
0.09
0.085

χ>0
χ=0

−25
0.01

0.02

0.08
0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
Probability of disaster p

0.06

0.56
1.8

Credit Spread

Leverage

0.54
0.52
0.5
0.48

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8

0.46

0.6
0.01

0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
Probability of disaster p

0.06

0.01

Figure 2: Comparative statics on steady-state. Eﬀect of an increase in the probability of
disaster on capital, leverage, credit spreads (in %), and the user cost of capital, for the frictionless
model ( = 0, red dot-dashed line) and the benchmark model (  0, blue full line).

40

Δlog(z)−μ

Prob of Disaster

Disaster Realization

Capital

1

1
0.5
1

1

0

0
−0.5

0

5 10 15
Investment

20

−1

10
20
Consumption

0

10
20
Employment

1

0

1

0
20
Risk−free return

10

0
20
Equity return

10

2.7

2.9

2.65

2.8

10

20

2.72
2.7
2.68
2.66
2.64
2.62

2.7
10 15
Leverage

0
20
Bond return

10

2.6
5

20

2

0.5
2

10
Output

20

5

10 15
Spread

20

5 10 15
Default rate

20

0.5212
0.785

56.36
56.34

0.521

0.78

56.32
5

10

0.775

0.5208
20

15

5

10

15

5

10

15

Figure 3: Impulse response function of model quantities and returns to a one standard
deviation shock to total factor productivity. Quantity responses are shown in % deviation
from balanced growth path. Returns, default rates, credit spreads, leverage and the probability
of disaster are annual, in % per year.

Δlog(z)−μ

Prob of Disaster

0

Disaster Realization
0

0.5

−10

−10

0.5

0
−20

−0.5
5
10 15
Investment

0

10
20
Consumption
0

−10

−10

−20

−20
10

−20

20

0

Capital

1

1

10
20
Employment

10
Output

1

20

0
−10

0

−20

20
Risk−free return

−1
20
Equity return

10

10

0

3.5
3

20
Bond return

10

20

2
0

−20

2.5

−2
−40

2
5

10 15
Leverage

20

−4
5

10 15
Spread

1.5
57

0.5

56

0

55.5
5

10

15

20

5
10 15
Default rate

20

12
10
8
6
4
2

1

56.5

20

5

10

15

5

10

15

Figure 4: Impulse response function of model quantities and returns to a disaster
realization. Quantity responses are shown in % deviation from balanced growth path. Returns,
default rates, credit spreads, leverage and the probability of disaster are annual, in % per year.
41

Δlog(z)−μ

Prob of Disaster

1
0
−1

Disaster Realization
1

4

0

2

5
10 15
Investment

20

10
20
Consumption

0

−1

10
20
Employment

−2

0

−15
10

20

0

2

−10

10
Output

0

4

−5

Capital
0
−2
−4
−6
−8

20
Risk−free return

−5
20
Equity return

10

2

5

1

4

0

−4
10

20
Bond return

10

20

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

3

−1
2
5

10 15
Leverage

20

56

5

10 15
Spread

52
50
5

10

15

20

5
10 15
Default rate

20

0.8

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6

54

20

0.6
0.4
0.2
5

10

15

5

10

15

Figure 5: Impulse response function of model quantities and returns to a shock to the
probability of disaster. Quantity responses are shown in % deviation from balanced growth
path. Returns, default rates, credit spreads, leverage and the probability of disaster are annual,
in % per year.

42

Δlog(z)−μ

Probability of Disaster

1

4

0
−1

Benchmark
Cst Lev
RBC

2

5 10 15
Investment

20

10
20
Consumption

0

Disaster Realization
0

0

−5
−10

−1

10
20
Employment

10
Output

0

4

−10

Capital

1

20

0

2
0

−20
10

−5

20
Risk−Free return

10

20
Equity return

−5
20
Bond return

10

2

5

2

1

4

1

3

0

0
−1

10

20

2
5

10 15
Leverage

20

56

5

10 15
Spread

20

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

54
52
50
5

10

15

20

5
10 15
Default rate

20

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
5

10

15

20

5

10

15

Figure 6: Comparison of RBC model with and without financial friction. This figure
compares the impulse response of three models to a probability of disaster shock: the benchmark
model (red full line), the model with constant leverage (green dot-dashed line), and the frictionless
RBC model (blue dashed line). Quantity responses are shown in % deviation from balanced
growth path. Returns, default rates, credit spreads, leverage and the probability of disaster are
annual, in % per year.
Correlation of Defaults
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02 0.025 0.03
Prob of Disaster

0.035

0.04

0.045

Figure 7: Time-varying systematic risk: Correlation of defaults in the model. This
picture plots the correlation of default indicator between any two firms next period, i.e.
 (+1  +1 ) as a function of the disaster probability 
43

consumption

output

labor
0.28

0.393

0.51
0.5

0.27
0.392

0.49
0.26

0.48

0.391

0.25

0.47

0.39

0.24

0.46
0.45

0.23
0.44

0.389
1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

1.4

Relative productivity of firms in default

investment

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2

2.2

Default Rate

0.5
0.11

0.98

0.1

0.96

0.09

0.94

0.4
0.3

0.92

0.08

0.2

0.9

0.07

0.88
0.06

0.1

0.86

0.05
1.4

1.6

1.8

debt

2

2.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

debt

2

2.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

debt

Figure 8: Eﬀect of outstanding debt on quantities, when firms in default are less productive. The figure plots the policy functions for consumption, (  ) employment (  )
output (  ) investment (  ) the relative productivity of firms in default relative to firms
not in default, and the share of firms in default, as a function of outstanding debt  (holding 
and  fixed).

44

Δlog(z)−μ

Probability of Disaster

1

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

0
−1

5

10
15
20
Disaster Realization

25

30

1

5

10

15
20
Capital

25

30

5

10

15
20
Consumption

25

30

5

10

15
20
Output

25

30

5

10

25

30

0
State−contingent
Benchmark
RBC

0

−2
−4
−6

−1

5

10

15
20
Investment

25

30

0

3
2
1
0
−1

−5
−10
5

10

15
20
Employment

25

30

0

0

−1

−1

−2

−2

−3

−3
5

10

15

20

25

30

15

20

Figure 9: Role of state-contingent debt. The figure plots the impulse response function of
model quantities to a shock to the probability of disaster. Blue full line = state-contingent debt,
red line = benchmark model, green line = RBC frictionless model. Quantity responses are shown
in % deviation from balanced growth path.

45

