NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE THE EFFECTS OF MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS BIG OR SMALL?
Olivier Coibion
Working Paper 17034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17034

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

I am grateful to Steven Davis, two anonymous referees, Francesco Bianchi, Yuriy Gorodnichenko,
David Romer, John Leahy, Serena Ng, and Tara Sinclair for helpful comments as well as to the Computational
Science Cluster (SciClone) at the College of William and Mary for computational support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Olivier Coibion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Are the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks Big or Small?
Olivier Coibion
NBER Working Paper No. 17034
May 2011
JEL No. E3,E4,E5
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the small estimated effects of monetary policy shocks from standard VAR’s versus
the large effects from the Romer and Romer (2004) approach. The differences are driven by three
factors: the different contractionary impetus, the period of reserves targeting and lag length selection.
Accounting for these factors, the real effects of policy shocks are consistent across approaches and
most likely medium. Alternative monetary policy shock measures from estimated Taylor rules also
yield medium-sized real effects and indicate that the historical contribution of monetary policy shocks
to real fluctuations has been significant, particularly during the 1970s and early 1980s.

Olivier Coibion
Department of Economics
College of William and Mary
115 Morton Hall
Williamsburg, VA 23188
and NBER
ocoibion@wm.edu

A central question of monetary economics is the sensitivity of the economy to policy instruments.
Quantifying this sensitivity, however, requires disentangling endogenous and exogenous changes in the
policy instrument. Much of the evidence on the quantitative effects of interest rate changes has come
from the VAR literature, most commonly relying on the identifying assumption that policy innovations
have no contemporaneous effects on macroeconomic variables. The predominant finding has been that
the effects of unexpected policy innovations are relatively small.1 Romer and Romer (2004, R&R
henceforth) reach a very different conclusion using a novel approach to identify monetary policy
innovations by first constructing a historical series of interest rate changes decided upon at meetings of
the FOMC and then isolating the innovations to these policy changes that are orthogonal to the Federal
Reserve’s information set. R&R show that this new measure of policy shocks points to much larger
effects of monetary policy shocks than previously thought.
In fact, their results imply not just greater effects of monetary policy shocks, but also a
dramatically different historical interpretation of U.S. business cycle fluctuations than what one would
reach based on the VAR approach. To see this, Figure 1 plots the implied contribution of monetary
policy shocks to macroeconomic fluctuations between 1970 and 1996 from a standard VAR and the
baseline R&R approach.2 The results from the standard VAR approach are well known: monetary policy
shocks appear to account for very little of the fluctuations in the real economy, measured either via
industrial production or unemployment, and play only a small role in accounting for inflation patterns
over this time period. Strikingly, even the 1980-1982 recessions, commonly attributed to the policy
changes enacted by then newly appointed Chairman Volcker, cannot be explained by monetary policy
shocks according to the standard monetary VAR. The R&R methodology, on the other hand, implies that
the brunt of fluctuations in industrial production, unemployment, and inflation have been driven by
monetary policy innovations. Even the 1990 recession, for example, is attributed to contractionary
monetary policy according to the baseline R&R methodology, a result at odds with the conventional
wisdom.3 A hybrid approach, which incorporates the R&R shocks into a standard VAR yields an
interpretation in which monetary policy innovations can account for much of the trend component of
inflation and a smaller, albeit non-negligible, component of fluctuations in the real side of the economy.
Given the stark contrast implied by the different approaches not only for measuring the direct
effects of monetary policy shocks via impulse responses but also the historical interpretation of U.S.
business cycle fluctuations, a more detailed analysis of these methods is needed to identify why the
results differ so dramatically. I find that three key elements play a significant role in accounting for the
1

See for example Leeper, Sims and Zha (1996), Bernanke, Gertler and Watson (1997), Bernanke and Mihov (1998),
Christiano et al. (1999), and Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005).
2
The methods used for the results of Figure 1 are described in detail in section 1.
3
See Blanchard (1993), Hall (1993) and Walsh (1993).

1

difference in the estimated effects of monetary policy shocks across the different methods. First, by
applying a common approach, namely the single equation approach of R&R, to estimating impulse
responses to the different shocks, I show that the R&R innovations identify episodes in which the change
in monetary policy is larger: the Federal Funds Rate (FFR) rises much more and for a longer period after
the baseline R&R shocks than after either standard VAR shocks or the implied shocks from the hybrid
VAR. Controlling for this difference in how contractionary monetary policy is in response to a shock,
both sets of VAR shocks yield very similar effects of monetary policy innovations as the baseline R&R
results.
Second, I show that the period in which the Federal Reserve abandoned targeting the Federal
Funds Rate between 1979 and 1982 plays an important role in accounting for the different results across
methods.

In particular, the large effects of monetary policy shocks identified by R&R are

disproportionately driven by two historical episodes: the rapid decline in the FFR in April-June 1980 and
the subsequent rapid increase in September-November of 1980. Dropping either of these episodes lowers
the estimated effects of monetary policy shocks using the baseline R&R method significantly, by about a
half in the latter case and by about a third in the former case. Both episodes were in the midst of the nonborrowed reserves targeting period by the Fed, during which the Federal Funds Rate experienced extreme
swings.

Thus, both periods are likely to be particularly noisy for measuring policy innovations.

Consistent with this, I document that the R&R shocks are predictable using lagged macroeconomic
variables, but that this predictability is eliminated once one omits the period of non-borrowed reserves
targeting. Additional evidence comes from alternative measures of the stance of monetary policy during
these episodes, such as the Bernanke and Mihov (1998) measure or the Boschen-Mills (1995) index,
which point to much smaller policy reversals than implied by the R&R measure. If one omits the period
of non-borrowed reserves targeting from the estimation, all three approaches (standard VAR, hybrid
VAR, and R&R method) yield very similar estimates of the real effects of monetary policy shocks:
approximately mid-way between the standard VAR and the benchmark R&R results.
Third, I find that R&R’s approach to estimating impulse responses is particularly sensitive to the
lag structure. While they assumed fairly long lag specifications (2 years of autoregressive lags for each
macroeconomic variable and 3-4 years of lags of the shock) in estimating impulse responses, I show that
the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks using their approach are nearly monotonically
increasing in the assumed lag length. In addition, AIC lag selections consistently point to much shorter
lag specifications than assumed by R&R and yield estimated peak effects over the whole sample that are
between the results of R&R and those of the baseline VAR. Similar results obtain from a modelaveraging procedure designed to take into account uncertainty about the true lag length. Accounting for
the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting eliminates much of this sensitivity to lag length and yields
2

estimates of the peak real effects of monetary policy shocks which are more consistent across the three
approaches: a one-hundred basis point innovation to the Federal Funds Rate lowers industrial production
by 2-3% and raises the unemployment rate by approximately half a percentage point.
To provide additional evidence on the size of the effects of monetary policy shocks, I consider
three alternative ways of identifying monetary policy shocks. First, I re-estimate the same reaction
function as R&R but follow the suggestion of Hamilton (2008) and Sims and Zha (2006b) of explicitly
allowing for heteroskedasticity in the innovations (via GARCH). Using this very close substitute to the
original R&R shocks, I find that most of the sensitivity issues that were associated with the original R&R
shocks are mitigated. Second, following Boivin (2006) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011), I extract
a measure of monetary policy shocks from an estimated Taylor rule with time-varying parameters. The
resulting shock series, which should identify a narrower set of monetary policy shocks, namely
innovations to the policy rule rather than changes in the coefficients of the rule, yields real effects of
monetary policy shocks which are again between the VAR and original R&R estimates. Finally, I use the
monetary policy shocks estimated using a DSGE model by Smets and Wouters (2007) and show that
these shocks also point to medium-sized effects on real variables. In short, the analysis points to a clear
answer to the question posed in the title of the paper: the effects of monetary policy shocks are medium.
Despite the fact that the estimated effects of monetary policy shocks appear to be smaller than
originally found by R&R using their own measure of shocks as well as with the GARCH and timevarying coefficient based shocks, the implied historical contribution of monetary policy innovations to
production remains nontrivial and differs qualitatively from that implied by standard VAR’s. This is
particularly the case during the 1970s in which “stop-go” monetary policy likely played an important role
in affecting fluctuations in production, as argued in Romer and Romer (2002), and during the Volcker
disinflation. This supports the broader claim of R&R that monetary policy innovations are historically
significant and contrasts with the prediction of standard VAR’s that monetary policy shocks have
mattered little for historical U.S. macroeconomic fluctuations.
Section 1 provides details on the standard VAR approach, the baseline R&R framework, and their
hybrid VAR, as well as baseline estimates of the effects of monetary policy shocks from each. Section 2
focuses on the effects of different approaches to estimating impulse responses as well as sensitivity to
specific time periods and lag selection issues for these measures of monetary policy shocks. Section 3
considers alternative measures of monetary policy shocks. Section 4 concludes.

I

Estimating the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks

The most traditional approach to identify and estimate the effects of monetary policy shocks remains the
timing assumption that a current innovation to the instrument used by monetary policymakers, most
3

commonly assumed to be the Federal Funds Rate in the U.S., has no contemporaneous effect on
macroeconomic variables such as production, employment and prices. This assumption has motivated a
long literature that estimates the effects of monetary policy shocks using a vector autoregression (VAR)
ordered with the policy variable last. Following Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1999), I will use the
following ordering of variables as representative of this literature: the log of industrial production
(seasonally adjusted), the unemployment rate, the log of the Consumer Price Index (CPI, seasonally
adjusted), a log commodity price index, and the effective Federal Funds Rate (FFR).4 While including
the unemployment rate is not typical, I do so to have an additional measure of the real effects of monetary
shocks. For this purpose, the unemployment rate is particularly useful because so much of its fluctuations
are at the business cycle frequency.5 Estimates of the effects of a one hundred basis point innovation to
the FFR, based on monthly data from 1970:1 to 1996:12, are presented in Figure 2, allowing for 12 lags
in the VAR.6

Confidence intervals are generated by repeatedly (1,000 times) drawing from the

asymptotic distribution of the parameters which yields a distribution of impulse responses. As commonly
noted, the estimated real effects of a monetary policy shock are relatively small: the peak effect on
industrial production is less than one percent (-.7%) and the unemployment rate rises by 0.16 percentage
points.
These estimates are in line with much of the empirical findings of the VAR literature. For
example, Christiano et al. (1999) find a peak drop of approximately 0.70% in production in response to a
100 basis point increase in the Federal Funds Rate.7 Similarly, Leeper, Sims and Zha (1996) estimate a
peak drop in GDP of 0.35% and an increase in the unemployment rate of approximately 0.10 percentage
points in their thirteen variable model. Bernanke and Blinder (1992) find somewhat higher estimates,
with unemployment rising by approximately 0.60 percentage points. Bernanke, Gertler and Watson
(1997) find a peak effect on interpolated monthly GDP of approximately -0.4% while Bernanke and
Mihov (1998) estimate a peak effect of approximately -0.5% for monthly interpolated GDP. Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz (2005) estimate a Factor-Augmented VAR and find that a 100 basis point increase in
the FFR lowers industrial production by a maximum of approximately 0.6% and raises the unemployment
rate by 0.20% points. Gorodnichenko (2006) proposes an alternative factor-based VAR analysis which
predicts a peak drop in real GDP of approximately 0.8%. Uhlig (2005) uses sign restrictions to estimate
4

The commodity price index is from the Commodity Research Bureau. All variables in the VAR are in levels. The
CPI housing costs until 1983 were measured in large part using monthly payments on new mortgages, so
contemporaneous interest rates had a direct effect on the overall CPI. All results in the paper are robust to using the
CPI excluding shelter instead of the overall CPI.
5
None of the results are sensitive to the inclusion of the unemployment rate in the VAR.
6
The time sample is set to be comparable to the R&R sample of monetary policy shocks.
7
These and subsequent figures concerning the results of previous work come from impulse responses displayed in
each paper and are thus only meant to be approximations. In each case, I compute implied responses to a 100 basis
point increase in the FFR based on the reported point estimates.

4

the effects of monetary policy shocks and finds a peak drop in monthly interpolated GDP of
approximately 0.30% when he imposes the assumption of zero response of real GDP on impact. Faust,
Swanson and Wright (2005) estimate the effects of monetary policy shocks using Futures markets for the
FFR and find a peak drop in GDP of 0.60%.8 Thus, despite different identification strategies, variables,
time samples, lag structures and other factors, the consensus finding from this literature is that the effects
of monetary policy shocks are relatively small.9
A notable exception to this finding of small effects of monetary policy shocks is Romer and
Romer (2004). They propose a novel procedure to identify monetary policy shocks. First, they use the
narrative approach to extract measures of the change in the Fed’s target interest rate at each meeting of
the FOMC between 1969 and 1996. They then regress this measure of policy changes on the Fed’s realtime forecasts of past, current and future inflation, output growth and unemployment. The residuals from
this regression constitute their measure of monetary policy shocks.

This procedure has several

advantages over the identification scheme of the VAR literature. First, their measure of policy eliminates
much of the endogenous movement between the effective FFR and macroeconomic variables.10 Second,
by conditioning on the Fed’s real-time forecasts of macroeconomic variables which are formed using a
multitude of economic variables, their policy innovations identify changes in policy that are independent
of current expectations of future economic conditions. Because the standard VAR only controls for a
small set of macroeconomic variables, the R&R measure of monetary policy shocks is therefore likely to
be relatively freer of anticipatory movements than measures from a standard VAR.
Having derived a measure of monetary policy shocks, R&R then assess the effects of these
shocks via regressions of each macroeconomic variable on lags of itself and lags of the policy shock:
∑

∆

∆

∑

(1)

where x is the macroeconomic variable and εmp is their measure of monetary policy shocks. Note that this
specification applies the same timing restriction as the standard VAR, namely that policy shocks have no
contemporaneous effect on macroeconomic variables. With estimates of the parameters of (1), impulse
responses can readily be constructed.

Given monthly data, they set I=24 and J=36 for industrial

production and I=24 and J=48 for prices.

11

R&R use the PPI for finished goods, but I will focus on the

CPI for consistency with most of the literature. Figure 2 presents the impulse responses of industrial
8

The method of Faust et al. (2005) does not yield point estimates but rather confidence intervals. The estimate here
is based on the midpoint over their confidence intervals.
9
These papers also consistently find that monetary policy shocks account for a relatively small component of
forecast error decompositions of real macroeconomic variables, with the exception of Christiano et al. (1999) who
find that monetary policy shocks can account for up to 44% of the output forecast error variance.
10
One potential limitation of relying on changes in the target rate rather than the effective rate is that policy changes
may be enacted prior to the meetings of the FOMC.
11
R&R estimate (1) using unseasonally-adjusted data with monthly dummies. Because this has no important effects
on the results, I focus on the specification with seasonally-adjusted data.

5

production, unemployment and prices, to a permanent 100 basis point shock using this approach. The
time period for the analysis is 1970:1-1996:12, with shocks prior to 1969:3 set equal to zero. For the
unemployment rate, which R&R did not consider, I estimate (1) in levels with the same lag structure as
industrial production. Confidence intervals are generated by repeatedly (1,000 times) drawing from the
asymptotic distribution of the parameters which yields a distribution of impulse responses. The contrast
between this approach and the standard VAR is striking: the R&R methodology yields a peak effect on
production of -4.3% and a rise in the unemployment rate of nearly a full percentage point (0.93). The
effect on production and unemployment is thus more than four times as large as that of the standard VAR
approach.

R&R show that these results are robust to longer lag lengths in (1) and alternative

specifications of the regression used to derive the shock series.
In addition to their single equation specification, R&R also consider a hybrid approach in which
they integrate their new measure of monetary policy shocks into a standard VAR a la Christiano et al.
(1999). Specifically, in place of the effective FFR, they substitute the cumulative sum of their monetary
policy shocks. The advantage of this procedure is that one should be able to more precisely identify the
effects of monetary policy shocks than in the standard VAR, given that the R&R measure controls for
much of the endogenous fluctuations in the interest rate as well as the Fed’s information set, while also
simultaneously estimating the joint dynamics of macroeconomic variables, including controlling for
commodity prices.12 Figure 2 presents estimates from this hybrid procedure, using the baseline VAR with
the cumulative R&R shocks in lieu of the FFR, again using a year’s worth of lags. The estimated real
effects of monetary policy shocks are in between the standard VAR and the baseline R&R results, with
industrial production falling a maximum of 1.6% and unemployment rising by 0.40 percentage points.
The response of the price level is also between that of the standard VAR (and does not exhibit a
pronounced price puzzle) and the baseline result of R&R.
These approaches thus point to rather startling differences in the estimated effects of monetary
policy shocks and, as illustrated in Figure 1, even more striking differences in historical interpretations.
The standard VAR approach finds small real effects of monetary policy shocks and concludes that these
innovations account for very little of historical business cycle fluctuations. The R&R approach, on the
other hand, identifies large effects of monetary policy shocks and indicates that these shocks can account
for much of the historical fluctuations at business cycle frequencies in production, employment and
inflation. The hybrid approach yields a more moderate view, in which policy shocks have larger effects

12

R&R also reproduce estimates of (1) controlling for commodity prices. This yields slightly smaller effects of
monetary policy shocks on production. However, because commodity prices are endogenous variables which
should respond to monetary policy (see Barsky and Kilian 2002 and Kilian 2009), these impulse responses omit the
endogenous response of commodity prices to the shock and the subsequent effects of these commodity price
changes on domestic production. The hybrid VAR, on the other hand, controls for this interaction.

6

than in the standard VAR framework, and can account for the gradual rise of inflation in the 1970s, the
disinflation of the 1980s, but much less of the business cycle fluctuations in production and employment
than implied by the baseline R&R approach.

II

What Accounts for the Different Estimated Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks?

To disentangle the differences among the approaches, I first compare the implied monetary policy shocks
of each approach. Second, I apply the same single equation procedure to generate impulse responses, that
of R&R, to each set of shocks. Third, I study the influence of the period of non-borrowed reserves
targeting. Fourth, I present sensitivity results to lag selection issues as well as a model-averaging exercise
to address this sensitivity.

2.1

Identified Monetary Policy Shocks

The first step to understanding the difference across specifications is to consider the implied monetary
policy shocks of each. The top panels of Figure 3 plot the cumulative sum of monetary policy shocks
from each approach. As can immediately be seen, there is substantial comovement between these series.
The correlation between actual shocks (cumulative shocks) from the standard VAR and the R&R
approach is 0.31 (0.53) while that between the actual shocks (cumulative shocks) from the hybrid VAR
and the R&R approach is 0.83 (0.28). In the mid to late 1970s, all three measures are falling, which
points to a systematic period of loose monetary policy, i.e. interest rates being set lower than one would
expect given macroeconomic conditions. This is reversed in the early 1980’s, with a sequence of positive
monetary policy innovations associated with the Volcker disinflation. Despite these similarities, there are
also some visible differences. First, identified monetary policy shocks from the standard VAR are more
volatile than the other measures: the standard deviation of shocks from the standard VAR is almost 50%
greater than the R&R shocks and 75% greater than the hybrid shocks. Second, the cumulative R&R
series exhibit a much more pronounced decline in the 1970s than the other series. Third, while the R&R
shocks point to increasingly contractionary monetary policy (conditional on the Fed’s forecasts) in the
mid-1980s to early 1990s, both the standard VAR and the hybrid VAR exhibit mostly negative sequences
of policy shocks over the same time period. The bottom panels of Figure 3 plot the difference between
the identified shocks from the standard VAR and the R&R baseline shocks, as well as the difference
between the identified shocks from the hybrid VAR and the R&R baseline shocks. Not surprisingly, the
identified shocks are most different between 1979 and 1982, the period in which the Federal Reserve
abandoned targeting the Federal Funds Rate. I return to this feature of the data in section 2.3.

7

2.2

Impulse Responses using Single Equation Estimation

One way to address how much of the difference in impulse responses comes just from the shock series is
to apply the single equation approach to constructing impulse responses of R&R to each shock series.
Figure 4 plots the impulse responses extracted from estimates of equation (1) for industrial production,
unemployment (in levels) and prices applied to the different measures of monetary policy shocks. In
addition, I estimate the impulse response of the effective Federal Funds Rate to each shock measure,
again using equation (1) in levels with the same lags as for industrial production, to assess whether the
different shocks lead to quantitatively similar monetary contractions.13 Note first that the results for the
baseline R&R specification are identical to those in Figure 2 since we are applying exactly the same
procedure as before. Using the shocks from the standard VAR, the results are larger than those in Figure
2: a 100 basis point innovation leads to a peak drop in industrial production of approximately 2% (instead
of 0.7%) and a peak increase in the unemployment rate of almost 0.4 percentage points (instead of 0.16),
although the standard errors are also now much larger. The response of the price level is again more
pronounced, with prices falling 2% after five years. For the hybrid VAR, the results are quantitatively
very similar to the original impulse responses. Thus, while using the same procedure as R&R to estimate
impulse responses does raise the implied quantitative effects of monetary policy shocks using the standard
VAR shocks, there remains a sizable difference between the results of R&R and the two other
specifications.
One factor underlying this difference is apparent from the average response of the Federal Funds
Rate to each type of innovation. After a standard VAR shock, the FFR rises by approximately 100 basis
points for a few months and then begins to decline. The response of the FFR to an innovation from the
R&R shock series, on the other hand, is much larger. First, the FFR rises by over 200 basis points, and
remains high for an extended period of time relative to the effects of a VAR shock. The hybrid VAR
shocks are in between: the FFR rises by 200 basis points in the first few months after the shock, but then
rapidly return to zero. Thus, a key difference between the R&R shocks and the other shock measures is
that the R&R shocks are associated with much larger and longer changes in monetary policy: i.e. the
contractionary impetus is not the same across shocks. As a result, it should not be surprising to observe
larger effects of monetary policy innovations from the R&R shocks on macroeconomic variables.
To quantify this notion, I construct a counterfactual set of impulse responses for the two VAR
shocks in which the initial innovations are designed to match the quantitative response of the FFR to the
baseline R&R innovations. Specifically, for each set of VAR shocks, I select a sequence of innovations
used to generate the impulse response of the FFR (innovations are allowed to be non-zero over the first 24
months) which minimizes the distance between the impulse response of the FFR to these innovations and
13

In addition, I allow the shocks to have a contemporaneous effect on the interest rate.

8

the impulse response of the FFR to R&R shocks over the first 36 months. One can then construct
alternative impulse responses for industrial production, unemployment and prices by feeding this
sequence of innovations into the single equation estimates of (1) for these variables, in the spirit of Sims
and Zha (2006a). The results, illustrated in Figure 4, indicate that once one controls for the different
response of the FFR to each shock measure, the impulse responses are broadly similar across
specifications.14 Both the baseline VAR shock approach and the hybrid VAR point to peak effects of
monetary policy shocks on industrial production of approximately -4%, unemployment increases of
almost 1% point, and drops in the price level of around 4-6% after five years. In other words, one reason
why the baseline R&R specification is yielding bigger implied effects of monetary policy innovations is
because the contractionary impetus associated with each type of shock is not directly comparable across
shocks.

2.3

The Period of Non-Borrowed Reserves Targeting

Another possibility for why alternative approaches yield such different estimated effects of monetary
policy shocks is that the results could be driven by outliers from each specification. Figure 3 showed, for
example, that while there is a high correlation between the different shock series, there are some
substantial differences as well, particularly between 1979 and 1982 when the biggest monetary policy
shocks in the sample occurred. This period is problematic for the identification of monetary policy
shocks. On the one hand, the Volcker disinflation era is commonly cited as the clearest example of a
monetary-policy driven recession and so should be particularly instructive for identifying the effects of
monetary policy shocks. On the other hand, because the Federal Reserve officially stopped targeting the
FFR during this time period, it is also the period in which the identification procedure from each
methodology is most likely to be misspecified.
To assess the sensitivity of the empirical results to outliers and specific episodes, I replicate the
estimation procedure of section 2.2 (i.e. applying single equation estimation for alternative shock
measures) but set rolling 3-month intervals of shocks equal to zero. For each specification, I then extract
the implied peak effect of monetary policy shocks on industrial production, unemployment, and prices, as
well as the cumulative effect on the FFR over the first 12 months of the impulse response. The latter
provides a simple metric for the size of the contractionary impetus associated with each shock measure
which incorporates both the magnitude of the FFR’s response to policy shocks and its persistence.

14

The counterfactual responses display larger responses but otherwise maintain very similar stochastic properties as
the original responses. For example, the standard deviation of interest rate changes during the first 36 months of the
impulse responses goes from 0.21 (0.32) for the standard VAR (hybrid VAR) to 0.27 (0.30) in the counterfactual
responses, bringing each more in line with the standard deviation of 0.28 from using the R&R shocks.

9

The results are presented in Figure 5. The first result to note is that the peak effects of monetary
policy shocks using the hybrid shocks are quite robust. For example, the peak effects on unemployment
are consistently between 0.4 and 0.6 percentage points, with little sensitivity to individual shocks. Similar
results hold for the response of prices and industrial production. On the other hand, both the baseline
R&R and the specifications based on standard VAR shocks are quite sensitive to certain observations.
The results using the standard VAR shocks vary when certain shocks over the entire sample are dropped,
but are most noticeably sensitive to observations between 1979 and 1982.15 The R&R results are also
sensitive, but almost exclusively to observations between 1979 and 1982. Dropping some of these
observations has significant implications on the peak estimated effects of monetary policy shocks,
sometimes reducing them to the values one gets using the hybrid shocks. The results in Figure 5 also
suggest that the larger and more persistent response of the FFR to R&R shocks relative to the other shock
measures identified in the previous section is also a reflection of a limited number of observations
between 1979 and 1982. Omitting some of these episodes reduces the size of the contractionary impetus
of R&R shocks as well as the associated real effects of monetary policy shocks.
In particular, there appear to be two episodes that play a leading role in driving the empirical
results of R&R. These include the period from April 1980 to June of 1980 and that from September 1980
to November 1980. If we drop the latter 3-month episode, the peak effect of monetary policy shocks on
industrial production (unemployment) falls to -1.9% (0.49% points), while dropping the former time
period reduces the peak effect on industrial production (unemployment) to -2.9% (0.70% points). These
episodes correspond to the period in which the FFR fell precipitously in the first half of the year then rose
dramatically in the second half of the year. Interpreting changes in the FFR during this time period is
complicated by the fact that the Fed was targeting alternative measures of monetary policy and that
transcripts from this time period are often uninformative about the Fed’s expectations for the FFR.16

15

This sensitivity of VAR shocks only arises when impulse responses are estimated using the methodology of R&R.
If instead one extracts the impulse responses directly from the VAR while dropping the relevant time periods, there
is little sensitivity of the estimated peak effects to individual periods.
16
Further complications come from other policy measures in this time period. For example, between March and
July of 1980, the Federal Reserve imposed credit constraints (Credit Restraint Program) per the request of the Carter
administration. While the details of the program appear to have been designed to minimize its effects, some
evidence indicates that it had much more substantial effects than expected. According to the Board, “It is difficult,
if not impossible, to say how much of the weakness in bank loans [under the program] … was due to the recession,
how much to the reaction to fiscal announcements and general credit conditions (including expectational effects),
how much to the cumulative effects of earlier overall restraints, and how much to the credit restraint programs. But
the timing and abruptness of the change in loan growth trends suggest that the announcement of the programs played
a significant role.” The CRP was removed in July of 1980 as it became clear that the economy was in a recession
(see Schreft 1990 for more details). Note that because this program was in place exactly during the time period
when the FFR fell precipitously, this is one indication that monetary policy may not have been as loose as might be
gauged from changes in the FFR over this time period.

10

Given the volatile nature of the FFR over this time period, it is non-trivial to disentangle market-driven
fluctuations in the FFR from changes in monetary policy.
One way to discern whether these identified shocks are reasonable is to compare them to
alternative measures of the stance of monetary policy over this time period. For example, while the
baseline R&R shocks point to a cumulative policy-driven decrease in the FFR of nearly 4% between April
and June of 1980 followed by an increase of nearly 4% between September and November, the
corresponding identified policy changes from the standard VAR approach are of a slightly less than 3%
cumulative decrease in the first episode and an increase of only 128 basis points in the second. This is
particularly striking because the VAR uses the effective FFR as the measure of policy while R&R use
intended policy changes, with the latter being substantially less volatile than the former, particularly
during this time period. Similarly, the hybrid VAR points to a cumulative policy-driven decrease in
interest rates of slightly under 3% during the first episode followed by a cumulative increase of 176 basis
points between September and November. Because the hybrid VAR shocks are based on the cumulative
R&R shock measure, but purified of the predictive component of lagged macroeconomic variables, one
interpretation could be that the R&R shocks are overstating the degree of policy changes by not
sufficiently controlling for the endogenous market-driven fluctuations in the FFR over this time period.
To assess this possibility, I regress the R&R shocks on current and lagged macroeconomic
variables
∑

.

(2)

are exogenous, they should be unpredictable using

Under the null that the Romer and Romer shocks

lagged macroeconomic variables. Equation (2) includes contemporaneous values of macroeconomic
variables to be consistent with the identification restrictions imposed in both the VAR and single equation
approaches. Table 1 reports the F-statistics for the null that all of the β’s are equal to zero using the
monthly change in industrial production, the unemployment rate, and the monthly inflation rate as
regressors. Over the whole sample, we can reject the null of exogeneity of R&R shocks using industrial
production and the unemployment rate. However, once we remove the October 1979 to September 1982
period, all of the F-statistics decline substantially and we can no longer reject the null hypothesis that all
of the β’s are zero for each of the macroeconomic variables. These results support the notion that the
R&R shocks contain some element of endogenous responses to macroeconomic conditions during the
period in which the Federal Reserve abandoned targeting the Federal Funds Rate.
In addition, one can compare the implied change in the stance of monetary policy from the R&R
shocks to alternative measures from the literature. One such measure, similar in spirit to the R&R
approach, is the Boschen-Mills (1995) index. This indicator, derived largely from FOMC directives,
classifies policy according to the importance that policymakers assigned to reducing inflation relative to
11

promoting real GDP growth but does not attempt to identify whether changes in the stance of monetary
policy reflect macroeconomic conditions or exogenous policy decisions. Another measure of the stance
of monetary policy comes from Bernanke and Mihov (1998). They extract their measure from a VAR
which allows for time-varying estimates of the central bank’s operating procedures. Their empirical
results indicate that FFR targeting is an appropriate description of the Federal Reserve’s with the
exclusion of the 1979-1982 period. As a result, their measure of the stance of monetary policy has the
key advantage of being based on the most relevant instrument of monetary policy over time.17 Figure 6
plots these two alternative measures of the stance of monetary policy along with the cumulative R&R
shocks, normalized by the 36-month moving average of lagged values.18 Because R&R shocks represent
deviations of the intended FFR from the average response of the Fed to its real-time forecasts of
macroeconomic variables, the normalized cumulative shock measure can also be interpreted as a measure
of the stance of monetary policy (i.e. periods with a sequence of positive innovations to the FFR can be
interpreted as periods in which the Fed raised interest rates more than it normally would have given its
information set).
Overall, the three measures reveal broadly similar patterns of switches between loose and tight
monetary policy, although some differences stand out.

For example, both the Boschen-Mills and

Bernanke-Mihov measures point to monetary policy tightening more rapidly in the late 1970s than does
the R&R measure. More relevant to the issue at hand is the behavior of the series during 1980. The R&R
measure exhibits a dramatic decrease in early 1980 followed by an almost identical reversal in the latter
part of the year, both of which dwarf in magnitude all other policy changes over the time sample. The
Boschen-Mills indicator, on the other hand, points only to a slight loosening of the stance of monetary
policy in August of 1980, with policy remaining primarily concerned with inflation over GDP growth
until November of 1981. The Bernanke-Mihov measure, like the R&R measure, identifies a loosening of
monetary policy in early 1980 followed by a tightening in the latter half of the year, but the quantitative
magnitude of these policy changes is much smaller (relative to policy changes in other periods) than the
R&R measure. For example, the Bernanke-Mihov index implies that the monetary loosening in early
1980 was comparable in magnitude to the loosening in late 1974 to early 1975 and that of the end of
1982. In addition, the monetary contraction of the latter half of 1980 was, according to Bernanke and
Mihov, quite small in historical perspective, in contrast to the R&R measure.

17

On the other hand, their measures of monetary policy are likely somewhat contaminated by variations in the
policy instrument arising from forward-looking behavior on the part of the Federal Reserve, as emphasized in R&R.
18
The normalization by the 36-month moving average of lagged values is done to be comparable to the BernankeMihov measure, which is based on such a normalization. However, the scales of the three measures are not directly
comparable. Note also that both the Boschen-Mills and Bernanke-Mihov measures have the signs reversed from
their original values, so that for all three measures, an increase is associated with a tightening of monetary policy.

12

These results illustrate the difficulty of properly interpreting the magnitude of policy changes
during the era of non-borrowed reserves targeting. Combining this with the fact that the empirical results
are particularly sensitive to these values implies that one should generally be wary of placing too much
weight on results driven by this time period. As a result, I consider estimates from each approach that
omit the early Volcker years by restricting the time period for the analysis to 1970:1-1979:9 and 1984:11996:12.19 The results are presented in Figure 7. Dropping the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting
eliminates most of the differences in estimated peak real effects across specifications. For the standard
VAR approach, the peak effects of monetary policy shocks on real variables increase in absolute value,
yielding a maximum drop in industrial production of almost 2% and a rise in the unemployment rate of
almost 0.40 percentage points. The price puzzle is more pronounced, but prices fall by significantly more
in the long-run than when estimated over the whole sample. For the hybrid VAR estimates, there is only
a modest increase in the effects of monetary policy shocks relative to the results over the whole sample.
Finally, the results using the baseline R&R approach are significantly revised downwards, with the peak
effects on industrial production and unemployment falling to less than 3% and 0.66 percentage points
respectively relative to initial results of more than a 4% drop in industrial production and over 0.90
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate. Thus, eliminating the period in which the FFR is
generally perceived to be a poor proxy for the stance of monetary policy eliminates much of the
quantitative difference in the real effects of monetary policy shocks across the three methods. Overall,
these effects appear to be moderate and close to the original estimates from the hybrid VAR procedure.

2.4

Lag Specification

A final factor that can potentially account for the differences in results across specifications is the lag
specification. The traditional VAR literature has commonly employed a lag length of one year, a practice
which I have so far followed when estimating both VAR approaches.

The single equation R&R

specification, on the other hand, uses much longer lag lengths in estimating their second step to generate
impulse responses: 24 months of autoregressive lags and 36 (48) months of lags of their shock measure
for industrial production (prices). To assess the sensitivity of each approach to lag length, Figure 8
presents the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks on industrial production, unemployment

19

The resumption date of January 1984 is significantly later than the actual end of the NBR targeting period but
ensures that estimation procedures with long lag lengths do not overlap too much with the NBR period. When the
latter occurs, I set monetary policy shocks during the period to be zero, which is consistent with R&R’s procedure of
setting shocks prior to 1969:3 equal to zero.

13

and prices from each specification for different lag lengths using both the whole sample and the restricted
sample that omits the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting.20
While the estimated peak effects from the standard VAR are robust to lag length, the R&R
specification is remarkably sensitive to the number of lags of shocks included in equation (1).
Particularly noteworthy is the fact that the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks are
increasing almost monotonically with the lag length. The hybrid VAR displays a similar sensitivity for
lag lengths of less than one to two years. So while R&R employ long lag lengths to construct impulse
responses, Figure 8 suggests that one could potentially reconcile the results of the VAR and R&R
approaches by using shorter lag specifications, thereby yielding a consensus finding of small real effects
of monetary policy shocks. However, this would require relying on lag lengths of well under a year,
which would be at odds with both standard lag length specifications and the conventional wisdom that
monetary policy shocks have very delayed macroeconomic effects.
One way to address this issue is via lag length selection criteria such as the AIC or BIC.
However, some well-known issues arise in this context: while the BIC is consistent, it tends to select too
few lags in short samples while the AIC asymptotically selects lag lengths that are too long (Ng and
Perron 2005). Monte Carlo simulations of the single equation approach applied to industrial production
confirm that the BIC fares very poorly in recovering the correct lag specification when the sample length
is equal to that available in the data.21

The AIC does much better on average, with only minor

underestimates of the correct lag specification, but there is substantial uncertainty associated with AIC
selections. For example, the Monte Carlo results suggest that if one were to observe an AIC lag selection
of 12 months in our data, this would be within the 95% confidence interval of AIC selections for true
models with lag lengths ranging from 3 months to 32 months.
As a result of the uncertainty associated with lag selection in the current context, I also consider
a model-averaging procedure that takes into account these features of the data. Specifically, I generate a
weighted average of impulse responses from specifications using different lag lengths. The weights come
from a bootstrap of each specification under different lag lengths which quantifies the probability that this

20

For the single equation approach, I hold the autoregressive lags constant at 24 but vary the number of lags of the
shocks. Varying both the autoregressive lags and lags of the shock simultaneously yields very similar results as the
ones in Figure 8.
21
The specific Monte Carlo is as follows. I estimate equation (1) for industrial production assuming I = 12 but
letting J vary from 3 to 36 months in 3 month increments. For each J, I take the estimated parameters and residuals
of equation (1) and generate 1,000 times series of the same length as in the data with a burn-in period of 100
months. For each simulated time series, I then extract the optimal lag length according to the AIC and BIC. Results
of the mean lag selections from each information criterion for the different true lag specifications are reported in
Appendix Figure 1.

14

particular specification would yield the same AIC lag selection as identified in the data.22 Appendix
Table 1 presents results from a Monte Carlo exercise documenting that the model averaging approach a)
leads to a smaller bias than the AIC, b) reduces the standard deviation across simulations of the estimated
peak effect of monetary policy shocks relative to the AIC and c) reduces the mean squared error of
estimated impulse responses relative to the AIC criterion.

The model-averaging procedure also

dramatically improves upon the performance of specifications with too few lags and specifications based
on the BIC while modestly improving upon the performance of specifications with too many lags.23
Table 2 presents the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks on macroeconomic
variables from each empirical approach using the baseline lag specification of Romer and Romer (2004),
the AIC lag selection, and the model-averaging approach. Using the AIC over the whole sample yields
significantly shorter lag selections than assumed in the baseline specifications. As a result, the estimated
peak effects of monetary policy shocks from the Romer and Romer VAR and single equation methods are
reduced relative to the baseline lag length assumptions. However, with the single equation approach, the
peak effect of monetary policy shocks on industrial production falls only from -4.3% to -3.4% while the
effect on the unemployment rate goes from 0.93% points to 0.61% points. Very similar results obtain
with the model-averaging procedure. Thus, one cannot readily reconcile the standard VAR and R&R
methods by appealing to shorter lag lengths, since both the AIC and model-averaging approaches to lag
selection still point to sizeable real effects of monetary policy shocks.
On the other hand, Figure 8, which also plots the sensitivity of estimated peak effects controlling
for the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting, suggests that the lag sensitivity is largely driven by the
early Volcker era. This result mirrors the finding that the differential contractionary impetus across shock
measures identified in section 2.2 stems from the NBR targeting period. Controlling for this time period
eliminates much of the sensitivity to lag length, particularly for industrial production and unemployment.
Table 2 presents estimated peak effects using the AIC and model-averaging approaches to lag selection
over the restricted sample and documents that the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks are
now broadly similar across methods, despite different lag specifications. For example, the estimated
decline in industrial production ranges from -1.8% to -2.8% across methods and lag specifications. Thus,
22

Note that this is similar in spirit to Bayesian model-averaging with equal priors on each lag specification, as in
Kass and Raftery (1995). The model-averaging procedure is described in more detail in Appendix 1.
23
Asymptotically, empirical specifications with too many lags should be unbiased but inefficient. In small samples,
however, these specifications have an upward (in absolute value) bias in their estimates of the peak real effects of
monetary policy shocks, as documented in Appendix Table 1, although this bias is small relative to that from
underfitting the model. The fact that the model-averaging approach has a downward bias (in absolute value) also
reflects the asymmetry from underfitting versus overfitting the model. By placing a disproportionate weight on
longer lag lengths via the conditional probabilities, the model-averaging approach mitigates the downward bias from
underfitting relative to the AIC but does not completely eliminate it. I am grateful to David Romer for pointing this
out.

15

once one accounts for the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting, the real effects of monetary policy
shocks appear to be in the medium range, with industrial production dropping by approximately 2-3%
and unemployment rising by around half a percentage point.

III

Alternative Taylor-Rule Based Measures of Monetary Policy Shocks

To provide additional evidence on the size of the effects of monetary policy shocks, I consider three
alternative measures of shocks, all linked by their adherence to the Taylor rule framework. The first
approach follows R&R almost perfectly, but applies the suggestion of Hamilton (2008) and Sims and Zha
(2006b) that one should explicitly allow for heteroskedastic errors in estimating policy rules. The second
approach is based on Boivin (2006) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011). Like R&R, they estimate
Taylor rules using Greenbook forecasts for each meeting of the FOMC, but allow for time-varying
parameters. This methodology therefore allows us to differentiate changes in the policy rule from
innovations to the rule. The third approach follows Smets and Wouters (2007), who identify innovations
to the Taylor rule from an estimated DSGE model. In addition, I revisit the implied contribution of
monetary policy shocks to historical U.S. macroeconomic fluctuations.

3.1

Romer and Romer Shocks from GARCH Estimation of the Taylor Rule

In Figure 3, we can observe a common feature of most identified monetary policy shock measures: a
sharp increase in the volatility of these shocks between 1979 and 1982, the period in which the Federal
Reserve abandoned targeting the Federal Funds Rate. Hamilton (2008) and Sims and Zha (2006b) each
forcefully argue that this type of heteroskedasticity is so severe that it matters not just for the calculation
of standard errors but also for the estimation of the parameters of the Fed’s response function. Hamilton
(2008), for example, argues that once one estimates the Taylor rule by GARCH instead of OLS, there is
much weaker evidence of a change in the Fed’s response to inflation and output when Volcker became
Chairman, a result that reflects not just different standard errors but also different point estimates.
Similarly, Sims and Zha (2006b) estimate regime-switching VAR’s and find that, once one allows for
heteroskedasticity, what changes across regimes is only the variances of structural disturbances, with the
Volcker reserves-targeting episode standing out as a period of high variance in the disturbances to the
policy rule.
To assess the importance of time-varying volatility of monetary policy innovations in the Taylor
rule estimated by R&R, I replicate their OLS estimation and find that one can overwhelmingly reject the
null of no heteroskedasticity using an ARCH test with one lag at the 1% significance level. As a result, I
replicate their baseline Taylor rule regression using GARCH(1,1) and extract the residuals, which I refer
to as R&R GARCH shocks. The correlation between this measure of policy shocks and the original R&R
16

shocks is very high, 0.93, with Appendix Figure 2 presenting a scatter plot of this new measure of policy
innovations relative to the original R&R shocks.24 The shocks line up very closely with the 45 degree
line, with the exception of the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting, in which the GARCH shocks
are consistently higher than the original R&R shocks. Appendix Figure 3 plots the cumulative sum of the
two shock measures. While they track each other closely overall, the GARCH shocks point to much more
contractionary policy between 1979 and 1982, and looser monetary policy in the early 1970s.
Figure 9 reproduces the sensitivity results of section 2 using this alternative measure of policy
shocks. Using the whole sample and the same lag specification as R&R, the estimated peak effects of
monetary policy shocks are medium: a one-hundred basis point innovation lowers industrial production
by 2 percent and raises the unemployment rate by 0.60 percentage points. The effect on prices is also
substantially dampened. The results display little sensitivity to specific historical episodes, so dropping
shocks from any 3-month period has little effect on the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks.
The results are also insensitive to dropping the early Volcker years. Finally, the estimated peak effects of
monetary policy shocks, while still increasing in lag length, are less sensitive to lag selection issues than
the original R&R series. In short, explicitly controlling for the GARCH effects associated with the period
of non-borrowed reserves targeting in the estimation of the Taylor rule, eliminates most of the sensitivity
issues identified in section 2, and yields estimated real effects of monetary policy shocks which are again
in the medium range.

3.2

Shocks from an Estimated Taylor Rule with Time-Varying Parameters

Both the original R&R shocks as well as the GARCH measure considered in section 3.1 are defined as the
residuals from an estimated Taylor rule over the whole sample. R&R argue that the goal of this
regression is not to estimate the Fed’s reaction function as well as possible, but rather to purge the
intended funds rate series of movements taken in response to useful information about future economic
developments. The resulting measure of monetary policy shocks includes factors such as the evolution of
the Fed’s operating procedures, policy-makers’ beliefs about the workings of the economy, the tastes and
goals of the Federal Reserve, politics, the pursuit of other objectives (such as affecting the exchange rate),
and random variation in policy. Conceptually, the latter is equivalent to the innovations to the central

24

Appendix Table 2 presents the estimated coefficients from the original R&R specification versus those from the
GARCH specification. Because there are some missing observations before November 1972, the GARCH equation
is estimated over the restricted sample of 1972:11-1996:12. Appendix Table 1 also presents coefficient estimates
from estimating the same Taylor rule by OLS over this restricted sample. The GARCH shocks are extrapolated
back to 1969:3 using the coefficients from the estimates in Appendix Table 1. Note that the correlation between the
original R&R shocks and the shocks extracted from estimating the Taylor rule by OLS over the restricted sample is
0.996. Finally, Appendix Table 2 also reports coefficient estimates from the conditional variance equation, in which
the coefficients on both the lagged squared residual and the lagged forecast variance are significant at the 1% level.

17

bank’s rule, while the others can be interpreted as changes in the rule itself. The potential problem with
grouping these different factors together is that variations in the rule may lead to different dynamics than
innovations to the rule. For example, the effects of a change in the policy rule will generally depend on
how quickly agents realize that a regime change has occurred, how long the regime change is expected to
last, etc…
To address this possibility, I consider an alternative approach to extract those monetary policy
shocks which might more precisely distinguish innovations to the rule from innovations in the rule.
Specifically, I follow Boivin (2006) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011) and estimate a restricted
version of the Taylor rule in R&R with time-varying parameters:
∆

,

,

,

,

,

,

. (3)

As in R&R, the left-hand side variable is the intended change in the Federal Funds Rate decided upon at
the FOMC meeting at time t. The control variables include the level of the intended FFR immediately
preceding the meeting (fbm), the FFR preceding the previous meeting (fbm-1), the forecast of average
inflation over the subsequent two quarters (Ftπt+1,t+2) , the forecast of output growth in the current quarter
(Ftgyt), and the forecast of the unemployment rate in the current quarter (Ftuet). Like the R&R Taylor
rule, this is estimated at the frequency of FOMC meetings using Greenbook forecasts of macroeconomic
variables and the R&R measure of interest rate changes at each meeting. Unlike R&R, this Taylor rule
allows for time-varying response coefficients (which are assumed to follow a random walk, as in Boivin
2006).25 Thus, those policy changes which would commonly be interpreted as regime change, i.e.
changes in the coefficients of the Fed’s response function, will generally not be classified as monetary
policy shocks in this approach. In addition, changes in the central bank’s target rate of inflation or target
for GDP growth will be incorporated in the time-varying intercept.26 Only the random innovations to the
rule will be classified as monetary policy shocks. However, this specification of the Taylor rule imposes
a more restricted information set than that used in the baseline R&R approach. For example, the Taylor
rule estimated by R&R controls for forecasts of lagged, contemporaneous and future values of inflation
and output growth while equation (3) imposes specific horizons to which the Fed responds.27 The Taylor
rule estimated by R&R also controls for revisions in the forecasts of inflation and output growth, while

25

The estimation allows for two breaks in the volatility of shocks to the parameters in 1979 and 1982. The timevarying coefficients are presented in Appendix Figure 4.
26
This helps address the concern, raised by Sims and Zha (2006b), that time-invariant Taylor rules are implausible
because they imply that monetary authorities react to expected inflation of 3% in exactly the same way, whether the
recent past level of inflation has been 1.5% or 6%. The time-varying Taylor rule only implies that the Fed responds
to deviations from trend inflation in the same way, but allows for trend inflation to vary.
27
The specific horizons chosen are based on Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011), who employ an AIC selection
criterion over a wide variety of forecasting horizons.

18

the time-varying specification focuses exclusively on contemporaneous forecasts. I will refer to the
monetary policy shocks from the time-varying coefficients approach as R&R TVC shocks.
The correlation between the original R&R and the R&R TVC shocks is quite high at 0.82 (0.86
with R&R GARCH shocks). Consistent with the notion that the R&R TVC shocks are excluding some
component of interest rate innovations as regime changes, the standard deviation of R&R TVC shocks is
ten percent lower than that of the original R&R shocks. Appendix Figure 5 plots a scatter of the two
shocks and Appendix Figure 6 plots the cumulative sum of the two shock measures. The cumulative
measures exhibit some small differences. For example, the sequence of negative policy shocks between
1969 and 1972 is only half as big with the R&R TVC shocks, indicating that a significant component of
the loosening in monetary policy over this time period can be attributed to a changing response to
macroeconomic variables. Similarly, the original R&R shocks point to unusually tight monetary policy in
the mid 1990s, while the TVC approach attributes much of these interest rate changes to innovations in
the Fed’s endogenous response to macroeconomic variables.
Figure 10 presents the results from applying the sensitivity analysis from section 2 to this
alternative measure of policy shocks. The results are broadly similar to those using the original R&R
shocks. First, the estimated peak effects of monetary policy shocks using the baseline lag specification of
R&R are close to the baseline result of R&R: a one-hundred basis point innovation to the FFR yields a
peak decline in output of approximately 4% and a rise in the unemployment rate of nearly 0.75 percentage
points, while the price level falls by about 4%. The results are less sensitive to any 3-month sequence of
shocks than the original R&R shocks, and the peak effects of monetary policy shocks decrease (in
absolute value) when dropping the period in which the Fed abandoned targeting the FFR. Finally, the
peak effects of monetary policy shocks on industrial production and unemployment are much less
sensitive to the lag specification: once the lag length exceeds one year, the results are essentially
unchanged for longer lag lengths. Thus, this setup presents an alternative interpretation for the sensitivity
of both VAR and R&R shocks to the 1979-1982 period: the difficulty of separating between those policy
changes that should be characterized as a change in the rule versus those that should be characterized as a
pure innovation to the rule.

3.3

Shocks from a Taylor Rule in an Estimated DSGE Model

Along with VAR’s and single equation estimates of the central bank’s reaction function, another very
common approach to studying monetary policy is within the context of estimated DSGE models. A wellknown example is the New Keynesian model of Smets and Wouters (2007) which includes price and
wage frictions along with a plethora of shocks. Monetary policy is modeled via a Taylor rule in which the
monetary authority is assumed to respond to contemporaneous inflation, output growth and the output
19

gap. Like the standard monetary VAR, however, this approach does not explicitly incorporate the actual
forecasts of the central bank.28
For comparison with the previous measures of monetary policy shocks, I extract the filtered
monetary policy shock series from Smets and Wouters (2007). These shocks are available quarterly over
the same sample as the R&R shocks. The correlation between the two shock series is surprisingly high
(0.40) given the very different methodologies, and the Smets-Wouters measure is 69% more volatile, as
measured by the standard deviation of the shocks. Appendix Figures 7 and 8 display a scatter of the two
shock series and their cumulative sums respectively. While the latter tell qualitatively similar stories, the
Smets-Wouters shocks point to much more contractionary innovations since the early 1980s than the
original R&R shocks, with the sum of the shocks rising from approximately 5% in 1984 to over 20% by
the end of 1996. Figure 11 reproduces the sensitivity results of section 2 but applied to the SmetsWouters shocks using quarterly data. The results closely resemble those found using the R&R GARCH
shocks. First, the estimated peak effects using the lag structure from R&R (converted to quarterly
frequency) are in the small to medium range: a one-hundred basis point innovation lowers industrial
production by a maximum of 1.5% and raises the unemployment rate by slightly less than 0.40 percentage
points, when estimated over the whole sample, while the price level is predicted to fall by approximately
1.5%. These smaller estimates of monetary policy shocks likely reflect the same features as in the
standard VAR: 1) the use of the actual FFR rather than intended policy changes and 2) not controlling for
the real-time information available to the Fed. The results are insensitive to any quarterly shock being
dropped from the estimation and are also insensitive to dropping the period of reserves targeting. Finally,
the results are much less sensitive to the assumed lag length than the original specification of R&R.

3.4

Revisiting the Historical Contribution of Monetary Policy Shocks

The starkest contrast between the traditional VAR literature and the Romer and Romer (2004) analysis of
monetary policy shocks, as emphasized in the introduction and illustrated in Figure 1, lays in the
historical contribution of monetary policy shocks to macroeconomic fluctuations implied by each
approach. Whereas standard monetary VAR’s point to little contribution of monetary policy shocks to
historical US fluctuations, the baseline approach of R&R implies that the brunt of the annualized changes
in production, employment and prices can be explained by monetary policy innovations. In part, the latter
reflects the large estimated macroeconomic effects of monetary policy shocks from the baseline R&R

28

A third approach to estimating the Taylor rule is the framework proposed in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000).
However, because this approach replaces ex-ante forecasts with ex-post values, the estimated residual combines
monetary policy innovations and the rational expectations error.

20

approach.29 In this section, I revisit the implied historical contribution of monetary policy shocks to
macroeconomic fluctuations taking into account the different issues identified in previous sections. Using
the original R&R shocks, the GARCH R&R shocks, the TVC R&R shocks, and the Smets-Wouters
shocks, I use estimates of equation (1) dropping the early Volcker period as in section 2.3 to construct
counterfactual time series of industrial production, unemployment and inflation driven exclusively by
exogenous monetary policy shocks. While the estimation excludes the 1979:10-1983:12 period, the
counterfactuals are constructed using the shocks over the entire sample.30
As illustrated in Figure 12, all four measures point to a nontrivial contribution of monetary policy
shocks to historical U.S. macroeconomic fluctuations. The estimated contributions are considerably
smaller than implied by the original R&R results but also considerably larger than those implied by the
baseline VAR. In particular, much of the volatility in production during the 1970’s is attributable to
monetary policy shocks, consistent with the “stop-go” description of monetary policy during this period
emphasized in Romer and Romer (2002). Every shock measure also points to an important contribution
of monetary policy shocks to the recessions of the early 1980s. Across methods, exogenous monetary
policy actions appear to have contributed approximately 2-3% points out of the 5% point increase in
unemployment between 1979 and 1982.
In addition, one should note that the contribution of monetary policy shocks to real fluctuations
has drastically declined since the early 1980s. This is consistent with the argument made in Clarida et al.
(2000), Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) and Boivin and Giannoni (2006) that improved monetary policy (in
this case via smaller innovations to the policy rule) contributed to the Great Moderation. For example, all
four shock measures imply that the 1990 recession was not directly caused by exogenous contractionary
monetary policy.

Finally, monetary policy shocks can account for a significant component of the

historical volatility in inflation. In particular, the disinflation of the early 1980s can readily be attributed
to exogenous monetary policy, a feature not shared by standard monetary VAR’s.

29

The large role assigned to monetary policy fluctuations using the baseline R&R approach in Figure 1 reflects both
the large estimated effects of policy shocks and the specific sequence of policy shocks identified in R&R. If one
feeds the VAR shocks into R&R’s estimate of equation (1), the implied contribution of monetary policy shocks to
historical fluctuations remains small. Thus, the difference in identified shocks plays a role above and beyond just
generating different impulse responses of policy shocks.
30
For industrial production and the unemployment rate, I estimate equation (1) using 24 autoregressive lags and 24
lags of monetary policy shocks. As illustrated in Figure 8, the effects of monetary policy shocks are relatively
insensitive to the lag structure once the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting is accounted for. Because this is
not the case for prices, counterfactual inflation paths are based on applying the model-averaging procedure from
section 2.4 to each set of monetary policy shocks excluding the 1979:10-1983:12 period. The displayed
counterfactual paths are weighted averages of counterfactuals using different lag specifications where the weights
come from the model-averaging estimates.

21

IV

Conclusion

This paper revisits a basic quantitative issue for monetary policy analysis: how large are the effects of
monetary policy shocks? The current state of the literature is mixed, with monetary VAR’s commonly
pointing to small effects of monetary policy shocks (and a minimal contribution of these innovations to
historical US macroeconomic fluctuations) while the Taylor rule approach of Romer and Romer (2004)
implies much larger effects of monetary shocks, both for impulse responses and historical
decompositions. I find that these differences are driven by several factors. First, unanticipated monetary
policy contractions in a VAR are associated with smaller and less persistent increases in interest rates than
equivalent innovations from the R&R methodology: adjusting for the size of the contractionary impetus
in interest rates eliminates much of the quantitative differences in the impulse responses across methods.
Second, the assumed lag structure also affects the magnitude of estimated peak effects of policy shocks.
While the VAR estimates are largely robust to this issue, the two-step procedure of R&R is not: their
estimated peak effects are nearly monotonically increasing in the lag length of the shocks. Using either
the AIC or the model-averaging procedure considered in this paper points to smaller effects of policy
innovations than originally found by R&R, albeit still significantly larger than traditional estimates from
the VAR literature.
Third, the period in which the Federal Reserve abandoned targeting the Fed Funds Rate plays a
disproportionate role in driving the estimated peak effects of policy shocks. This is problematic since
each approach relies on the FFR as the primary measure of the stance of monetary policy-makers.
Dropping this time period from the analysis helps reconcile the VAR and R&R estimates and yields
moderate effects of policy shocks. Similarly, explicitly controlling for the time-variation in the shock
structure when estimating the Taylor rule also leads to more moderate effects of policy shocks than
originally uncovered by Romer and Romer (2004). Nonetheless, my results confirm the broader point of
Romer and Romer (2004) that monetary policy shocks have likely played a more important role in
accounting for historical macroeconomic fluctuations than is commonly implied by monetary VAR’s,
particularly during the 1970s and early 1980s.
Finally, the apparent sensitivity of the results to the period of non-borrowed reserves targeting
during the early Volcker years presents a cautionary tale for future monetary policy analysis that will have
to wrestle with the current period of zero interest rates and the associated unorthodox monetary policy
actions pursued by the Fed and other central banks. Properly measuring the stance of policy and
identifying policy innovations is rife with difficulties even in calm periods.

Doing so during

extraordinary circumstances such as the Volcker experiment or the current period presents a particularly
challenging exercise for monetary policy analysis.

22

References
Barsky, Robert B. and Lutz Kilian. 2002. “Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great Stagflation? A
Monetary Alternative?” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, ed. Ben S. Bernanke and
Kenneth S. Rogoff, 137-183. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Bernanke, Ben S and Alan S. Blinder. 1992. “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary
Transmission.” American Economic Review, 82(4): 901-21.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Mark Watson. 1997. “Systematic Monetary Policy and the Effects of
Oil price Shocks.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 91–142.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz. 2005, “Measuring the Effects of Monetary Policy: A
Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(1): 387-422.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Ilian Mihov. 1998. “Measuring Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113(3): 869-902.
Blanchard, Olivier, 1993. “Consumption and the Recession of 1990-1991.” American Economic Review,
83(2): 270-274.
Boivin, Jean, and Marc Giannoni. 2006. “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 445-462.
Boivin, Jean. 2006. “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coefficients and RealTime Data.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38(5): 1149-1173.
Boschen, John F. and Len O. Mills. 1995. “The Relation Between Money Market and Narrative
Indicators of Monetary Policy.” Economic Inquiry, 33(1): 24-45.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 1999. “Monetary Policy Shocks: What
Have We Learned, and To What End?” In Handbook
B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 65-148.

of Monetary Economics 1999, ed. John

Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. 2000. “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1): 147-180.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation and the Great
Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation.” American Economic Review, 101(1): 341-370.
Faust, Jon, Eric T. Swanson, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2004. “Identifying VARs based on High Frequency
Futures Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(6): 1107-1131.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy. 2006. “Reduced rank identification of structural shocks in VARs.”
http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~ygorodni/.
Hall, Robert E. 1993. “Macro Theory and the Recession of 1990-1991.” American Economic Review,
83(2): 275-279.
23

Hamilton, James D. 2008. “Macroeconomics and ARCH.” In Volatility and Time Series Econometrics:
Essays in Honor of Robert Engle, ed. Tim Bollerslev, Jeffry R. Russell and Mark Watson.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kass, Robert E. and Adrian E. Raftery. 1999. “Bayes Factors.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90(430): 773-795.
Kilian, Lutz. 2009, “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in
the Crude Oil Market.” American Economic Review, 99(3): 1053-1069.
Leeper, Eric M., Christopher A. Sims, and Tao Zha. 1996, “What Does Monetary Policy Do?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1996(2): 1-78.
Lubik, Thomas A., and Frank Schorfheide. 2004. “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S.
Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 190-217.
Ng, Serena and Pierre Perron. 2005, “A Note on the Selection of Time Series Models.” Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, 67(1): 115-134.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
Implications.” American Economic Review, 94: 1055-1084.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 2002. “The Evolution of Economic Understanding and
Postwar Stabilization Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Proceedings, 2002: 11-78.
Schreft, Stacey L.. 1990. “Credit Controls: 1980.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review,
1990(Nov): 25-55.
Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. 2006a. “Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 10(2): 231-272.
Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. 2006b. “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?”
American Economic Review, 96(1): 54-81.
Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97(3): 586-606.
Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 39(1): 195-214.
Uhlig, Harald. 2005. “What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an agnostic
identification procedure.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2): 381-419.
Walsh, Carl E. 1993. “What Caused the 1990-1991 Recession?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Review, 2: 33-48.

24

Figure 1: The Contribution of Monetary Policy Shocks to Business Cycle Fluctuations

Annual Growth in IP

standard VAR Approach

UE Rate

R&R baseline approach

20

20

10

10

10

0

0

0

-10

-10

-10

-20
1970

1980

1990

-20
1970

1980

1990

-20
1970

15

15

15

10

10

10

5

5

5

0
1970

Annual Growth in CPI

VAR with R&R shock

20

1980

1990

0
1970

1980

1990

0
1970

15

15

15

10

10

10

5

5

5

0
1970

1980

1990

0
1970

1980

1990

0
1970

1980

1990

1980

1990

1980

1990

Note: The dashed blue lines are actual macroeconomic variables, while the solid black lines are the
predicted time paths of each macroeconomic variable from identified monetary policy shocks from each
approach. The Standard VAR Approach corresponds to the baseline VAR, the VAR with R&R Shocks
corresponds to the baseline VAR using the cumulative measure of R&R shocks in place of the effective
Federal Funds Rate, and R&R Baseline Approach corresponds to the estimation procedure of Romer and
Romer (2004). See section 1 in the text for details.

25

Figure 2: Impulse Responses of Macroeconomic Variables to Monetary Policy Shocks

Response of IP

standard VAR Approach

Response of UE

R&R baseline approach

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

0

20

40

60

-0.06

0

20

40

60

-0.06

1.5

1.5

1.5

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

Response of CPI

VAR with R&R shock

0.02

0

20

40

60

-1

0

20

40

60

-1

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

0

20

40

60

-0.06

0

20

40

60

-0.06

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

Note: The solid black lines are the impulse response functions of each macroeconomic variable to a 100
basis point monetary policy innovation. The dashed blue lines are one standard deviation intervals from a
bootstrap. The Standard VAR Approach corresponds to the baseline VAR, the VAR with R&R Shocks
corresponds to the baseline VAR using the cumulative measure of R&R shocks in place of the effective
Federal Funds Rate, and R&R Baseline Approach corresponds to the estimation procedure of Romer and
Romer (2004). The horizontal axis is in months. See section 1 in the text for details.

26

Figure 3: Identified Monetary Policy Shocks from each Approach
Hybrid VAR vs R&R Shocks
4

2

2
Cumulative Value of Shocks

Cumulative Value of Shocks

VAR vs R&R Shocks
4

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

1975

1980

1985

1990

-8

1995

Difference between Hybrid VAR and R&R Shocks

Difference between VAR and R&R Shocks

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-4

Cumulative Hybrid VAR Shocks
Cumulative R&R Shocks

4

-4

-2

-6

Cumulative VAR Shocks
Cumulative R&R Shocks
1970

0

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1

Note: The top two figures plot the cumulative sum of identified monetary policy innovations from each
approach described in the text. The Cumulative VAR Shocks corresponds to the sum of Choleskiidentified innovations to the effective FFR in the baseline VAR, the Cumulative R&R Shocks corresponds
to the sum of the monetary policy shocks identified in Romer and Romer (2004), and the Cumulative
Hybrid VAR Shocks corresponds to the sum of Choleski-identified innovations to the cumulative R&R
shock measure added to the baseline VAR in place of the effective Federal Funds Rate. The bottom two
panels plot the difference between the baseline VAR (left) and the hybrid VAR (right) shocks relative to
the R&R shocks each month. See section 2.1 in the text for details.

27

Figure 4: Impulse Responses to Monetary Policy Shocks using Single Equation Approach

Industrial Production

VAR Shocks

0.02

0

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.04

Unemployment

0

20

40

60

-0.06

0

20

40

60

-0.06

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

0

Price Level

R&R Shocks

0.02

-0.06

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

Effective FFR

VAR with R&R Cum. Shock

0.02

0

20

40

60

-0.06

0

20

40

60

-0.06

2

2

2

0

0

0

-2

-2

-2

0

20

40
Months

60

0

20

40
Months

60

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

60

Months

Note: The solid black lines are the impulse response functions of each macroeconomic variable to a 100
basis point monetary policy innovation from each identification procedure. Each impulse response is
estimated following Romer and Romer (2004). The dotted blue lines are one standard deviation
confidence intervals from a bootstrap. The VAR Shocks correspond to impulse responses using monetary
policy shocks identified using the baseline VAR. The VAR with R&R Cum. Shocks correspond to impulse
responses using monetary policy shocks identified using the VAR with R&R cumulative shocks in place
of the effective Federal Funds Rate. The R&R Shocks correspond to impulse responses using monetary
policy shocks identified in Romer and Romer (2004). The dashed black lines are the counterfactual
impulse responses to a sequence of shocks designed to replicate the IRF of the Federal Funds Rate to
R&R shocks. See section 2.2 for details.

28

Figure 5: Sensitivity of Peak Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks to Individual Episodes
Unemployment
Peak Rise in Unemployment

1.4

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Prices

Peak Drop in Prices

0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1970

1995

Cumulative Effect on FFR over 12 Months

Peak Drop in Industrial Production

Industrial Production
0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Federal Funds Rate
25

20
R&R shocks
VAR shocks
Hybrid VAR shocks

15

10

5
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Note: Each line presents the peak effect of monetary policy shocks on macroeconomic variables from estimating equation (1) using alternative
measures of monetary policy shocks. For each time period, the monetary policy shock for that month and the two previous months are set equal to
zero, so the lines present the sensitivity of estimated peak effects to 3-month time intervals. The bottom right panel measures the sensitivity of the
cumulative interest rate response to each shock measure over the first 12 months of impulse responses. The VAR Shocks correspond to monetary
policy shocks identified using the baseline VAR. The Hybrid VAR Shocks correspond to monetary policy shocks identified using the VAR with
R&R cumulative shocks in place of the effective Federal Funds Rate. The R&R Shocks correspond to monetary policy shocks identified in Romer
and Romer (2004). See section 2.2 for details.
29

Figure 6: Measures of the Stance of Monetary Policy
0.15

3

Romer ‐ Romer, left axis

2

0.1

1

0.05

0

0

‐0.05

‐1

‐2

Bernanke ‐Mihov
right axis

‐0.1

Boschen ‐ Mills, left axis

‐0.15

‐3
1972

1975

1978

1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

Note: The solid blue line is the cumulative Romer and Romer (2004) shocks (minus the 36-month moving average of its lagged values), the thin
black line is the Bernanke and Mihov (1998) measure of the stance of monetary policy, while the dashed black line is the Boschen and Mills
(1995) indicator of the stance of monetary policy. For each series, a higher value is associated with tighter monetary policy. See section 2.3 in the
text for details.

30

Figure 7: Impulse Responses to Monetary Policy Shocks Omitting the Early Volcker Period

Response of IP

Standard VAR Approach

Response of UE

R&R Baseline Approach

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.02

0

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.04

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

Response of CPI

VAR with R&R shocks

0.04

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0.01

0.005

0.01

0.005

0

0

-0.005

-0.01

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0
-0.01

-0.02

-0.015

-0.03

-0.02

-0.04

-0.005
-0.01
-0.015

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

-0.025

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

-0.05

Note: The solid black lines are the impulse responses of each macroeconomic variable to a 100 basis point monetary policy innovation from each
identification procedure using the entire time sample. The blue dashed lines are the impulse responses dropping the period from 1979:10-1983:12.
The Standard VAR Approach corresponds to the baseline VAR, the VAR with R&R Shocks corresponds to the VAR using the cumulative measure
of R&R shocks in place of the effective Federal Funds Rate, and R&R Baseline Approach corresponds to the estimation procedure of Romer and
Romer (2004). The horizontal axis is in months. See section 2.3 in the text for details.

31

Figure 8: Sensitivity of Peak Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks to Lag Lengths

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

-0.05

10

20

30

40

1

0
Peak Effect of MP shock on Prices

0

Peak Effect of MP shock on Unemployment

Peak Effect of MP shock on Industrial Production

Panel A: Whole Sample

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Number of Lags of Monetary Policy Shocks

10

20

30

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

40

10

Number of Lags of Monetary Policy Shocks

20

30

40

Number of Lags of Monetary Policy Shocks

Baseline VAR
R&R VAR
Baseline R&R

-0.005
-0.01
-0.015
-0.02
-0.025
-0.03
-0.035

10

20

30

40

Number of Lags of Monetary Policy Shocks

1

0
Peak Effect of MP shock on Prices

0

Peak Effect of MP shock on Unemployment

Peak Effect of MP shock on Industrial Production

Panel B: Dropping Period of Non-FFR Targetting

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

10

20

30

40

Number of Lags of Monetary Policy Shocks

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04
10

20

30

40

Number of Lags of Monetary Policy Shocks

Note: Each line presents the estimated peak effect of monetary policy shocks on macroeconomic variables for different lag specifications. The
Baseline VAR lines correspond to peak effects of monetary policy shocks identified using the baseline VAR with lag length given on the horizontal
axis. The R&R VAR lines correspond to peak effects of monetary policy shocks identified using the VAR with R&R cumulative shocks in place of
the effective Federal Funds Rate, with lag length given on the horizontal axis. The Baseline R&R lines correspond to peak effects of monetary
policy shocks identified in Romer and Romer (2004), using an autoregressive lag of 24 months and lags of the monetary policy shocks given on
the horizontal axis. See section 2.4 in the text for details.
32

Figure 9: Controlling for Heteroskedasticity in Estimation of Romer and Romer (2004) Shocks
Original R&R shocks
GARCH R&R shocks

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

-0.05
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Sensitivity to Lag Length

0.02
Whole sample
Restricted Sample

0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Peak Effect on Industrial Production

IRFs using R&R Lags
Response of Industrial Production

Peak Drop in Industrial Production

Sensitivity to Historical Episodes
-0.01

0
-0.005
-0.01
-0.015
-0.02

-0.03

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

25

30

35

40

45

15
20
25
30
Lags of Shocks Included

35

40

45

Original R&R shocks
GARCH R&R shocks

1.2
1
0.8
0.6

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Whole sample
Restricted Sample

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

2000

Peak Effect on Unemployment

0.8
Response of Unemployment

Peak Rise in Unemployment

1.4

0.4
1970

Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

-0.025

0

10

20

30

40

50

0.4

0.2

0

60

Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

0.6

0

5

10

15

20

-0.01

0.005

-0.02

Original R&R shocks
GARCH R&R shocks

-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
1970

x 10
0

0
-0.005
-0.01

Whole sample
Restricted Sample

-0.015
1975

1980
1985
1990
1995
Rolling 3-month shocks set to zero

2000

Peak Effect on Prices

0.01

Response of Prices

Peak Drop in Prices

-3

0

-0.02

0

10

20

30
Months

40

50

60

-5

-10
Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

-15

-20

0

5

10

Note: The left column presents peak effects of monetary policy shocks estimated using the impulse response procedure of R&R with their lag
structure, setting rolling 3-month shocks equal to zero, using the original R&R shocks as well as R&R shocks estimated by GARCH. The middle
column presents impulse responses to R&R shocks estimated by GARCH. Impulse responses are estimated as in R&R, with their lag structure,
over the whole sample as well as the restricted sample omitting 1979:10-1983:12. The third column presents sensitivity of peak effects of
monetary policy shocks to the number of lags of shocks (R&R shocks estimated by GARCH) included in the empirical specification, over the
whole sample and the restricted sample. See section 3.1 for details.
33

Figure 10: Estimation of the Taylor Rule with Time-Varying Coefficients

Original R&R shocks
R&R TVC shocks

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1
0.8
0.6

1975

1980

1985

1990

-0.05

1975
1980
1985
1990
Rolling 3-month shocks set to zero

1995

Response of Prices

Peak Drop in Prices

-0.06

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0.5

0
Whole sample
Restricted Sample
0

10

20

30

40

50

Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

0.8
0.6
0.4
Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

0.2
0

60

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

35

40

45

0

0
-0.02
-0.04
Whole sample
Restricted Sample

-0.06
-0.08

0

1

0.02
Original R&R shocks
R&R TVC shocks

-0.04

-0.06
1970

-0.04

-0.5

1995

-0.02

-0.03

-0.02

Peak Effect on Unemployment

Original R&R shocks
R&R TVC shocks

1.2

0.4
1970

0

1
Response of Unemployment

Peak Rise in Unemployment

1.4

Whole sample
Restricted Sample

Peak Effect on Prices

-0.05
1970

Sensitivity to Lag Length

0.02

Peak Effect on Industrial Production

IRFs using R&R Lags
Response of Industrial Production

Peak Drop in Industrial Production

Sensitivity to Historical Episodes
-0.01

0

10

20

30
Months

40

50

60

-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

-0.08
-0.1

0

5

10

15
20
25
30
Lags of Shocks Included

Note: The left column presents peak effects of monetary policy shocks estimated using the impulse response procedure of Romer and Romer
(2004) with their lag structure, setting rolling 3-month shocks equal to zero, using the original R&R shocks as well as the shocks from estimating a
restricted version of the R&R Taylor rule with time-varying coefficients (R&R TVC shocks). The middle column presents impulse responses to
the TVC shocks. Impulse responses are estimated as in R&R, with their lag structure, over the whole sample as well as the restricted sample
omitting 1979:10-1983:12. The third column presents sensitivity of peak effects of monetary policy shocks to the number of lags of the TVC
shocks included in the empirical specification, over the whole sample and the restricted sample. See section 3.2 for details.
34

Figure 11: Results using the Smets-Wouters (2007) Measure of Monetary Policy Shocks
-3

-0.02
Romer-Romer
Smets-Wouters

-0.03
-0.04
-0.05

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

0
-5
-10
-15
-20

Whole sample
Restricted Sample
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

0.8

Romer-Romer
Smets-Wouters

0.6
0.4

1975

1980

1985

1990

0.2

0

-0.2

1995

Whole sample
Restricted Sample

0.4

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

-0.01

-0.015

-0.02

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

10

12

14

16

0.3
0.2
0.1

0

-0.02

0

-0.005

Romer-Romer
Smets-Wouters

-0.04
-0.05

-0.005
-0.01
Whole sample
Restricted Sample

-0.015
-0.02

1975
1980
1985
1990
Quarter in which shock is set to zero

1995

-0.025

2

4

6

8

10
12
Quarters

14

16

18

20

Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

0.4

0.005

-0.06
1970

2

0.5

-0.01

-0.03

Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

-0.005

0

20

Peak Effect on Prices

Peak Drop in Prices

Response of Unemployment

1

0.2
1970

Sensitivity to Lag Length
0

0.6

Response of Prices

Peak Rise in Unemployment

1.2

IRFs using R&R Lags

x 10

Peak Effect on Unemployment

-0.06
1970

5

Peak Effect on Industrial Production

Response of Industrial Production

Peak Drop in Industrial Production

Sensitivity to Historical Episodes
-0.01

2

4

6

8

Whole Sample
Restricted Sample

-0.01
-0.015
-0.02
-0.025

2

4

6
8
10
12
Lags of Shocks Included

14

16

Note: The left column presents peak effects of monetary policy shocks estimated using the impulse response procedure of Romer and Romer
(2004) with their lag structure, setting individual quarterly shocks equal to zero, using the original R&R shocks as well as the estimated monetary
policy shocks from Smets and Wouters (2007). The middle column presents impulse responses to Smets-Wouters shocks. Impulse responses are
estimated as in R&R, with their lag structure, over the whole sample as well as the restricted sample omitting 1979:4-1983:4. The third column
presents sensitivity of peak effects of monetary policy shocks to the number of (quarterly) lags of the Smets-Wouters shocks included in the
empirical specification, over the whole sample and the restricted sample. See section 3.3 for details.

35

Figure 12: The Contribution of Monetary Policy Shocks to Business Cycle Fluctuations
GARCH R&R Shocks

1980

0
-10

1980

10
0
-10
-20
1970

1990

20

1980

10
0
-10
-20
1970

1990

12

12

10

10

10

10

6
4

1980

Annual Inflation

15

5

0
1970

1980

1990

6
4
2
1970

1990

10

8

1980

8
6
4
2
1970

1990

1980

15

10

10

10

0
-5
1970

1980

0
-5
1970

1990

1980

1990

1980

1990

1980

1990

4

15

5

1990

6

15

5

1980

8

2
1970

1990

Annual Inflation

8

Unemployment

12

Unemployment

12

2
1970

Annual Inflation

10

-20
1970

1990

Industrial Production

-10

Smets-Wouters Shocks

20

Annual Inflation

Unemployment

Industrial Production

0

Unemployment

Industrial Production

10

-20
1970

TVC R&R Shocks

20

Industrial Production

Original R&R Shocks
20

5
0
-5
1970

Note: The dashed blue lines are actual macroeconomic variables, while the solid black lines are the predicted time paths of each macroeconomic
variable driven exclusively by identified monetary policy shocks. The first column uses the Original R&R Shocks, the second column uses the
R&R shocks estimated using GARCH, the third column uses the shocks allowing for time-varying coefficients in the Taylor rule, while the fourth
column uses Smets-Wouters (2007) shocks. Counterfactuals are based on estimating equation (1) in the text excluding the 1979:10-1983:12
period using 24 autoregressive lags and 24 lags of the shocks for industrial production and unemployment, and the model-averaging procedure for
inflation. See section 3.4 in the text for details.
36

Table 1: Predictability of Romer and Romer (2004) Shocks
1970:1-1979:9
1982:10-1996:12

1970:1-1996:12
Change in Industrial Production
Monthly Inflation
Unemployment Rate

2.28**
2.45**
1.62

0.74
1.09
0.96

Note: The table reports F-statistics for the null that all of the β’s are
equal to zero when estimating equation (2) in section 2.3 for different
right-hand side variables.
In each case, regressors include
contemporaneous values and six monthly lags. ** denotes statistical
significance at the 5% level.

37

Table 2: Lag Selection and Estimated Peak Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks
Lag Length Selection
Baseline
AIC
Averaging
Panel A: Whole Sample
Industrial Production
Standard VAR
Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks
R&R Single Equation
Unemployment
Standard VAR
Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks
R&R Single Equation
Prices
Standard VAR
Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks
R&R Single Equation
Panel B: Restricted Sample
Industrial Production
Standard VAR
Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks
R&R Single Equation
Unemployment
Standard VAR
Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks
R&R Single Equation
Prices
Standard VAR
Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks
R&R Single Equation

12
12
24

12

12
12
24

12

12
12
12

12
12
12

12
12

12

3.1
3.0
14.8 18.9

0.162
0.398
0.926

0.196
0.148
0.607

0.197
0.148
0.622

39

3.1
3.0
14.0 39.0

-0.001
-0.018
-0.042

-0.003
-0.014
-0.033

-0.003
-0.014
-0.034

9

3.2
24.8
14.4 17.9

-0.022
-0.022
-0.028

-0.018
-0.028
-0.026

-0.018
-0.026
-0.028

39

3.2
24.8
23.2 40.0

0.398
0.511
0.657

0.191
0.561
0.704

0.193
0.569
0.679

39

3.2
24.8
14.1 38.7

-0.011
-0.021
-0.044

-0.010
-0.035
-0.042

-0.010
-0.029
-0.041

3
36
36

24
3
36

12
12
24

-0.009
-0.003
-0.034

3
36
36

24

-0.009
-0.003
-0.034

3
3
48

24

-0.007
-0.016
-0.043

3
3
36

24

12

3.1
3.0
13.5 16.9

3
3
36

48

12

Estimated Peak Effects
Baseline
AIC
Averaging

Note: The table presents optimal lag length selections and associated estimated peak effects for alternative
measures of monetary policy shocks. Standard VAR corresponds to the baseline VAR approach described in
section 1, Hybrid VAR with R&R Shocks corresponds to the baseline VAR using the cumulative measure of
R&R shocks in place of the interest rate, and R&R Single Equation corresponds to the estimation procedure of
Romer and Romer (2004). The restricted sample consists of 1970:1-1979:9 and 1984:1-1996:12. Averaging
corresponds to the model-averaging procedure described in section 2.4. For the R&R Single Equation
approach, the first lag corresponds to autoregressive lags and the second to lags of the shock. Lags in the
Averaging column are weighted averages where weights come from the Averaging procedure. See section 2.4
for details.

38

Appendix 1: Description of the Model-Averaging Procedure
This section describes the model-averaging procedure used in the paper. For simplicity, I
describe the algorithm used for the single-equation method, but the same procedure applies to
the VAR framework. Assume that the DGP is given by
∑
∑
(A1)
where
is the true lag structure of the DGP, which is unobservable to the
econometrician. We are interested in estimating some moment of the data M(J*) which can be
recovered from equation (A1). These moments could include the impulse response of y to εmp
shocks, counterfactual paths of y, etc…
Step 1: Let denote the set of lag lengths considered by the econometrician. Use an
information criterion to identify optimal lag length selection from for equation (A1)
given the data, denoted by .
Step 2: For each
in the set ,
1. Estimate equation (A1) with lags and associated moments
.
2. Given the estimated parameters of (A1) conditional on , generate N artificial time
series.
3. For each n of the N artificial time series, use the information criterion to identify the
optimal lag length selection , .
4. The bootstrapped estimate of the probability of observing
when is the true lag
specification is
1
̂

,

where I is the indicator variable equal to one when the argument is true.
Step 3: Construct the model-averaging estimate of the moments of the data
̂
∑
|
̂

as

which follows Bayesian averaging with equal priors.

Estimation of Model-Averaging Procedure in Section 2.4
12 24 and goes from 3
When applied to the single-equation approach, I consider
months to 45 months in 3 month intervals. For the VAR’s, J goes from 3 months to 36 months
in 3 month intervals. In each case, N = 1,000. The moments used are the impulse responses of
each macroeconomic variable to monetary policy shocks. For the inflation counterfactuals in
Figure 12, the moments are the historical contribution of monetary policy shocks to annual
inflation.

39

Appendix Figure 1: Monte Carlo Simulation of Lag Selection by Information Criteria
35

45 degree line
Upper bound of 95% CI
for AIC

30

Selected Lag Length from AIC/BIC

25

Mean AIC Lag Selection
20

15
Lower bound of 95% CI
for AIC
10

5
Mean BIC Lag Selection

0

5

10

15

20
True Lag Length for Shocks

25

30

35

Note: The figure plots the results of a Monte Carlo simulation of equation (1) in the text for industrial production. The true autoregressive lag
length is set to 12 months, while the number of lags of monetary policy shocks in the DGP varies, as indicated on the horizontal axis. For each
value of the lag length for monetary policy shocks, 1,000 times artificial time series are generated. For each time series, the AIC and BIC are
applied to select optimal lag lengths. The mean lag selection from each approach for each true lag length for shocks is plotted in the graph. In
addition, the figure plots the 95% interval of lag selections from the AIC for each true lag length.

40

Appendix Figure 2: Original vs GARCH Romer and Romer Shocks

1969:3-1979:9 and 1982:11-1996:12
1979:10-1982:9

2

GARCH Romer and Romer Shocks

1

0

-1

-2
45 degree line

-3

-3

-2

-1
0
Original Romer and Romer Shocks

1

2

Note: The figure presents a scatter plot of the original Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks
versus the residuals from estimating the same Taylor rule by GARCH(1,1). See section 3.1 for details.

41

Appendix Figure 3: Cumulative Shocks from Romer and Romer (2004) and GARCH
6

4

Cumulative GARCH R&R Shocks

2

0

-2

-4

Cumulative original R&R Shocks

-6

-8

-10
1969

1972

1975

1978

1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

Note: The figure presents the cumulative sum of Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks and the
cumulative sum of the residuals from estimating the same Taylor rule as in Romer and Romer (2004) by
GARCH(1,1). See section 3.1 for details.

42

Appendix Figure 4: Estimated Coefficients from Time-Varying Parameters Approach
Inflation Response

Output Growth Response

0.2

0.08
0.06

0.15

0.04
0.1
0.02
0.05
0
1969

0

1971

1973

1975

1977

-0.02
1969

1979 19811983198519871989199119931995

1971

1973

1975

Unemployment

1977

1979 19811983198519871989199119931995

Interest Smoothing AR(1)

0.05

0.6

0

0.4

-0.05
0.2
-0.1
0

-0.15
-0.2
1969

1971

1973

1975

1977

-0.2
1969

1979 19811983198519871989199119931995

1971

1973

1975

1977

Interest Smoothing AR(2)

Intercept

0.2

1.5

0

1

-0.2

0.5

-0.4

0

-0.6
1969

1971

1973

1975

1977

1979 19811983198519871989199119931995

-0.5
1969

1979 19811983198519871989199119931995

1971

1973

1975

1977

1979 19811983198519871989199119931995

Note: The figure plots the estimated time-varying (smoothed) coefficients of the Taylor rule in
section 3.2. One standard deviation confidence intervals are denoted by the dashed lines.

43

Appendix Figure 5: Original Romer and Romer Shocks vs TVC Shocks
2
1969:3-1979:9 and 1982:10-1996:12
1979:10-1982:9

1.5

Time-Varying Coefficients R&R Shocks

1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
45 degree line

-2.5
-3
-3.5
-3.5

-3

-2.5

-2

-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
Original Romer and Romer Shocks

0.5

1

1.5

2

Note: The figure presents a scatter plot of the original Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks
versus the shocks estimated from the restricted Romer and Romer Taylor rule with time-varying coefficients.
See section 3.2 for details.

44

Appendix Figure 6: Cumulative Shocks from Original and TVC Romer-Romer Taylor Rule
2

1

0

Cumulative Shocks from
Romer and Romer with TVC

‐1

‐2

‐3

‐4

‐5

Cumulative original
Romer and Romer Shocks

‐6

‐7

‐8
1969

1972

1975

1978

1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

Note: The figure presents the cumulative sum of the original Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy
shocks and the cumulative sum of the shocks from the restricted Romer and Romer Taylor rule with timevarying coefficients. See section 3.2 for details.

45

Appendix Figure 7: Original Romer and Romer Shocks vs Smets-Wouters Shocks

5
1969:Q1-1979:Q3 and 1982:Q4-1996:Q4
1979:Q4-1982:Q3

4

3

Smets-Wouters Shocks

45 degree line
2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4
-4

-3

-2

-1

0
1
2
Original Romer and Romer Shocks

3

4

5

Note: The figure presents a scatter plot of the original Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks
versus Smets-Wouters (2007) shocks from an estimated DSGE model. See section 3.3 for details.

46

Appendix Figure 8: Cumulative Shocks from Romer-Romer and Smets-Wouters
20

Cumulative Smets and Wouters Shocks

15

10

5

0

Cumulative Romer and Romer Shocks

‐5

‐10
1969

1972

1975

1978

1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

Note: The figure presents a scatter plot of the original Romer and Romer (2004) monetary policy shocks
versus Smets and Wouters (2007) shocks from an estimated DSGE model. See section 3.3 for details.

47

Appendix Table 1: Monte Carlo Simulations of Information Criteria and Model-Averaging

Correct Lags (12)
Mean Lag Selection
Autoregressive Lags
Monetary Policy Shock Lags
Fraction of Correct Lag Selections

Imposed Lag Length
Insufficient Lags (6) Excessive Lags (24)

Information Criteria Lag Selections
AIC
BIC

Model-Averaging
AIC-based

12
12
na

12
6
na

12
24
na

10.5
11.5
55.6%

6.1
6.4
0.3%

14.0
14.5
na

Peak Effect of MP Shocks
Mean % Error of Estimated Peak Effect
Standard Deviation of Estimated Peak Effects

2.0%
0.0115

-57.7%
0.0085

8.7%
0.0127

-7.0%
0.0134

-56.9%
0.0099

-6.1%
0.0122

MSE of Impulse Responses
Mean
Ratio of mean MSE to when using correct lags

0.0028
1.00

0.0108
3.86

0.0038
1.36

0.0040
1.43

0.0106
3.79

0.0034
1.21

Note: The table presents results from Monte Carlo simulations of the ability of standard information criteria and a model-averaging approach to
recover the true peak effects of monetary policy shocks. The Monte Carlo simulations are done as follows. First, estimate equation (1) in the text
for industrial production and the original R&R shocks using 12 autoregressive lags and 12 lags of monetary policy shocks. This is assumed to be
the true DGP. Second, generate 1,000 artificial time series from this specification, by feeding in random draws from the estimated residuals of (1)
and the concurrent monetary policy shocks. Each time series has a burn-in sample of 100 periods then an additional 320 observations are
generated to be used in subsequent steps. Third, for each simulated time series, apply the AIC and BIC criterion to select the optimal lag length
from the set of I={6,12,24} and J={6,12,24}. Fourth, apply the model-averaging procedure described in section 2.4 to calculate conditional
probabilities to assign to each model. The first two rows of the table present the average lag selection of the AIC and BIC, as well as the mean of
the weighted average of lags from the model-averaging procedure. The third row presents the frequency at which the AIC and BIC select the true
lag specification. Fifth, for each simulated time series, I compute the estimated peak effect of monetary policy shocks on industrial production
using a) the correct lag specification (I=12, J=12), b) using fewer lags of the shocks (I=12, J=6), c) using more lags of the shocks (I=12, J=24), d)
the AIC-selected lag specification, e) the BIC-selected lag specification, and f) the model-averaging approach, which takes a weighted average of
the impulse responses across possible lag specifications where the weights are determined by the estimated conditional probabilities assigned to
each model. The fourth row of the table then displays the mean percentage error (relative to the true peak effect assumed) associated with each
approach, while the fifth row shows the standard deviation of estimated peak effects across simulations. Sixth, for each simulation, I compute the
Mean Squared Error (MSE) of each impulse response relative to the assumed true impulse response over 36 months. The last two rows display the
average MSE across simulations for each approach, as well as the ratio of these means to that achieved when using the correct lag specification.

48

Appendix Table 2: Estimated Coefficients of the Taylor Rule in Romer and Romer (2004)
Original R&R
coef
se
Constant
0.17
(0.12)
Initial Level of intended funds rate
-0.02
(0.01)
Forecasted inflation
Quarters Ahead:
-1
0.02
(0.03)
0
-0.04
(0.03)
1
0.01
(0.07)
2
0.05
(0.06)
Change in forecasted inflation since previous meeting
Quarters Ahead:
-1
0.06
(0.05)
0
0.00
(0.04)
1
0.03
(0.07)
2
-0.06
(0.07)
Forecasted output growth
Quarters Ahead:
-1
0.01
(0.01)
0
0.00
(0.01)
1
0.01
(0.02)
2
0.02
(0.03)
Change in forecasted output growth since previous meeting
Quarters Ahead:
-1
0.05
(0.03)
0
0.15
(0.04)
1
0.02
(0.04)
2
0.02
(0.04)
Forecasted UE rate, current quarter
-0.05
(0.02)

Restricted R&R
coef
se

GARCH R&R
coef
se

0.27
-0.02

(0.16)
(0.01)

0.32
-0.01

(0.09)
(0.01)

0.02
-0.06
0.04
0.03

(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.08)
(0.09)

0.02
0.00
-0.01
-0.02

(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)

0.04
0.01
0.00
-0.03

(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.10)
(0.09)

0.03
0.00
0.04
0.06

(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.05)

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04

(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.04)

0.00
0.02
0.02
0.02

(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)

0.06
0.15
0.03
-0.01
-0.07

(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.02)

0.02
0.06
0.03
-0.02
-0.06

(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.01)

0.00
0.48
0.57

(0.00)
(0.12)
(0.08)

Conditional Variance Equation (for GARCH)
Constant
Lag of Squared Residual
Lag of Forecast Variance
Sample
N

1969:3-1996:12
263

1972:11-1996:12
221

1972:11-1996:12
221

Note: The table presents estimates of the Taylor rule in Romer and Romer (2004). The first specification
replicates the OLS estimation of Romer and Romer, the second estimates the same Taylor rule by OLS starting
in 1972:11, and the third estimates the same Taylor rule by GARCH(1,1) over the restricted sample. See
section 3.1 for details.
49

