                                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THIS TIME IS THE SAME:
ING BANK PERFORMANCE IN 1998 TO EXPLAIN BANK PERFORMANCE DURING THE RECENT FINANCIAL CRIS

                                                       Rüdiger Fahlenbrach
                                                        Robert Prilmeier
                                                         René M. Stulz

                                                      Working Paper 17038
                                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w17038


                                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                  May 2011




          We thank Amit Goyal, Jun-Koo Kang, Christian Laux, Roger Loh, Angie Low, Ulrike Malmendier,
          Ron Masulis, Erwan Morellec, Lasse Pedersen, Jeremy Stein, Neal Stoughton, Rossen Valkanov, Mitch
          Warachka, Josef Zechner, and seminar participants at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
          Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Management University, University of New South
          Wales, University of Queensland, University of Sydney, University of Technology, Sydney, and Wirtschaftsuniversität
          Wien for helpful comments and suggestions. Fahlenbrach gratefully acknowledges financial support
          from the Swiss Finance Institute and the Swiss National Centre of Competence in Research on “Financial
          Valuation and Risk Management.” Part of this research was carried out while Fahlenbrach was visiting
          researcher at the University of New South Wales. Address correspondence to René M. Stulz, Fisher
          College of Business, The Ohio State University, 806 Fisher Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, stulz@cob.osu.edu.
          The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
          National Bureau of Economic Research.

          NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
          reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
          NBER publications.

          © 2011 by Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
          of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
          credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
This Time Is the Same: Using Bank Performance in 1998 to Explain Bank Performance During
the Recent Financial Crisis
Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 17038
May 2011
JEL No. G01,G21

                                                ABSTRACT

We investigate whether a bank’s performance during the 1998 crisis, which was viewed at the time
as the most dramatic crisis since the Great Depression, predicts its performance during the recent financial
crisis. One hypothesis is that a bank that has an especially poor experience in a crisis learns and adapts,
so that it performs better in the next crisis. Another hypothesis is that a bank’s poor experience in a
crisis is tied to aspects of its business model that are persistent, so that its past performance during
one crisis forecasts poor performance during another crisis. We show that banks that performed worse
during the 1998 crisis did so as well during the recent financial crisis. This effect is economically important.
In particular, it is economically as important as the leverage of banks before the start of the crisis.
The result cannot be attributed to banks having the same chief executive in both crises. Banks that
relied more on short-term funding, had more leverage, and grew more are more likely to be banks
that performed poorly in both crises.


Rüdiger Fahlenbrach                                          René M. Stulz
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)              The Ohio State University
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny Bâtiment Extranef, # 211               Fisher College of Business
1015 Lausanne                                                806A Fisher Hall
Switzerland                                                  2100 Neil Avenue
ruediger.fahlenbrach@epfl.ch                                 Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                                             and NBER
Robert Prilmeier                                             stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
810 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
prilmeier_1@fisher.osu.edu
                                                               “The worst financial crisis in the last fifty years”

                                                                                                    Robert Rubin




1.       Introduction

      The crisis that Robert Rubin, then Secretary of the Treasury, called the worst in the last fifty years

was the crisis of 1998. On August 17, 1998, Russia defaulted on its debt. This event started a dramatic

chain reaction. As one observer puts it, “the entire global economic system as we know it almost went

into meltdown, beginning with Russia's default.”1

      As Russia defaulted, a number of investors made large losses. This forced many of them to sell

securities across many markets to raise cash. Initially, the impact of the default was limited because there

was hope that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) would step in and bail out Russia. When it became

clear that this would not happen, prices of emerging market securities fell sharply and stocks across the

developed world soon followed suit. As security prices fell, the capital of investors and financial firms

was eroded. Further, volatility increased. These developments led investors and financial institutions to

reduce their risk. This caused a flight to safety, so that the prices of the safest and most liquid securities

increased relative to the prices of other securities.

      An example of the impact of the crisis ignited by the Russian default that is often cited is the collapse

of the hedge fund managed by Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM). The fund‟s investors had made

spectacular profits and the fund had almost never had a month with a negative return before the end of the

spring of 1998. During the month of August 1998, the fund lost 44% of its capital. Eventually, in

September, the Federal Reserve would coordinate a private bailout of this fund, which required an

injection of $3.5 billion from more than 10 banks. The head of the LTCM hedge fund described the

events of the time as a ten-sigma event.2 Other financial institutions also made massive losses. For


1
    See Friedman, Thomas L., The Lexus and the Olive Tree, 1999, p. 212.
2
    See Sloan, Allan, and Rich Thomas, “Riding For a Fall”, Newsweek, October 5, 1998, p. 56.

                                                          1
example, the market capitalization of both CitiGroup and Chase Manhattan fell by approximately 50% in

the two months following the Russian default.

    The impact of these events on securities with credit and liquidity risks was large. Because of the

flight to safety, U.S. Treasury securities increased in value, but the compensation that investors required

to bear the risk of other securities increased sharply. While interest rates were falling, riskier and less

liquid securities saw their yields increase relative to the yields of Treasury bonds. The president of the

Federal Reserve Bank of New York testified before Congress that “the abrupt and simultaneous widening

of credit spreads globally, for both corporate and emerging-market sovereign debt, was an extraordinary

event beyond the expectations of investors and financial intermediaries.”3 The Federal Reserve decreased

the Federal Funds target rate three times in the two months that followed the rescue of LTCM.

    The financial crisis that started in 2007 would eventually be described as the biggest financial crisis

of the last 50 years, supplanting the crisis of 1998 for that designation. The comments we cite regarding

the 1998 crisis are not different, however, from comments made in relation to the recent financial crisis.

In particular, during the recent financial crisis investors made large losses in securities that had been

designed to have a minimal amount of risk, and the unexpected losses in these securities led to fire sales,

a withdrawal of liquidity from financial markets, and a flight to quality. The similarity between the crisis

of 1998 and the recent financial crisis raises the question of how a bank‟s experience in one crisis is

related to its experience in another crisis. There is increasing evidence in finance that past experiences of

executives and investors affect their subsequent behavior and performance.4 There is anecdotal evidence

that the same is true for organizations. For instance, Lou Gerstner argues that the near-death experience of

IBM in the early 1990s explains much of its subsequent success as it enabled him to “turn IBM into a

market-driven rather than an internally focused, process-driven enterprise.” (Gerstner (2002)). If an

organization and its executives perform poorly in a crisis, it could be that they learn to do things

differently and consequently cope better with the next crisis. Further and perhaps more importantly, an

3
  Testimony of William J. McDonough, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the U.S. House
of Representatives Committee on Banking and Financial Services, “Risks of Hedge Fund Operations”, October 1,
1998.
4
  See, e.g., Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Malmendier and Nagel (2010) and Malmendier, Tate, and Yan (2011).

                                                      2
unexpected adverse event could lead an institution to assess payoff probabilities differently (for instance,

as in Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011)) or reduce its risk appetite. Therefore, one hypothesis, the

learning hypothesis, is that a bad experience in a crisis leads a bank to change its risk culture, to modify

its business model, or to decrease its risk appetite so that it is less likely to face such an experience again.

There is anecdotal evidence that executives claim they learned from the 1998 crisis. Lehman‟s CEO was

the same in 1998 and 2006. He is quoted as having said in 2008 that “We learned a ton in „98”.5 A recent

book on AIG describes one Goldman Sachs executive as having “never silenced that desire to do

something about the next 1998, about never being dependent on short-term funding again.”6 The book

goes on describing how that executive obtained authorization in 2004 for Goldman to lengthen the

maturity of its funding. Credit Suisse performed relatively well during the recent crisis and one senior

executive told one of the authors that the explanation is that they learned a lot from their difficulties in

1998.

      Another hypothesis, the business model hypothesis, is that the bank‟s susceptibility to crises is the

result of its business model and that it does not change its business model as a result of a crisis

experience, either because it would not be profitable to do so or for other reasons. For instance, recent

work by Adrian and Shin (2009) shows that broker-dealers increase their leverage in good times. Such an

outcome may be the result of them having the best business opportunities during credit booms, but it also

makes them more vulnerable if a credit boom is followed by a crisis. With this hypothesis, crisis exposure

exhibits persistence, so that a bank‟s experience in one crisis is a good predictor of its experience in a

subsequent crisis.

      We empirically test these two hypotheses against the null hypothesis that every crisis is unique, so

that a bank‟s past crisis experience does not offer information about its experience in a future crisis. We

find evidence that is strongly supportive of the business model hypothesis. We show that the stock market

performance of banks in the recent crisis is positively correlated with the performance of banks in the



5
    “At Lehman, allaying fears about being the next to fall,” by Jenny Anderson, New York Times, March 18, 2008.
6
    See Boyd (2011), p. 192.

                                                         3
1998 crisis. This result holds whether we include investment banks in the sample or not. Our key result is

that for each percentage point of loss in the value of its equity in 1998, a bank lost an annualized 66 basis

points during the financial crisis from July 2007 to December 2008. This result is highly significant

statistically. When we estimate a regression of the performance of banks during the financial crisis on

their performance in 1998 as well as on characteristics of banks in 2006, we find that the return of banks

in 1998 remains highly significant. For instance, the economic significance of the return of banks in 1998

in explaining the return of banks during the financial crisis is of the same order of magnitude as the

economic significance of a bank‟s leverage at the start of the crisis. Our results cannot be explained by

differences in the exposure of banks to the stock market.

    From the perspective of bank performance, the crisis of 1998 and the financial crisis are the same in

the sense that banks that had a near-death experience in 1998 had it again during the financial crisis –

except that during the financial crisis, the outcome was worse for the banks and the economy. An

important question is whether poor performance in one crisis makes it more likely that an institution will

fail in the next crisis. We find that banks that performed poorly in 1998 were more likely to fail in the

recent financial crisis. The effect of bank performance in 1998 on the probability of failure is extremely

strong. A one standard deviation lower return during the 1998 crisis is associated with a statistically

highly significant 5 percentage points higher probability of failure during the credit crisis of 2007/2008.

Relative to the average probability of failure of 7.5% for the sample banks, this represents an increase of

67% in failure probability. Again, this result holds whether we include or exclude investment banks in the

sample.

    A natural question to ask is whether the correlation we document is affected by cases where the

executive in charge during the financial crisis was also involved with the bank in 1998. It could be that

personality traits of the executive rather than the bank‟s business model are responsible for the bank being

positioned similarly for both crises. We investigate this possibility and find it does not explain our results.

Another possible explanation for our results is that banks remember a different aspect of the 1998 crisis.

Banks recovered rapidly from the 1998 crisis. Investors who took positions in more risky fixed-income

                                                      4
securities at the bottom of the crisis made large profits. It is possible that banks that recovered strongly

from the crisis remembered that experience subsequently and found it unnecessary to change their

business model as a result of their strong rebound. We do not find evidence supportive of this

explanation.

    Our results hold when we control for characteristics that are commonly used as determinants of stock

performance of financial institutions. However, controlling for such characteristics may lead us to

understate the economic importance of the crisis persistence of banks in that these characteristics may

result from the same unobserved characteristics of the business model that lead to poor performance

during crises. We explore further whether the banks that perform poorly in the 1998 crisis as well as in

the recent financial crisis have other common characteristics. We find that they do. We show that we can

predict poor performers in both crises using some bank characteristics in 1997 as well as the same

characteristics in 2006. In particular, the poor performers have greater reliance on short-term finance and

grow more in the three years preceding the crisis. Whereas the existing literature has emphasized the role

of short-term finance in making financial institutions vulnerable (e.g. Adrian and Shin (2010),

Brunnermeier (2009), and Gorton (2010)), we are not aware of work that has shown that faster growing

banks are more vulnerable to crises.

    Our paper is related to several recent papers on the financial crisis. Cheng, Hong, and Scheinkman

(2010) examine whether excessive executive compensation, measured as size and industry-adjusted total

compensation, is related to several risk measures of banks. They find evidence that excess compensation

is correlated with risk taking and suggest that institutional investors both pushed managers towards a

risky business model and rewarded them for it through higher compensation. Fahlenbrach and Stulz

(2011) show that banks where the incentives of CEOs were better aligned with those of shareholders did

not perform better during the crisis. Gandhi and Lustig (2010) show that a long-short portfolio where the

largest banks are bought and the smallest are sold underperforms the market by approximately 8% from

1970 to 2005. Ellul and Yerramilli (2010) find in a sample of 74 U.S. bank holding companies that those

companies with strong and independent risk management functions tend to have lower enterprise-wide

                                                     5
risk. Our paper is also related to the literature on measurement of the systemic risk exposure of individual

banks. Acharya et al. (2010) propose a model-based measure of systemic risk that they call marginal

expected shortfall. Their measure is the average return of a bank during the 5% worst days for the market

in the year prior to the onset of the crisis. Our measure, the return during the crisis of 1998, which

represents a true tail event, can also be interpreted as measuring systemic risk. De Jonghe (2010) uses

extreme value theory to generate a market-based measure of European banks‟ exposure to risk and

examines how this measure correlates with interest income and components of non-interest income such

as commissions and trading income. Finally, Adrian and Brunnermeier (2010) develop a model to

estimate the systemic risk contribution of financial institutions, ΔCoVaR. Their focus is on increasing

comovement across institutions during financial crises. In contrast, we show comovement across financial

crises at the financial institution level.

     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief overview of the events that

hit financial markets in the summer and autumn of 1998. Section 3 describes our sample construction,

offers summary statistics and contains the main empirical analysis. Section 4 discusses the results and

Section 5 shows robustness tests. Section 6 concludes.



2.     Timeline of events in 1998

     Russia had a large domestic currency debt as well as a large foreign currency sovereign debt. In 1998,

it was facing increasing problems in refinancing its debt as well as in raising funds to operate the

government. However, financial markets generally believed that Russia was too big to fail and that the

IMF and the Western countries would make sure that it would not default. Many hedge funds and

proprietary trading desks had made large bets on the belief that Russia would not default, buying large

amounts of its domestic debt and hedging it against currency risk. On August 13, 1998, the Russian stock

and bond markets collapsed on fears of currency devaluation and dwindling cash reserves of the central

bank. Moody‟s and Standard and Poor‟s downgraded Russia‟s long-term debt on the same day. On

August 17, 1998 Russia defaulted on ruble-denominated debt, stopped pegging the Russian ruble to the

                                                     6
dollar, and declared a moratorium on payments to foreign creditors. The currency collapsed as did the

banking system. Investors reassessed the risk of sovereign countries. Levered investors who made large

losses due to Russia‟s default were forced to sell securities. Banks that had large exposures to Russia and

other troubled countries suffered losses. Sovereign spreads increased dramatically. Liquidity withdrew

from securities markets.

    As liquidity withdrew, hedge funds focused on arbitrage in fixed-income markets made large losses.

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York orchestrated a bailout of Long-Term Capital Management

(LTCM), a Connecticut-based hedge fund founded by John W. Meriwether with approximately $5 billion

in equity and $100 billion in assets in the beginning of 1998 (Loewenstein (2000)). LTCM‟s net asset

value dropped by 44% during the month of August. By the end of August, its leverage had increased to 55

to 1 (Loewenstein (2000)). A bankruptcy of LTCM was considered to be very costly for big U.S. banks,

either directly through defaults on loans or indirectly because many of the highly levered derivatives

positions of LTCM had banks as counterparties and any fire sales of collateral would likely have

destroyed substantial value because of the size of the positions of LTCM. During mid-September, after

continued losses, Goldman Sachs, AIG, and Berkshire Hathaway started to work on a rescue package.

This package was rejected on September 23, 1998, and on the same day, a rescue package orchestrated by

the New York Fed was accepted. Eleven banks contributed $300 million, one contributed $125 million,

and two contributed $100 million.

    The impact of these events on securities with credit and liquidity risks was extremely large. Because

of the flight to safety, U.S. Treasury securities increased in value, but the compensation that investors

required to bear the risk of other securities increased sharply. While interest rates were falling, riskier and

less liquid securities saw their yields increase relative to the yields of Treasury bonds. By mid-October,

the U.S. stock market had lost approximately 20% of its value, with equity volatility and credit spreads at

historically high levels. The Federal Reserve responded by decreasing its target rate by three quarters of a

percent in total within two months of the rescue of LTCM.




                                                      7
       We do not review the timeline of events for the financial crisis here because it is widely known (e.g.,

Brunnermeier (2009) or Gorton and Metrick (2010)). The events of 1998 parallel those of the financial

crisis. During the financial crisis, investors made large losses in securities that had been engineered to

have a minimal amount of risk. The unexpected losses in these securities led to fire sales and to a

withdrawal of liquidity from financial markets.




3.       Empirical analysis

         This section provides information on the construction of our sample, defines the principal variables

we use in the statistical analysis, and shows our main results.



3.1.      Sample construction

       The starting point for our sample are all companies with SIC codes between 6000 and 6300 that

existed in July 1998 in the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and Standard & Poor‟s

Compustat databases. We first exclude companies with foreign incorporation because our focus is on U.S.

firms. We then reduce the sample to all those firms that also existed with the same Compustat identifier

(gvkey) or permanent CRSP company identifier (permco) in Compustat and/or CRSP at the end of 2006.

We automatically include firms in our sample that have the same gvkey, same permco, and the same or a

very similar name in 1998 and 2006.7 We manually examine firms that match on either the gvkey or

permco criterion, but where names do not match. We include all firms where the identifiers are the same,

but the name of the corporation changed (e.g., from PNC Bank Corporation (1998) to PNC Financial

Services Group Inc. (2006) or Countrywide Credit Industries Inc. (1998) to Countrywide Financial

Corporation (2006)).8


7
  We use the SAS command spedis to compare names and accept all banks as having similar names if the
command returns a spelling distance smaller than 30.
8
  Some firms changed their names because of a new geographic orientation or a change in the business model, yet
kept CRSP and Compustat identifiers. One may argue whether these are really the same firms in 1998 and 2006, but
we decided to leave them in the sample to reduce as much as possible subjective classifications on our part. Note
that including these firms will hurt our identification strategy.

                                                        8
    We allow firms to merge between 1998 and 2006. For most of our sample mergers and acquisitions,

the new entity and the acquirer have the same name. In some mergers and acquisitions, the new entity‟s

name is a mix of the names of the target and acquirer. In several other cases, the acquiring company takes

on the name of the target. In a few cases, the new entity has an entirely different name. As long as either

Compustat‟s gvkey or CRSP‟s permco is the same in 1998 and 2006, we include the merger in our

sample. Should our statistical analysis require data pre-merger, we always use, to be consistent, data from

the entity that is defined in the CRSP database as the acquiring entity.9

    In the last step, we follow Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2011) and exclude firms that are not in the

traditional banking industry, such as investment advisors (SIC 6282), online brokerages, or payment

processors. Our final sample contains 347 firms with complete return data for 1998 and 2006. For

increased transparency, we list sample firms in Appendix 1.

    We obtain stock returns from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), accounting data and

information on investment securities, trading securities, assets held for sale, and deposits from Standard

and Poor‟s Compustat, and Tier 1 capital ratios as well as net interest income and non-interest income

from Compustat banking. We collect the names of the CEOs of sample firms from CompactDisclosure in

1998 and the Corporate Library in 2006 as well as a manual search of proxy statements for firms not

covered by these data sources. Thomson Reuters‟ SDC Platinum provides data on merger dates and

transaction prices. We obtain information on notional amounts of derivatives from FR Y-9 statements for

bank holding companies from the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) Bank Regulatory database.

For the use of commercial paper, we combine information from Compustat and FR Y-9 statements.




9
  Some of the biggest banks in the United States today were the result of mergers during our sample period (e.g.,
Traveler‟s Group acquired CitiCorp to form CitiGroup. Chase Manhattan Corp. acquired J.P. Morgan & Co to form
JP Morgan Chase. NationsBank Corp acquired BankAmerica with the new entity operating under the name Bank of
America. Norwest acquired Wells Fargo with the new entity operating under the name Wells Fargo). Because some
readers may worry about whether the way we calculate 1998 crisis returns for these big mergers affects our results,
we have verified that our main results hold if we exclude all banks which do not have the same name in 1998 and
2006. This requirement reduces the sample to 288 firms. Our results remain qualitatively and quantitatively similar.

                                                         9
3.2.     Main dependent and independent variables

       We investigate the determinants of returns of individual banks using buy-and-hold returns from July

1, 2007, to December 31, 2008. Admittedly, the crisis did not end in December 2008. Bank stocks lost

substantial ground in the first quarter of 2009. However, the losses in 2009 were at least partly affected by

uncertainty about whether banks would be nationalized so that we stop calculating the buy-and-hold

returns in December 2008.10 Not all our sample banks survive until December 2008. If banks delist or

merge prior to December 2008, we put proceeds in a cash account until December 2008.11

       Some of our regressions use an indicator variable equal to one if a firm failed during the financial

crisis as the dependent variable. Firms are considered to have failed if they are on the list of failed banks

maintained by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), if they are not on the FDIC list but

have filed for Chapter 11, if they merged at a discount, or if they were forced to delist by their stock

exchange. We obtain information on the price per share paid as well as the announcement date for a

merger from Thomson Reuters‟ SDC Platinum database. A merger is judged to have occurred at a

discount if the price paid per share is lower than the target's stock price at market close one trading day

before the announcement date. An example of a merger that occurred at a discount is the acquisition of

Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase. Factiva news searches were performed to determine whether a delisting

was voluntary or forced. We attempted to ensure that voluntary delisters did not delist to preempt an

imminent forced delisting. Most voluntary delisters cited reporting obligations and other regulatory

compliance costs as the main reason for delisting. Among the banks that were forced to delist, two failed

to meet the market capitalization requirements of the NYSE and Nasdaq, respectively; one failed to

submit an audited 2006 10-K by the final deadline set by the NYSE; and one saw its trading halted and

was later delisted by NYSE Alternext after having failed to meet a deadline to raise capital or sell itself to

an investor as required by the OTS in a cease-and-desist order.



10
   However, we have also estimated regressions with buy-and-hold returns from July 2007 until December 2009. See
Section 5 for results.
11
   We have verified that our results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar if proceeds are put in a bank industry
index (using the Fama-French 49 “bank” industry).

                                                          10
       Our main explanatory variable is the return during the latter half of 1998. We construct the return

during the crisis of 1998 as follows. We fix, admittedly somewhat arbitrarily, the start of the crisis to be

August 3, 1998 (the first trading day of August 1998). We then search, for each sample firm, for the date

between August 3 and December 31, 1998 on which the firm attains its lowest (split- and dividend-

adjusted) stock price. Finally, we use daily return data to calculate buy-and-hold returns from August 3,

1998 to the low in 1998. We also calculate a rebound buy-and-hold return, which is the six-month buy-

and-hold return following the lowest price of 1998.

       Figure 1 shows returns to an equal-weighted and value-weighted index of sample banks as well as the

return to the value-weighted CRSP index between January 1998 and December 2009. Two things are

noteworthy. First, large banks (the dashed line) emerged from the crisis in 1998 faster than small banks,

but small banks (the solid line) tended to do better during much of 2000 – 2009. Second, not only banks,

but also the overall market (the dotted line) experienced severe losses during both the crisis of 1998 and

the recent credit crisis. Because of the latter point, we include a bank‟s equity beta as a measure of

systematic risk exposure in all of our regressions. We measure a bank's equity beta by estimating a market

model of weekly bank returns in excess of 3-month T-bills from January 2004 to December 2006, where

the market is represented by the value-weighted CRSP index.

       We follow Acharya et al. (2010) and approximate a bank‟s leverage as the quasi-market value of

assets divided by the market value of equity. The quasi-market value of assets is defined as book value of

assets minus book value of equity plus the market value of equity. All other control variables are

described in the table captions.



3.3.     Summary statistics

       Table 1 shows sample summary statistics. The median and mean annualized return for sample banks

was minus 30% (minus 31%) from July 2007 to December 2008. Twenty-six sample banks failed

between July 2007 and December 2009, which corresponds to 7.49 percent of all sample observations.

The median and mean return from August 3, 1998 to the lowest stock price in 1998 was approximately

                                                      11
minus 24%, and minus 26%, respectively. Banks attained their lowest stock price on average 50 trading

days after August 3, 1998 (early October 1998). Banks performed quite well during the six months

following their 1998 crisis, with median and mean rebound returns of 12% and 18%, respectively.

       For 43% of sample observations, we observe the same CEO in office in 1998 and 2006. The average

bank has $40.4 billion in assets at the end of 2006, but the median bank has only $2 billion in assets.

These numbers are substantially smaller than the mean ($129 billion) and median ($15.5 billion) total

bank assets one would obtain from banks that are in the S&P 1500 (e.g., Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2011)).

The average bank in our sample has a book-to-market ratio of 0.6 and a market capitalization of $5.4

billion. The average leverage is 7.6.

       Finally, the median and average equity beta of sample firms is equal to 0.77 and 0.70, respectively.

Banks did well in 2006, with median and mean returns of 10% and 12%, respectively. The median and

mean Tier 1 capital ratios are both in excess of 10%, so that they are well above the statutory

requirements. The minimum Tier 1 capital ratio is 5.73%, which exceeds the minimum capital

requirement.



3.4.     Do bank returns during the events of 1998 help predict bank returns during the financial

         crisis?

       We now test the three hypotheses we discussed in the introduction. The learning hypothesis implies

that the crisis return of the recent crisis is negatively related to the crisis return of 1998, while the business

model hypothesis implies a positive relation. The null hypothesis is that the returns during the two crises

are unrelated. Table 2 shows strong support for the business model hypothesis. The crisis return of 1998

has strong predictive power for the returns during the recent financial crisis. Banks that did poorly during

the crisis of 1998 again did poorly during the recent financial crisis. The effect appears both economically

and statistically significant. In the cross-section of banks, a one standard deviation higher return during

the crisis of 1998 is associated with an 8.2% lower return (0.655 x 0.125) during the recent financial

crisis. After controlling for the rebound return in 1998, the return during the calendar year 2006, the

                                                       12
equity beta, the book-to-market ratio, the log of market value, and leverage (all measured at the end of

fiscal year 2006), the effect is a 6.1% lower return during the recent crisis for a one standard deviation

lower return during the events of 1998. Relative to the sample mean for the annualized crisis return

2007/2008 of minus 31%, this corresponds to a drop of 20%. For comparison, a one standard deviation

increase in leverage is associated with a 7.0% lower return (-0.0206 x 3.395) during the recent financial

crisis. The effect is not driven by investment banks. In column 5, where we include regulatory capital and

thus exclude non-depository institutions, we find economically and statistically similar results. We do not

find support for the hypothesis that banks with stronger rebound returns remembered only that aspect of

the 1998 crisis subsequently and took more risks as a result. This hypothesis predicts a negative

coefficient on rebound returns. Once we control for other return characteristics in columns 3 to 5, the

coefficient on the six-month rebound return is indistinguishable from zero.

     Most of the control variables in column 4 have the expected sign, except for the coefficient on beta.

Similar to Beltratti and Stulz (2011), we find that banks that did well in 2006 have poor crisis returns.

Smaller banks did better during the recent crisis, as did banks with lower leverage (see, e.g., Acharya et

al. (2010)). Surprisingly, the equity beta has a positive coefficient – banks with larger exposure to the

market had better returns during the crisis.12 Coefficients of control variables in column 5, based on a

regression which excludes institutions that do not report Tier 1 capital, are qualitatively similar, but

generally of lower significance. Banks with more Tier 1 capital did better during the financial crisis.

     Our results so far are equally consistent with banks that did well in 1998 again doing well in

2007/2008 and with banks doing poorly in 1998 again doing poorly in 2007/2008. In Table 3, we analyze

whether there are asymmetries in the relation between crisis returns in 1998 and returns during the recent

crisis. We split banks into quintiles based on their crisis returns of 1998 and create indicator variables for

12
  This result is contrary to the findings reported in Acharya et al. (2010), who find a negative coefficient on beta in
regressions of crisis returns on beta and controls. Two things help explain the difference in results. Acharya et al.
(2010) measure beta over the period July 2006 to June 2007, while we measure beta over 2004-2006. When we
estimate beta over the same time period as Acharya et al. (2010), we find that beta is indistinguishable from zero.
Acharya et al. (2010) also have a smaller sample as they require financial institutions to have a market capitalization
of at least $5 billion. When we restrict our sample to the 100 largest banks in our sample, and measure beta from
July 2006 to June 2007, we find a statistically significantly negative coefficient on beta of -0.25 (compared to -0.29
in Acharya et al. (2010)).

                                                          13
each of the five groups. Quintile 1 contains all observations whose return during the crisis of 1998 is

among the 20% lowest. For consistency, we proceed similarly with the rebound returns in 1998. Table 3

reports results of regressions in which we replace the 1998 crisis and rebound returns with the quintile

indicator variables. The omitted group is quintile 5, the quintile of banks that did best during the crisis

and rebound period, respectively. Table 3 shows that banks that performed extremely poorly during the

crisis of 1998 did so again during 2007/2008. We report in column 1, which does not include other

control variables, that being in the bottom quintile in 1998 is associated with an almost 23% lower return

during the financial crisis of 2007/2008. Only the coefficient on the lowest 1998 crisis quintile indicator

variable is statistically significant, and it is much larger than the other coefficients.13

     Controlling for leverage, beta, size, and returns in 2006 attenuates the effect to a certain extent.

However, in column 2, which includes the same control variables as the regressions reported in Table 2,

the coefficient on the bottom 1998 crisis quintile indicator is still an economically significant -17% and is

also statistically significant at the one percent level. Column 3 of Table 3 shows that the effect is not

driven by investment banks. Requiring institutions to report Tier 1 capital (and thus excluding investment

banks) leads to a statistically and economically significant minus 15.6% lower crisis return if the 1998

return fell into the lowest quintile. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3 show that controlling for the 1998 rebound

return quintiles does not change the results for the 1998 crisis quintile indicator variables. Returns during

the recent financial crisis are 16.9% lower if the firm is in the bottom quintile of 1998 returns (sample of

all banks, column 4). None of the quintile indicator variables for rebound returns is statistically

significant. Results for the sample that excludes non-depository institutions yield a similar picture for the

bottom quintile crisis returns.

     Commentators have argued during the recent financial crisis that some banks may have known that

they were too big to fail, and that this might have created incentives to take on more risks than socially

optimal. Similarly, if banks knew that they were too big to fail, they may have felt less compelled to



13
  Wald tests reject the hypothesis of joint equality of 1998 crisis return quintile coefficients for all specifications
that contain banks and investment banks.

                                                            14
change their business model after the 1998 crisis, because they were reasonably certain to receive federal

assistance during the next crisis. Alternatively, it may be harder to change the business model of a large

bank. In Table 4, we split the sample of banks into two groups, based on the median value of total assets

in 2006, and repeat the regressions of Table 2, columns 3 and 4. We find that the predictive power of

1998 crisis returns is concentrated in large banks. Columns 1 and 2 show that there is no predictive power

of 1998 crisis returns in the sample of small banks. Columns 3 and 4 repeat the regressions for the sample

of large banks only. A one standard deviation higher 1998 crisis return for large banks is associated with

about 11% higher annualized crisis returns in 2007/2008.14 However, in regressions not reported in Table

4, we analyze whether the effect is concentrated in the largest banks (those with assets in excess of $50

billion) and find that there is no difference in the coefficient of 1998 crisis returns for these and all other

banks. Columns 5 through 7 report regressions that use the entire sample, and include interaction terms of

the crisis return 1998 and rebound return 1998 with an indicator variable equal to one if the bank is of

above median size. The results in columns 5 and 6 are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those

reported in columns 1 through 4. Column 7 reports results that focus on depository institutions only, and

shows that our results are not driven by investment banks. The crisis returns of 1998 have strong

predictive power for crisis returns during the financial crisis for large banks that report Tier 1 capital.

     Table 5 examines whether the predictive power of 1998 crisis returns is different for banks which had

the same CEO in 1998 and 2006. A different correlation could arise for at least two different reasons.

First, a bank CEO whose strategy led to large realized tail risk in 1998 (and who survived in his job) may

have gotten more cautious and may have reduced, relative to other banks, the risk exposure of his bank

during the build-up of the recent financial crisis. This hypothesis would predict a statistically significant

negative coefficient on an interaction term of the 1998 crisis return with a same CEO indicator variable.

On the other hand, a CEO may have certain personality traits and attitudes towards risk that are time-

invariant. In that case, and to the extent that banks do not always hire CEOs with similar traits, it could be

14
  One may be concerned that small banks‟ business model is more local so that they would not have had any direct
exposure to the kind of assets that were affected in the 1998 financial crisis, which originated in Russia. However, it
turns out that the average 1998 crisis return among large banks is -25.8%, compared to -26.0% for small banks.
Hence, on average, large and small banks seem to have been affected equally by the financial crisis of 1998.

                                                          15
that the executive‟s ideas on how to run a bank rather than the bank‟s business model itself explain our

results. If that were the case, we would expect a statistically significant positive coefficient on the

interaction term. Table 5 shows the results. The interaction variable same CEO x crisis return 1998 is not

statistically significantly different from zero in any specification. We cannot reject the hypothesis that the

predictive power of 1998 returns is the same in banks with and without the same CEO in 1998 and 2006.



3.5.     Do bank returns during the events of 1998 help predict failure during the financial crisis?

       The analysis so far has focused on stock returns. An important question to address is whether poor

performance in a crisis makes it more likely that the bank itself will be unable to survive a subsequent

crisis. If banks that perform poorly in a crisis have inherently more exposure to systemic risk, these banks

are more likely to fail during the next crisis. Table 6 shows the status of sample banks by the end of

2009.15 We classify 321 banks or 92.5% of our sample banks as having survived the crisis. Of those, 280

were listed on a major U.S. stock exchange at the end of 2009. Thirty-four banks merged during the

period July 2007 to December 2009 at a premium. We define a merger to have happened at a premium if

the price per share paid during the transaction is higher than the closing price per share on the last day

prior to the merger announcement. Seven sample banks voluntarily delisted to avoid regulatory

compliance costs. We observe 26 bank failures, which we define as banks being closed by the FDIC or

OTS (15 observations), banks merging at a discount (5 observations), forced delistings by an exchange (4

observations), or chapter 11 filings (2 observations).16 Classifying bank mergers at a discount as failures

captures the cases of Bear Stearns (discount of 67%) and Countrywide Financial (discount of 8%), among

others.

       Table 7 shows the results of probit regressions of bank failures on the same explanatory variables we

used before. All specifications report marginal effects. Poor crisis returns in 1998 are associated with a

15
   We chose to extend the time period for failures to the end of 2009, because banks may be closed by the FDIC or
OTS with a delay. Of the 26 banks we classify as failures, 11 failed during 2009.
16
   For some failures, such a classification is not clear-cut. For example, Washington Mutual Bank was seized by the
Office of Thrift Supervision, and its bank holding company, Washington Mutual, Inc., filed for chapter 11. In Table
6, we classify the Washington Mutual failure as “Closed by FDIC/OTS”, because the seizure preceded the Chapter
11 filing by one day.

                                                        16
significantly higher probability of failure during the recent credit crisis. The effects are economically

large. In the most comprehensive specification in column 4, a one standard deviation lower return during

the 1998 crisis is associated with a statistically significant 5.0% (-0.3994 x 0.125) higher probability of

failure during the credit crisis of 2007/2008. Relative to the average probability of failure for our sample

of 7.5%, this corresponds to an economically highly significant increase in the probability of failure of

67%. Regarding the control variables, it appears that larger banks were more likely to fail. Somewhat

surprisingly, neither leverage nor beta has explanatory power in the probit regressions.

     Perhaps not surprisingly, non-depository institutions had higher failure rates (4/18=22%). However,

column 5, which excludes non-depository institutions, shows that the results are quantitatively and

qualitatively similar for regressions using the sample of depository institutions.

     Overall, the results of the probit regressions are consistent with the return results of Tables 2 through

5. We show in Tables 2 to 5 that poor returns during the 1998 crisis had predictive power for the

2007/2008 crisis return, and Table 7 corroborates this finding by showing that poor returns in 1998

predict bank failure during the recent crisis. It is important to note that this result is consistent with banks

maximizing shareholder wealth in choosing their business model and their risk appetite, in that the

expected gains from positioning themselves as they did may have exceeded the expected costs for

shareholders from the resulting increase in the probability of failure.



4.     Discussion and interpretation

     We have shown strong evidence in support of the business model hypothesis in Section 3. To make

some progress towards an explanation of our key finding, we now examine the characteristics of sample

banks that were in the bottom tercile of performance in both 1998 and 2007/2008. There were 51 such

banks. We focus on three main areas. We measure the degree to which banks relied on leverage, and in

particular short-term funding. We examine market leverage, defined as before, as well as whether the

bank had an S&P rating and the ordinal measure of the institution‟s rating. We define short-term funding

as debt with maturity of less than one year, divided by total liabilities (i.e., the sum of short-term debt,

                                                      17
long-term debt, deposits, and other liabilities (Compustat acronym LT)). The data source for these

measures is Compustat. We also analyze an indicator variable equal to one if the firm uses commercial

paper, and zero otherwise. These data come from Compustat and FR Y-9, the consolidated financial

statements for bank holding companies. The second area we focus on is the rate at which banks grew their

balance sheets prior to the two crises. We measure asset growth as the annualized growth rate of total

assets during the three years preceding the 1998 crisis and the three years preceding the recent financial

crisis, respectively. Finally, we examine the degree to which banks derived their income from non-

traditional banking business. We focus on the fraction of income that is non-interest income as well as the

fraction of total assets that consists of investment securities, assets held for sale, and trading securities,

respectively. In addition, we analyze the total notional amount of derivatives outstanding. This analysis is

in the spirit of De Jonghe (2010) who examines, for a sample of European banks, how a measure of

systemic risk correlates with interest income and components of non-interest income such as commissions

and trading income.

    Table 8 shows summary statistics of key variables for bottom tercile performers at the end of fiscal

year 2006 and at the end of fiscal year 1997, the last fiscal year ends available prior to the respective

crisis. Panels A and B show results for all banks, while panels C and D show results for depository

institutions only.

    It is striking that bottom performers in both crises grew substantially faster than other financial

institutions during the three years before the start of the crisis. Before the most recent crisis, bottom

performers grew more than the other financial institutions by 70%. During the three years prior to the

1998 crisis, they grew more than the other financial institutions by 45%. Adding the 2004-2006 asset

growth rate to the regressions of Table 2, the coefficients on the 1998 return are still significant, but their

economic magnitude and statistical significance falls by 25 percent.

    Bottom performers had an approximately 30% higher leverage than other institutions prior to both

crises, with the differences being strongly statistically significant. Bottom performers relied, relative to all

other institutions, much more heavily on commercial paper and other short-term funding prior to the

                                                      18
crises of 1998 and 2007/2008. On average, 18% (27%) of liabilities were financed short-term in 2006

(1997) for bottom performers, relative to 8.5% (9%) in other financial institutions. These differences are

again highly statistically significant. In addition, bottom performers relied statistically significantly less

on financing through customer deposits,17 which account for an average of 65% (59%) of their liabilities

in 2006 (1997), as compared to 79% (84%) for other financial institutions. This evidence demonstrates

that the funding fragility that Gorton (2010) finds to have played a critical role in the propagation of the

recent crisis and that Beltratti and Stulz (2011) show to be negatively associated with bank performance

during the recent crisis was also an important determinant of the performance of financial institutions in

the 1998 crisis. However, this difference in liability structure does not appear to explain our main result.

In particular, if we add 2006 short-term funding to the principal regressions of Table 2, the coefficients of

the 1998 return are unaffected. Relatively more of the poorly performing institutions are rated, but given

there is a rating, the ordinal measure of the ratings is not different across poorly performing and other

institutions.

     Overall, there seems to be a clear difference in the liability structure of the firms that performed

poorly prior to both crises. This difference in liability structure is not driven by the non-depository

institutions, as panels C and D of Table 8, which focus on depository institutions only, show.

     We also examine differences in investment and trading positions and assets held for sale. Poorly

performing institutions held fewer investment securities prior to both crises. There is some evidence that

they also had larger trading positions and more assets held for sale, but these effects are economically

small. Panels C and D also examine, for depository institutions, differences in non-interest income and

the size of the derivatives positions. Bottom performers relied significantly less on non-interest income in

2006, but we find no difference in 1997. There are no differences in the total notional amount of

derivatives positions.18



17
  These include deposits by individuals, partnerships, and corporations.
18
  Note, however, that we do not know whether these derivatives are used for hedging or speculation. Hence, while
the notional amounts are quite similar, the use of these derivatives and its consequences for the income statement
could be very different (for more discussion, see Gorton and Rosen (1995)).

                                                        19
       Many of the variables we analyze in Table 8 are correlated, and we do not control for important bank

characteristics such as bank size. To better assess how bank characteristics are correlated with banks‟

crisis performance, we report in Table 9 probit regressions explaining whether a financial institution is in

the bottom performer group during both crises. Panel A uses 2006 firm characteristics as independent

variables, while Panel B uses 1997 firm characteristics. It might seem odd to use bank characteristics in

2006 to help understand whether a bank performed poorly in the 1998 crisis as well as in the more recent

crisis. However, the purpose of the experiment is to assess how bank characteristics are related to crisis

performance. The idea in using the 2006 characteristics is to assess whether bank characteristics at a point

in time are useful in predicting how a bank will fare in a crisis. According to model (1) in Panel A, poor

performance is correlated with short-term funding independent of leverage. At the sample mean, a one

standard deviation change in short-term funding is associated with a 6.7% (0.6214 x 0.108) larger

probability of being in the bottom performer group. This is large relative to an unconditional probability

of 14.7% of being in that group. Further, model (1) shows an extremely strong effect of asset growth. A

one standard deviation increase in asset growth is associated with a 7.8% (0.7835 x 0.099) increase in the

probability of being a bottom performer. Model (2) shows that deposits, which are highly negatively

correlated with short-term funding, are associated with a lower probability of membership in the bottom

performer group, but this result is statistically weaker.19 Leverage is significantly positive in all

regressions, and the return in 2006 is significantly positive in model (1). Model (3) adds the amount of

investment securities, trading securities, and assets held for sale on the balance sheet as explanatory

variables. The amount of investment securities held is significantly negatively associated with the

probability of being a bottom performer, with a 7.5% (-0.6184 x 0.121) decrease in probability for a one

standard deviation change in investment securities. Trading securities and assets held for sale are not

significant. Model (4) examines non-interest income. Interestingly, banks with a higher fraction of non-

interest income are less likely to become members of the bottom performer group. A one standard

deviation increase in the percentage of non-interest income is associated with a 5.1% (-0.3801 x 0.133)

19
     The correlation between deposits and short-term funding is -75.6% in 2006 and -84.7% in 1997.

                                                         20
smaller probability of being a bottom performer. Models (5) and (6) focus on commercial banks and add

the use of derivatives and commercial paper. Coefficients on these two variables are not statistically

significantly different from zero.

    Panel B examines whether the same characteristics measured in 1997 can help explain bank‟s bottom

performer status. Because of data availability, the number of observations in each regression is

substantially reduced, and income variability and the rating variable are omitted entirely. The results for

1997 firm characteristics in Panel B are weaker but generally consistent with the results using 2006

characteristics.

    The above results suggest that the correlation between returns during the 1998 financial crisis and the

recent financial crisis is at least partly due to a business model that relies on higher leverage, more short-

term funding, and stronger asset growth during the boom preceding a crisis. If this is the case, we should

expect to find that returns during the 1998 crisis predict the levels of these firm characteristics in 2006,

the year prior to the recent crisis. In Table 10, we analyze the predictive power of 1998 crisis returns for

leverage, the Tier 1 capital ratio, short-term funding, and asset growth prior to the recent crisis. We also

add the distance to default. Following Laeven and Levine (2009), we measure the distance to default as

the natural logarithm of (ROA+CAR)/volatility(ROA), where ROA is the return on assets and CAR is the

capital to assets ratio. We measure the volatility of ROA on a quarterly basis from 2003 through 2006.

    Table 10 shows that banks that did poorly in 1998 have significantly higher leverage in 2006. A one

standard deviation change in the 1998 crisis return results in a 0.47 (-3.7974 x 0.125) unit change in

leverage, or 6.2% relative to the mean. This result is essentially the same whether or not non-depository

institutions are included. Interestingly, banks that rebounded more strongly after the 1998 crisis also

appear to have higher leverage in 2006. Tier 1 capital and distance to default can only be measured for

depository institutions. Banks that did poorly in 1998 have less Tier 1 capital and a shorter distance to

default in 2006, although the latter result is not statistically significant. Model (5) shows that banks that

rebounded strongly in 1998 use more short-term funding in 2006, but this result is entirely driven by non-

depository institutions. When we focus on depository institutions (model (6)), it is again the poor

                                                     21
performers of 1998 who used more short-term funding. Models (7) and (8) also show that banks that

performed poorly in 1998 grew their assets more strongly during 2004 through 2006.20 In model (7), a one

standard deviation worse 1998 crisis return is associated with a 1.9 percentage points (0.1505 x 0.125)

higher asset growth, or 17.3% relative to the mean. In sum, the results of Table 10 are consistent with the

interpretation that the 1998 crisis return captures aspects of a bank‟s business model.



5.     Robustness

     Our main sample consists of only 347 observations. Hence, there is the danger of outliers driving

some of our results. We have estimated several additional regressions to test the robustness of the main

results in Tables 2 and 4. We have estimated median regressions, in which the sum of the absolute value

of residuals rather than the sum of the squared residuals is minimized and thus the problem of outliers is

reduced. Our results are robust to this additional specification. Table 11, columns 1 and 2, reports the

results from median regressions using the main specification from Table 2. The coefficients of the

principal variable of interest, the crisis return of 1998 remains economically strongly significant, although

the statistical significance is reduced to the twelve percent level for all banks and the five percent level for

the sample without investment banks. The results are also robust if we use either truncated or winsorized

returns for the financial crisis and/or explanatory variables to reduce the danger of outliers driving results.

     We have also estimated regressions in which we changed the time period over which we measure

returns during the recent financial crisis. When we define crisis returns during the recent crisis as returns

from July 2007 to December 2009, the predictive power of 1998 returns continues to be statistically

significant, but loses approximately one third of its economic significance.

     Our principal tests calculate buy-and-hold returns during the crisis of 1998 from August 3, 1998 to

the day each bank attains the lowest stock price. Hence, banks‟ buy-and-hold returns are not calculated

over the same time horizon. To alleviate concerns about this issue, we have re-estimated regressions in



20
  Since asset growth is measured during 2004 through 2006, the control variables for the asset growth regressions
are measured at the end of 2003. For the other regressions, control variables are measured at the end of 2005.

                                                        22
which we define crisis returns during the crisis of 1998 as starting for all banks in August 1998 and

ending either at the beginning of October 1998 or at the beginning of November 1998. Table 11, columns

3 and 4 show that the redefined 1998 crisis returns using a common cutoff for all banks of October 1,

1998 continue to have economically and statistically significant explanatory power for returns during the

recent financial crisis. Results using the November 1, 1998 cutoff lose about 25% of their economic

significance relative to the results reported in Table 11, but continue to be statistically significant. They

are omitted for brevity.

    We have attempted to ensure that changing the way we control for systematic risk exposure does not

affect our results. We have estimated beta over different time periods, using either weekly or daily data.

In addition, we have calculated the marginal expected shortfall variable of Acharya et al. (2010) and have

included it in the place of beta as a control variable in the regressions. Our main results are robust to these

alternative specifications.

    Finally, one might be concerned that our use of raw returns to calculate buy-and-hold crisis returns is

problematic. We have re-estimated the main regressions of Table 2 using market-model adjusted buy-and-

hold returns for our main dependent and independent variable. We calculate monthly market-model

adjusted crisis returns as the difference between banks‟ crisis returns and banks‟ beta times the value-

weighted CRSP return, where returns are measured in excess of the 3-month T-bill rate. Beta is estimated

from 1995-1997 for the 1998 crisis returns and from 2004-2006 (or June 2006-June 2007) for financial

crisis returns. For the 228 banks that have data going back to 1995, results using raw returns and excess

returns are qualitatively and quantitatively similar.

    Our second set of robustness tests deals with a different issue. In the interpretation of our results, we

ascribe a special importance to the performance of banks during the events of 1998 and its ability to

predict returns during the recent financial crisis. What if our proxies for systematic risk such as beta are

mismeasured and any past return has predictive power for the performance during the recent crisis?

Alternatively, what if the crisis return of 1998 also predicts returns during a calm period for banks? If any

one of these two points is true, our interpretation of the crisis return 1998 might be questioned. We

                                                        23
attempt to address these concerns in Table 12. In columns 1 and 2, we reproduce our principal regressions

of Tables 2 and 4 for comparison. In columns 3 and 4, we estimate the same regressions, but replace the

crisis return 1998 with a “placebo crisis” return for 1997. We calculate the “placebo crisis” return with

buy-and-hold returns from August 1, 1997 until 50 trading days later. We use fifty trading days because

this is the average holding period from the first trading day in 1998 until the worst day of 1998. Columns

3 and 4 of Table 12 clearly show that the placebo crisis return 1997 does not have predictive power for

the recent financial crisis. In columns 5 and 6 of Table 12 we replace the left-hand-side financial crisis

return of 2007/2008 with a “placebo crisis return” by calculating annualized buy-and-hold returns for

sample banks from July 2005 until December 2006. The results of columns 5 and 6 of Table 12 show that

the crisis return of 1998 does not have predictive power for returns from July 2005 to December 2006. It

follows from this experiment that the features of the business model that help predict crisis performance

are not helpful to predict performance outside of crises. In unreported regressions, we predict 2005/2006

returns using returns of 1997, i.e. using two periods of good bank performance. We do not find evidence

that a period of good performance predicts another period of good performance.



6.    Conclusion

We find that the stock market performance of banks during the 1998 financial crisis predicts their stock

market performance during the financial crisis of 2007/2008. Our key result is that for each percentage

point of loss in the value of its equity in 1998, a bank lost an annualized 66 basis points during the recent

financial crisis. This result holds whether we include investment banks in the sample or not. Our result

cannot be explained by differences in the exposure of banks to the stock market or the same executives

running the banks in 1998 and 2007. Our result is consistent with what we call the business model

hypothesis and inconsistent with the learning hypothesis. Banks that are negatively affected in a crisis do

not appear to subsequently alter the business model or to become more cautious regarding their risk

culture. Consequently, the performance in one crisis has strong predictive power for a crisis which starts

almost a decade later.

                                                     24
     An important caveat applies to the interpretation of our results, however. By their very nature, crises

are unexpected. We cannot exclude that banks learned from 1998 and chose to take less risk on the asset

side, but as they invested in less risky assets, those assets turned out to perform unexpectedly poorly in

the recent crisis. There is no good way to assess comprehensively the ex ante risk of the assets banks

invest in, so that there is no good way to exclude the possibility that banks that suffered more from 1998

chose to invest more safely. However, our evidence shows that the banks that performed poorly in both

crises had more risky funding, higher leverage, and greater growth than other banks before the crises.

Hence, our evidence does suggest that banks did not change fundamental aspects of their business

strategy as a result of their performance in the 1998 crisis.

     Given our main result, some of the events subsequent to 1998 that have been argued to have played a

key role in the performance of banks during the financial crisis have to be put in perspective. The

Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) was signed into law in November 1999. GLBA repealed central

provisions of the Glass-Steagall Act that restricted bank holding companies from affiliating with

securities firms and insurance companies. Leading economists have suggested that the recent financial

crisis can be, in part, blamed on GLBA.21 The strong return predictability of 1998 crisis returns for the

financial crisis of 2007/2008 shows that part of the performance of banks during the recent crisis can be

attributed to factors that already existed before the enactment of GLBA or other regulatory decisions such

as the Commodities Futures Modernization Act or the SEC‟s amendments to the broker-dealer net capital

rule.

     Though we provide evidence that the banks that perform poorly in both crises are more reliant on

short-term market funding than other banks and grow more in the three years before the crisis, we do not

find that reliance on short-term market funding and greater asset growth are sufficient to explain our

result that returns during the recent crisis are predictable from returns of the 1998 crisis. Consequently,

21
   For example, Paul Krugman has argued that: “[…] aside from Alan Greenspan, nobody did as much as Mr.
Gramm to make this crisis possible” (New York Times, Taming the beast, March 24, 2008). Joseph Stiglitz is
quoted in an article on how GLBA helped to create the current economic crisis as saying: “As a result, the culture of
investment banks was conveyed to commercial banks and everyone got involved in the high-risk gambling
mentality. That mentality was core to the problem that we're facing now” (ABC news, Who‟s whining now? Gramm
slammed by economists, Marcus Baram, Sep 19, 2008).

                                                         25
further research should attempt to isolate aspects of a firm‟s business model or culture that can explain

this predictability. Cheng, Hong, and Scheinkman (2010) show that compensation practices in the late

1990s help explain the performance of banks during the recent crisis. Compensation practices can also be

a manifestation of the deeper fundamentals that lead to persistence in crisis exposure.

    In the absence of quantifiable information about a bank‟s business model or culture that could be used

to measure its sensitivity to crises, our evidence shows that there is strong persistence in crisis exposure

for crises that are ten years apart so that a bank‟s performance in one crisis is an important measure of its

inherent riskiness and exposure to crises.




                                                     26
References

    Acharya, Viral V., Lasse H. Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, and Matthew Richardson, 2010, Measuring

systemic risk, Working Paper, New York University.

    Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2010, CoVaR, Working Paper, Princeton University.

    Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial Intermediation

19, 418-437.

    Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Shin, 2009, Money, liquidity and monetary policy, American Economic

Review 99, 600-605.

    Beltratti, Andrea, and René M. Stulz, 2011, Why did some banks perform better during the credit

crisis? A cross-country study of the impact of governance and regulation, Journal of Financial

Economics, forthcoming.

    Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of managers on

firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.

    Boyd, Roddy, 2011, Fatal Risk, Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey.

    Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008, Journal of

Economic Perspectives 23, 77-100.

    Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong, and Jose A. Scheinkman, 2010, Yesterday‟s heroes: Compensation

and creative risk-taking, NBER Working Paper No. 16176.

    De Jonghe, Olivier, 2010, Back to the basics in banking? A micro-analysis of banking system

stability, Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 387-417.

    Ellul, Andrew, and Vijay Yerramilli, 2010, Stronger risk controls, lower risk: Evidence from U.S.

bank holding companies, Working Paper, Indiana University.

    Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, and René M. Stulz, 2011, Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis, Journal

of Financial Economics 99, 11-26.

    Gandhi, Priyank, and Hanno Lustig, 2010, Size anomalies in U.S. bank stock returns: A fiscal

explanation, Working Paper, UCLA.

                                                   27
    Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2011, Neglected risks, financial innovation,

and financial fragility, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

    Gerstner, Louis V. Jr., 2002, Who Says Elephants Can't Dance? Inside IBM's Historic Turnaround,

Collins, New York, New York.

    Gorton, Gary, 2010, Slapped by the invisible hand, Oxford University Press, Oxford, England.

    Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2010, Securitized banking and the run on repo, Journal of

Financial Economics, forthcoming.

    Gorton, Gary, and Richard Rosen, 1995, Banks and derivatives, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 10,

299-339.

    Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine, 2009, Bank governance, regulation and risk taking, Journal of

Financial Economics, 93, 259-275.

    Loewenstein, Roger, 2000, When genius failed: The rise and fall of Long-Term Capital Management,

Random House Publishing Group, New York, New York.

    Malmendier, Ulrike, Geoffrey Tate, and Jon Yan, 2011, Overconfidence and early-life experiences:

The effect of managerial traits on corporate financial policies, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

    Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2010, Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences

affect risk taking?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.




                                                    28
Appendix 1
The appendix lists all sample firms. Shown is the name as it appears in the field “comnam” of the
Compustat database at the end of fiscal year 2006.
1ST SOURCE CORP                   CENTRAL PACIFIC FINANCIAL          FIDELITY SOUTHERN CORP NEW
ABIGAIL ADAMS NATL BANCORP        CORP                               FIFTH THIRD BANCORP
INC                               CENTRAL VIRGINIA BANKSHARES        FIRST ALBANY COS INC
ALABAMA NATIONAL BANCORP          INC                                FIRST BANCORP NC
DEL                               CENTRUE FINANCIAL CORP NEW         FIRST BANCORP P R
AMCORE FINANCIAL INC              CENTURY BANCORP INC                FIRST BANCSHARES INC MO
AMERIANA BANCORP                  CHARTERMAC                         FIRST CHARTER CORP
AMERICAN WEST                     CHEMICAL FINANCIAL CORP            FIRST CITIZENS BANCSHARES INC
BANCORPORATION                    CHITTENDEN CORP                    NC
AMERIS BANCORP                    CITIGROUP INC                      FIRST COMMONWEALTH
AMERISERV FINANCIAL INC           CITIZENS BANKING CORP MI           FINANCIAL COR
AMERITRANS CAPITAL CORP           CITIZENS SOUTH BANKING CORP        FIRST DEFIANCE FINANCIAL CORP
ANCHOR BANCORP WISCONSIN          DEL                                FIRST FEDERAL BANCSHARES
INC                               CITY HOLDING CO                    ARK INC
ANNAPOLIS BANCORP INC             CITY NATIONAL CORP                 FIRST FEDERAL BANKSHARES INC
ARROW FINANCIAL CORP              COBIZ INC                          DEL
ASTORIA FINANCIAL CORP            CODORUS VALLEY BANCORP INC         FIRST FINANCIAL BANCORP OHIO
AUBURN NATIONAL BANCORP           COLONIAL BANCGROUP INC             FIRST FINANCIAL BANKSHARES
B B & T CORP                      COLONY BANKCORP INC                INC
B C S B BANKCORP INC              COLUMBIA BANKING SYSTEM INC        FIRST FINANCIAL CORP IN
B O K FINANCIAL CORP              COMERICA INC                       FIRST FINANCIAL HOLDINGS INC
BANCFIRST CORP                    COMM BANCORP INC                   FIRST FINANCIAL SERVICE CORP
BANCORP RHODE ISLAND INC          COMMERCE BANCORP INC NJ            FIRST HORIZON NATIONAL CORP
BANCORPSOUTH INC                  COMMERCE BANCSHARES INC            FIRST INDIANA CORP
BANCTRUST FINANCIAL GROUP         COMMERCIAL NATIONAL FINL           FIRST KEYSTONE FINANCIAL INC
INC                               CORP                               FIRST LONG ISLAND CORP
BANK GRANITE CORP                 COMMUNITY BANK SHRS                FIRST M & F CORP
BANK NEW YORK INC                 INDIANA INC                        FIRST MARINER BANCORP
BANK OF AMERICA CORP              COMMUNITY BANK SYSTEM INC          FIRST MERCHANTS CORP
BANK OF HAWAII CORP               COMMUNITY BANKS INC PA             FIRST MIDWEST BANCORP DE
BANK OF THE OZARKS INC            COMMUNITY BANKSHARES INC S         FIRST MUTUAL BANCSHARES INC
BANK SOUTH CAROLINA CORP          C                                  FIRST NIAGARA FINL GROUP INC
BANKATLANTIC BANCORP INC          COMMUNITY CAPITAL CORP             NEW
BANKUNITED FINANCIAL CORP         COMMUNITY FINANCIAL CORP           FIRST REGIONAL BANCORP
BANNER CORP                       COMMUNITY TRUST BANCORP            FIRST REPUBLIC BANK S F
BAR HARBOR BANKSHARES             INC                                FIRST SOUTH BANCORP INC
BEAR STEARNS COMPANIES INC        COMMUNITY WEST BANCSHARES          FIRST STATE BANCORPORATION
BEVERLY HILLS BANCORP INC         COMPASS BANCSHARES INC             FIRST UNITED CORP
BLUE RIVER BANCSHARES INC         COOPERATIVE BANCSHARES INC         FIRST WEST VIRGINIA BANCORP
BNCCORP                           CORUS BANKSHARES INC               INC
BOE FINANCIAL SVCS OF VA INC      COUNTRYWIDE FINANCIAL CORP         FIRSTFED FINANCIAL CORP
BOSTON PRIVATE FINL HLDS INC      COWLITZ BANCORPORATION             FIRSTMERIT CORP
BRITTON & KOONTZ CAPITAL          CULLEN FROST BANKERS INC           FLAGSTAR BANCORP INC
CORP                              DEARBORN BANCORP INC               FLUSHING FINANCIAL CORP
BROADWAY FINANCIAL CORP           DIME COMMUNITY BANCSHARES          FREMONT GENERAL CORP
DEL                               DORAL FINANCIAL CORP               FRONTIER FINANCIAL CORP
BROOKLINE BANCORP INC             DOWNEY FINANCIAL CORP              FULTON FINANCIAL CORP PA
BRYN MAWR BANK CORP               E S B FINANCIAL CORP               G S FINANCIAL CORP
C & F FINANCIAL CORP              EASTERN VIRGINIA BANKSHARES        GERMAN AMERICAN BANCORP
C C F HOLDING COMPANY             INC                                INC
C F S BANCORP INC                 ELMIRA SAVINGS BANK FSB NY         GLACIER BANCORP INC NEW
C V B FINANCIAL CORP              F F D FINANCIAL CORP               GREAT PEE DEE BANCORP
CAMCO FINANCIAL CORP              F M S FINANCIAL CORP               GREAT SOUTHERN BANCORP INC
CAMDEN NATIONAL CORP              F N B CORP PA                      GREATER BAY BANCORP
CAPITAL BANK CORP NEW             F N B CORP VA                      GREATER COMMUNITY BANCORP
CAPITAL CITY BANK GROUP           F N B FINANCIAL SERVICES CORP      GUARANTY FEDERAL
CAPITAL CORP OF THE WEST          F N B UNITED CORP                  BANCSHARES INC
CAPITOL BANCORP LTD               FARMERS CAPITAL BANK CORP          H F FINANCIAL CORP
CARDINAL FINANCIAL CORP           FEDERAL AGRICULTURAL MORT          H M N FINANCIAL INC
CARROLLTON BANCORP                CORP                               HABERSHAM BANCORP INC
CARVER BANCORP INC                FEDERAL HOME LOAN                  HANCOCK HOLDING CO
CASCADE BANCORP                   MORTGAGE CORP                      HARLEYSVILLE NATIONAL CORP
CASCADE FINANCIAL CORP            FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE          PA
CATHAY GENERAL BANCORP            ASSN                               HARLEYSVILLE SAVINGS FINAN
CENTER BANCORP INC                FEDERAL TRUST CORP                 CORP
CENTRAL BANCORP INC               FIDELITY BANCORP INC               HERITAGE COMMERCE CORP

                                               29
HERITAGE FINANCIAL CORP WA     NORTHWAY FINANCIAL INC         SOVEREIGN BANCORP INC
HINGHAM INSTITUTION FOR SVGS   NORTHWEST BANCORP INC PA       STATE BANCORP INC NY
MA                             NORWOOD FINANCIAL CORP         STERLING BANCORP
HOME FEDERAL BANCORP           OAK HILL FINANCIAL INC         STERLING BANCSHARES INC
HOPFED BANCORP INC             OCEANFIRST FINANCIAL CORP      STERLING FINANCIAL CORP
HORIZON FINANCIAL CORP WASH    OCWEN FINANCIAL CORP           STERLING FINANCIAL CORP
HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INC      OHIO VALLEY BANC CORP          WASH
I T L A CAPITAL CORP           OLD NATIONAL BANCORP           STUDENT LOAN CORP
IBERIABANK CORP                OLD SECOND BANCORP INC         SUFFOLK BANCORP
INDEPENDENCE FEDERAL           OMEGA FINANCIAL CORP           SUN BANCORP INC
SAVINGS BK                     OPPENHEIMER HOLDINGS INC       SUNTRUST BANKS INC
INDEPENDENT BANK CORP MA       ORIENTAL FINANCIAL GROUP INC   SUSQUEHANNA BANCSHARES INC
INDEPENDENT BANK CORP MICH     P A B BANKSHARES INC           PA
INDYMAC BANCORP INC            P F F BANCORP INC              SUSSEX BANCORP
INTEGRA BANK CORP              P N C FINANCIAL SERVICES GRP   SYNOVUS FINANCIAL CORP
INTERNATIONAL BANCSHARES       INC                            T C F FINANCIAL CORP
CORP                           P V F CAPITAL CORP             T F FINANCIAL CORP
INTERVEST BANCSHARES CORP      PACIFIC CAPITAL BANCORP NEW    T I B FINANCIAL CORP
IRWIN FINANCIAL CORP           PACIFIC PREMIER BANCORP INC    TECHE HOLDING CO
JACKSONVILLE BANCORP INC       PAMRAPO BANCORP INC            TIMBERLAND BANCORP INC
JEFFERIES GROUP INC NEW        PARK BANCORP INC               TOMPKINS TRUSTCO INC
JEFFERSONVILLE BANCORP         PARK NATIONAL CORP             TRICO BANCSHARES
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO            PARKVALE FINANCIAL CORP        TRUSTCO BANK CORP NY
KEYCORP NEW                    PATHFINDER BANCORP INC         TRUSTMARK CORP
L S B BANCSHARES N C           PATRIOT NATIONAL BANCORP       U M B FINANCIAL CORP
L S B CORP                     INC                            U S B HOLDING CO INC
L S B FINANCIAL CORP           PENNSYLVANIA COMMERCE          U S BANCORP DEL
LAKELAND FINANCIAL CORP        BANCORP IN                     UMPQUA HOLDINGS CORP
LANDMARK BANCORP INC           PEOPLES BANCORP                UNION BANKSHARES CORP
LEESPORT FINANCIAL CORP        PEOPLES BANCORP INC            UNIONBANCAL CORP
LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS       PEOPLES BANCORP NC INC         UNITED BANCORP INC
INC                            PEOPLES BANCTRUST CO INC       UNITED BANKSHARES INC
M & T BANK CORP                PEOPLES BANK BRIDGEPORT        UNITED COMMUNITY FINL CORP
M A F BANCORP INC              PINNACLE BANCSHARES INC        OHIO
M B FINANCIAL INC NEW          POPULAR INC                    UNITY BANCORP INC
M F B CORP                     PREMIER COMMUNITY              UNIVERSITY BANCORP INC
MAINSOURCE FINANCIAL GROUP     BANKSHARES INC                 VALLEY NATIONAL BANCORP
INC                            PREMIER FINANCIAL BANCORP      VIRGINIA COMMERCE BANCORP
MARSHALL & ILSLEY CORP         INC                            W HOLDING CO INC
MASSBANK CORP                  PRINCETON NATIONAL BANCORP     WACHOVIA CORP 2ND NEW
MAYFLOWER CO OPERATIVE BK      INC                            WAINWRIGHT BANK & TRUST CO
MA                             PROVIDENT BANKSHARES CORP      BOSTN
MEDALLION FINANCIAL CORP       PROVIDENT COMMUNITY            WASHINGTON BANKING
MERCHANTS BANCSHARES INC       BANCSHRS INC                   COMPANY
MERRILL LYNCH & CO INC         PROVIDENT FINANCIAL            WASHINGTON FEDERAL INC
META FINANCIAL GROUP INC       HOLDINGS INC                   WASHINGTON MUTUAL INC
MID PENN BANCORP INC           PULASKI FINANCIAL CORP         WASHINGTON SAVINGS BANK FSB
MIDSOUTH BANCORP INC           Q C R HOLDINGS INC             WASHINGTON TRUST BANCORP
MIDWEST BANC HOLDINGS INC      REGIONS FINANCIAL CORP NEW     INC
MIDWESTONE FINANCIAL GROUP     RENASANT CORP                  WAYNE SAVINGS BANCSHARES
INC                            REPUBLIC BANCORP INC KY        INC NEW
MORGAN STANLEY DEAN WITTER     REPUBLIC FIRST BANCORP INC     WEBSTER FINL CORP
& CO                           RIVER VALLEY BANCORP           WATERBURY CONN
MUNICIPAL MORTGAGE & EQUITY    RIVERVIEW BANCORP INC          WELLS FARGO & CO NEW
LLC                            ROYAL BANCSHARES PA INC        WESBANCO INC
N B T BANCORP INC              S & T BANCORP INC              WEST COAST BANCORP ORE NEW
NARA BANCORP INC               S C B T FINANCIAL CORP         WESTAMERICA
NATIONAL CITY CORP             S L M CORP                     BANCORPORATION
NATIONAL PENN BANCSHARES       S V B FINANCIAL GROUP          WHITNEY HOLDING CORP
INC                            S Y BANCORP INC                WILMINGTON TRUST CORP
NEW HAMPSHIRE THRIFT           SANDY SPRING BANCORP INC       WINTRUST FINANCIAL
BNCSHRS INC                    SAVANNAH BANCORP INC           CORPORATION
NEW YORK COMMUNITY             SEACOAST BANKING CORP FLA      WORLD ACCEPTANCE CORP
BANCORP INC                    SECURITY BANK CORP             WSFS FINANCIAL CORP
NORTH CENTRAL BANCSHARES       SHORE FINANCIAL CORP           WVS FINANCIAL CORP
INC                            SIMMONS 1ST NATIONAL CORP      YARDVILLE NATIONAL BANCORP
NORTH VALLEY BANCORP           SLADES FERRY BANCORP           ZIONS BANCORP
NORTHEAST BANCORP              SOUTH FINL GROUP INC
NORTHERN STATES FINANCIAL      SOUTHSIDE BANCSHARES INC
CORP                           SOUTHWEST BANCORP INC OKLA
NORTHERN TRUST CORP            SOUTHWEST GEORGIA FINANCIAL
NORTHRIM BANCORP INC           CORP


                                           30
                                                        Bank sample indices 1998-2009

                   150 200 250
         Index Value
           100      50
                              98

                                     99

                                            00

                                                   01

                                                           02

                                                                  03

                                                                          04

                                                                                 05

                                                                                        06

                                                                                               07

                                                                                                      08

                                                                                                             09

                                                                                                                    10
                            19

                                   19

                                          20

                                                 20

                                                         20

                                                                20

                                                                        20

                                                                               20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                  20
                                                                        Year

                                                  EW Sample Index                      VW Sample Index
                                                  VW CRSP Index



Figure 1: Equally-weighted and value-weighted indices of bank returns

The figure plots the value of two stock price indices constructed for sample banks from January
1998 through December 2009 as well as a value-weighted market index. “EW Sample Index”
represents an equal-weighted index and “VW Sample Index” is the value-weighted index of the
bank stocks in the sample. Both indices are rebalanced monthly. The sample consists of 347
banks that were in existence under the same or similar name in July 1998 and July 2007. Before
and after these dates, the indices consist of fewer banks due to IPOs (before July 1998) and
delistings (after July 2007). In January 1998, there are 309 bank stocks and in December 2009,
there are 281 bank stocks remaining in the sample. “VW CRSP Index” is the index constructed
using the value-weighted return for stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq, as reported by
CRSP.




                                                                       31
Table 1: Sample summary statistics
The table presents summary statistics for the sample of 347 banks. “Financial crisis return” is the annualized stock return from July 2007 through December 2008. If a
bank was delisted during the period from July 2007 to December 2008, the return (including delisting return) until the last day of listing was used, and proceeds were
put into a cash index until December 2008. “Bank failed” is an indicator variable equal to one if the bank was closed by the FDIC/OTS, merged at a discount relative
to the last close prior to the merger announcement, or was forced to delist by an exchange during the period from July 2007 to December 2009. “Crisis return 1998” is
the bank's stock return from August 3, 1998 (the first trading day in August 1998) until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its lowest price. If the lowest
price occurs more than once, the return is calculated using the first date on which it occurs. “Days in crisis 1998” reports the number of trading days from August 1,
1998 to the date of the lowest price. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return over the six months following the date on which the lowest price first occurs. “Placebo
return 1997” measures a hypothetical crisis return from August 1, 1997 (the first trading day in August 1997) over the following 50 trading days, i.e. the average of the
“days in crisis 1998” variable. “Return 2005 – 2006” is the annualized stock return from July 2005 through December 2006. “Same CEO in 1998” is an indicator
variable equal to one if the CEO at the end of fiscal year 2006 was already in office on August 1, 1998, and zero otherwise. Accounting data are measured at the end of
fiscal year 2006 and include the book-to-market ratio (book value of common equity divided by market value of common equity), leverage (book value of assets minus
book value of equity plus market value of equity, divided by market value of equity), the natural log of the market value of the bank's equity, and the Tier 1 capital
ratio as reported in the Compustat Bank database. Other firm characteristics are the bank‟s stock return during calendar year 2006 and the bank's equity beta (obtained
from a market model of weekly returns in excess of 3-month T-bills from January 2004 to December 2006, where the market is represented by the value-weighted
CRSP index).

                                           Number            Min            Lower            Median           Upper            Max             Mean           Standard
                                                                            Quartile                         Quartile                                         deviation
Financial crisis return                      347             -1.00           -0.54            -0.30           -0.05            0.47            -0.31             0.33
Bank failed                                  347              0.00            0.00             0.00            0.00            1.00             0.07             0.26
Crisis return 1998                           347             -0.97           -0.32            -0.24           -0.18            0.00            -0.26             0.12
Days in crisis 1998                          347              0.00           44.00            47.00           53.00          105.00            50.39            23.90
Rebound return 1998                          346             -0.21            0.04             0.12            0.24            1.84             0.18             0.26
Placebo return 1997                          304             -0.19            0.07             0.13            0.21            0.80             0.15             0.12
Return 2005 – 2006                           347             -0.68            0.01             0.08            0.17            0.77             0.10             0.15
Same CEO in 1998                             347              0.00            0.00             0.00            1.00            1.00             0.43             0.50
Beta                                         347             -0.52            0.22             0.77            1.13            1.83             0.70             0.51
Return in 2006                               347             -0.73            0.01             0.10            0.20            0.82             0.12             0.18
Total assets                                 347             56.02          794.54          2047.54          7371.13       1884318.00        40385.84        184549.47
Total liabilities                            347             34.26          727.17          1813.96          6083.51       1764535.00        37474.62        172172.47
Book-to-market                               346              0.19            0.45             0.57            0.73            1.35             0.60             0.19
Market capitalization                        347              8.84          105.45           366.52          1258.24        273598.06         5439.75        24565.06
Leverage                                     346              1.28            5.61             6.71            8.71           38.20             7.57             3.39
Tier 1 capital ratio                         319              5.73            8.93            10.53           12.23           21.94            10.86             2.65




                                                                                   32
Table 2: Buy-and-hold returns during the financial crisis and returns during the crisis of 1998
The table shows results from cross-sectional regressions of annualized buy-and-hold returns for banks from July
2007 to December 2008 on the banks' performance during the crisis of 1998 and firm characteristics. If a bank was
delisted during the period from July 2007 to December 2008, the return (including delisting return) until the last day
of listing was used, and proceeds were put into a cash index until December 2008. “Crisis return 1998” is the bank's
stock return from the first trading date in August 1998 until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its
lowest price. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return over the six months after the date on which the lowest price
occurs. Control variables include the bank's equity beta measured during 2004 – 2006 and the stock return in
calendar year 2006. The additional control variables are measured at the end of fiscal year 2006 and include the
book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of the bank's equity, leverage, and the Tier 1 capital ratio.
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.


                                      (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
Crisis return 1998                0.6550***                        0.5602***        0.4895***       0.4409***
                                    (4.73)                           (3.45)           (3.11)          (2.59)

Rebound return 1998                               -0.1966***         -0.0841          0.0535          -0.0122
                                                    (-2.90)           (-1.13)         (0.66)           (-0.11)

Return in 2006                                                                      -0.2591**        -0.2023*
                                                                                      (-2.55)         (-1.77)

Book-to-market                                                                       -0.1847        -0.3627***
                                                                                      (-1.54)         (-3.25)

Log (market value)                                                                 -0.0488***         -0.0194
                                                                                     (-4.11)           (-1.44)

Beta                                                                                0.1195***        0.0887**
                                                                                      (3.10)           (2.16)

Leverage                                                                           -0.0206***
                                                                                     (-3.28)

Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                                0.0192***
                                                                                                      (2.81)

Constant                          -0.1365***      -0.2693***       -0.1455***       0.3243***         -0.0864
                                    (-3.43)         (-12.61)         (-3.50)          (2.85)           (-0.54)
Number of observations                347             346              346             345               318
R-squared                             0.06            0.02             0.06            0.16              0.13




                                                         33
Table 3: Buy-and-hold returns during the financial crisis and returns during the crisis of 1998 –
Return quintiles
The table shows cross-sectional regressions of annualized buy-and-hold returns for banks from July 2007 to
December 2008 on the banks' performance during the crisis of 1998 and firm characteristics. If a bank was delisted
during the period from July 2007 to December 2008, the return (including delisting return) until the last day of
listing was used, and proceeds were put into a cash index until December 2008. Banks are sorted into return
quintiles based on the crisis return 1998. “Crisis return 1998” is a bank's stock return from the first trading date in
August 1998 until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its lowest price. “Crisis return 1998 Q1/Q2...”
denotes banks whose stock returns during the crisis of 1998 were in the lowest/second lowest return quintile for that
period, and so forth. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return over the six months after the date on which the
lowest price occurs. “Rebound return 1998 Q1/Q2...” indicates that the bank's return reversal was within the
lowest/second lowest quintile, and so forth. Control variables include the bank's equity beta measured during 2004 –
2006 and the stock return in calendar year 2006. The additional control variables are measured at the end of fiscal
year 2006 and include the book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of the bank's equity, leverage,
and the Tier 1 capital ratio. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                         34
                             (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)          (5)
Crisis return 1998 Q1    -0.2296***   -0.1697***       -0.1560***   -0.1687***   -0.1437**
                           (-4.21)      (-3.18)          (-2.75)      (-2.99)      (-2.42)

Crisis return 1998 Q2     -0.0393      -0.0308          -0.0642      -0.0303      -0.0618
                           (-0.72)      (-0.59)          (-1.18)      (-0.57)      (-1.13)

Crisis return 1998 Q3     -0.0727      -0.0729          -0.0891*     -0.0743      -0.0882
                           (-1.33)      (-1.39)          (-1.67)      (-1.41)      (-1.64)

Crisis return 1998 Q4     -0.0087      -0.0195          -0.0288      -0.0195      -0.0275
                           (-0.16)      (-0.37)          (-0.54)      (-0.37)      (-0.51)

Rebound return 1998 Q1                                               0.0107       0.0623
                                                                     (0.18)       (1.01)

Rebound return 1998 Q2                                               -0.0153      0.0099
                                                                      (-0.25)     (0.16)

Rebound return 1998 Q3                                               0.0181       0.0488
                                                                     (0.31)       (0.82)

Rebound return 1998 Q4                                               0.0129       0.0463
                                                                     (0.23)       (0.81)

Return in 2006                        -0.2696***        -0.1973*    -0.2650***    -0.1898
                                        (-2.66)          (-1.72)      (-2.59)      (-1.63)

Book-to-market                         -0.2087*        -0.3818***    -0.2150*    -0.3934***
                                        (-1.75)          (-3.40)      (-1.77)      (-3.47)

Log (market value)                    -0.0439***        -0.0181     -0.0442***    -0.0154
                                        (-4.05)          (-1.45)      (-3.70)      (-1.13)

Beta                                  0.1133***        0.0816**     0.1121***     0.0775*
                                        (2.92)           (1.98)       (2.85)       (1.85)

Leverage                              -0.0195***                    -0.0193***
                                        (-3.15)                       (-3.09)

Tier 1 capital ratio                                   0.0191***                 0.0195***
                                                         (2.79)                    (2.83)

Constant                 -0.2358***   0.2468**          -0.1252      0.2461*      -0.1740
                           (-6.09)      (2.19)           (-0.80)      (1.81)       (-1.01)
Number of observations       347         346               319         346           319
R-squared                    0.06        0.17              0.14        0.17          0.14




                                                  35
       Table 4: Differences between small banks and large banks
       The table shows cross-sectional regressions of annualized buy-and-hold returns for banks from July 2007 to
       December 2008 on the banks' performance during the crisis of 1998 and firm characteristics If a bank was delisted
       during the period from July 2007 to December 2008, the return (including delisting return) until the last day of
       listing was used, and proceeds were put into a cash index until December 2008. The sample is split into small bank
       and large bank subsamples based on whether the bank's book value of assets at the end of fiscal year 2006 is below
       or above the sample median. “Crisis return 1998” is the bank's stock return from the first trading day in August 1998
       until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its lowest price. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return
       over the six months after the date on which the lowest price occurs. Control variables include the bank's equity beta
       measured during 2004 – 2006 and the stock return in calendar year 2006. The additional control variables are
       measured at the end of fiscal year 2006 and include the book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of
       the bank's equity, leverage, and the Tier 1 capital ratio. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and *
       indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                    Small banks                   Large banks                          Full sample
                                 (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)
Crisis return 1998             0.2051        0.1825        0.9240***     0.8897***        0.2051         0.0825         0.1208
                               (1.05)        (0.93)          (3.47)        (3.62)         (0.95)         (0.40)         (0.55)

Crisis return 1998                                                                       0.7189**      0.9222***       0.7802**
x Large bank                                                                               (2.20)        (2.96)          (2.36)

Rebound return 1998            0.1359         0.0776        -0.0896        0.1400         0.1359         0.0572        -0.1113
                               (1.00)         (0.57)         (-0.86)       (1.19)         (0.90)         (0.40)         (-0.71)

Rebound return 1998                                                                       -0.2256        0.1274         0.2857
x Large bank                                                                               (-1.26)       (0.71)         (1.29)

Large bank                                                                              0.2338***      0.3027***      0.2609***
                                                                                          (2.81)         (3.29)         (2.70)

Return in 2006                               -0.1606                      -0.3187**                    -0.2526**       -0.1779
                                              (-1.23)                       (-2.04)                      (-2.48)        (-1.56)

Book-to-market                               -0.0894                      -0.4984**                      -0.1882     -0.3793***
                                              (-0.57)                       (-2.60)                       (-1.59)      (-3.40)

Log (market value)                           -0.0807*                     -0.0529**                    -0.0658***     -0.0425**
                                              (-1.94)                       (-2.53)                      (-4.15)        (-2.37)

Beta                                        0.1692***                      0.1400                       0.0905**        0.0578
                                              (2.80)                       (1.42)                         (2.09)        (1.25)

Leverage                                     -0.0006                     -0.0253***                    -0.0209***
                                              (-0.05)                      (-3.02)                       (-3.29)

Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                                                  0.0205***
                                                                                                                        (3.02)

Constant                     -0.2729***       0.1205        -0.0391      0.6369***      -0.2729***      0.2984**       -0.0605
                               (-5.08)        (0.47)         (-0.62)       (2.67)         (-4.59)         (2.30)        (-0.35)
Number of observations           173           173             173          172             346            345            318
R-squared                        0.01          0.07            0.13         0.31            0.08           0.19           0.16




                                                                36
Table 5: CEOs and financial crisis returns
The table shows cross-sectional regressions of annualized buy-and-hold returns for banks from July 2007 to
December 2008 on the banks' performance during the crisis of 1998 and firm characteristics. If a bank was delisted
during the period from July 2007 to December 2008, the return (including delisting return) until the last day of
listing was used, and proceeds were put into a cash index until December 2008. “Crisis return 1998” is the bank's
stock return from the first trading date of August 1998 until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its
lowest price. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return over the six months after the date on which the lowest price
occurs. “Same CEO in 1998” is an indicator variable equal to one if the bank's CEO at the end of 2006 held the
position of CEO in 1998, and zero otherwise. Control variables include the bank's equity beta measured during 2004
– 2006 and the stock return in calendar year 2006. The additional control variables are measured at the end of fiscal
year 2006 and include the book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of the bank's equity, leverage,
and the Tier 1 capital ratio. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                         (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
Crisis return 1998                   0.5884***       0.4787***       0.5260***        0.4590**        0.4002**
                                       (2.95)          (2.93)          (2.73)           (2.59)          (1.97)

Rebound return 1998                   -0.0287                          0.1056                          0.0052
                                       (-0.33)                         (1.15)                          (0.04)

Crisis return 1998                    -0.2179         -0.0596         -0.2298          0.0077          0.0383
x Same CEO                             (-0.62)         (-0.21)         (-0.68)         (0.02)          (0.11)

Rebound return 1998                   -0.2295                         -0.2139                          -0.0488
x Same CEO                             (-1.38)                         (-1.35)                          (-0.23)

Same CEO in 1998                      -0.0659         -0.0621         -0.0700          -0.0552         -0.0422
                                       (-0.74)         (-0.74)         (-0.81)          (-0.61)         (-0.45)

Return in 2006                                       -0.2508**       -0.2626**        -0.2009*        -0.2068*
                                                       (-2.46)         (-2.57)         (-1.77)         (-1.81)

Book-to-market                                        -0.1977*        -0.1822        -0.3764***      -0.3705***
                                                       (-1.66)         (-1.52)         (-3.39)         (-3.31)

Log (market value)                                  -0.0456***       -0.0483***        -0.0203         -0.0198
                                                      (-4.23)          (-4.05)          (-1.64)         (-1.46)

Beta                                                 0.1137***       0.1150***        0.0832**        0.0845**
                                                       (2.92)          (2.95)           (2.02)          (2.02)

Leverage                                            -0.0196***       -0.0207***
                                                      (-3.17)          (-3.27)

Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                 0.0185***       0.0188***
                                                                                       (2.73)          (2.74)

Constant                             -0.1279**       0.3340***       0.3434***         -0.0341         -0.0581
                                       (-2.53)         (3.00)          (2.91)           (-0.22)         (-0.36)
Number of observations                   346            346             345               319             318
R-squared                                0.07           0.17            0.17              0.15            0.14




                                                         37
Table 6: Bank failures from July 2007 through December 2009
The table gives an overview of how many of the sample banks delisted and how many of them failed during the
period from July 2007 through December 2009. Banks are considered to have survived if they are still listed at the
end of 2009, if they merged at a premium during the period from July 2007 through December 2009, or if they
delisted voluntarily. Banks are considered to have failed if they are on the list of failed banks maintained by the
FDIC, if they are not on the FDIC list but have filed for Chapter 11, if they merged at a discount or if they were
forced to delist by their stock exchange. A merger is judged to have occurred at a premium if the price per share paid
is higher than the target's stock price at market close one trading day before the announcement date. Factiva news
searches were performed to determine whether a delisting was voluntary or forced. Most voluntary delisters cited
reporting obligations and other regulatory compliance cost as the main reason for delisting. Among the banks that
were forced to delist, two failed to meet the market capitalization requirements of the NYSE and Nasdaq,
respectively; one failed to submit an audited 2006 10-K by the final deadline set by the NYSE; and one saw its
trading halted and was later delisted by NYSE Alternext after having failed to meet a deadline to raise capital or sell
itself to an investor as required by the OTS in a cease-and-desist order.



                                                                        Number        Percent
                       Bank survived
                            Listed at end of 2009                          280         80.69
                            Merged at premium                               34          9.80
                            Voluntary delisting                              7          2.02
                            Total survivors                                321         92.51

                       Bank failed
                             Closed by FDIC/OTS                             15         4.32
                             Merged at discount                              5         1.44
                             Forced delisting by exchange                    4         1.15
                             Chapter 11                                      2         0.58
                             Total failures                                 26         7.49
                       Total                                               347        100.00




                                                         38
Table 7: Bank failure during the financial crisis and performance during the 1998 crisis
The table presents marginal effects from probit regressions predicting bank failure during the period from July 2007
through December 2009. “Crisis return 1998” is the bank's stock return from the first trading day of August 1998
until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its lowest price. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return
over the six months after the date on which the lowest price occurs. Control variables include the bank's equity beta
measured during 2004 – 2006 and the stock return in calendar year 2006. The additional control variables are
measured at the end of fiscal year 2006 and include the book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of
the bank's equity, leverage, and the Tier 1 capital ratio. Numbers in parentheses are z-statistics, and ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


                                      (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
    Crisis return 1998            -0.3803***                     -0.4027***    -0.3994***     -0.3453***
                                    (-4.17)                        (-3.78)       (-4.04)        (-3.47)

    Rebound return 1998                             0.0482        -0.0417      -0.1404***     -0.1369**
                                                    (1.06)         (-0.89)       (-2.74)        (-2.15)

    Return in 2006                                                               0.0110         -0.0316
                                                                                 (0.18)          (-0.45)

    Book-to-market                                                               0.0264         0.0455
                                                                                 (0.35)         (0.73)

    Log (market value)                                                         0.0226***       0.0156**
                                                                                 (3.37)          (2.24)

    Beta                                                                         -0.0052        -0.0000
                                                                                  (-0.22)        (-0.00)

    Leverage                                                                     0.0047
                                                                                 (1.41)

    Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                        -0.0024
                                                                                                 (-0.53)
    Number of observations            347            346            346            345             318




                                                            39
Table 8: Comparison of firm characteristics – bottom performers vs. other institutions
The table presents summary statistics comparing the characteristics of financial institutions whose stock return was
in the bottom tercile for both the 1998 crisis and the financial crisis of 2007/2008 with financial institutions whose
stock return was above the bottom tercile for at least one of these periods. Panel A (Panel B) examines
characteristics measured at the end of 2006 (at the end of 1997) for all financial institutions. Panels C and D
examine depository institutions only. The variables “return in 2006”, “book-to-market”, “log (market value)”,
“beta”, “leverage”, and “Tier 1 capital ratio” are defined in Table 1. “Asset growth” is the annualized growth rate of
total assets from fiscal year end 2003-2006. “Short-term funding” is calculated as debt in current liabilities divided
by total liabilities. “Commercial paper user” is an indicator variable equal to one if part of the institution‟s liabilities
were financed with commercial paper, and zero otherwise. “Deposits” are measured as total customer deposits
divided by total liabilities. “Rated” is an indicator variable equal to one if the institution possessed an S&P rating,
and “rating” is an ordinal measure of the institution‟s rating which takes the value 1 for a rating of AAA, 2 for AA+,
3 for AA, 4 for AA-, and so forth. “Investment securities”, “Assets held for sale”, and “Trading securities” denote
the fraction of total assets held in investment securities, held for sale, and held in trading securities, respectively.
Assets held for sale are omitted from the panels that focus on non-depository institutions since there is only one non-
missing observation among these firms. “Derivatives” denotes the log of the gross notional amount of derivatives
held divided by total assets. “Non-interest income” is the ratio of non-interest income to the sum of non-interest
income and net interest income. “Income variability” is the standard deviation of the institution‟s pre-tax return on
assets over the 20 preceding quarters. “Non-depository” is an indicator variable equal to one if the institution is a
non-depository institution, and zero otherwise. Institutions are defined as depository if the two-digit SIC code in
Compustat equals 60 and the institution has deposits, and as non-depository if the two-digit SIC code in Compustat
equals 61 or 62 and the institution does not have deposits. Tests of differences between the bottom performers and
the other institutions are performed using t-tests that assume unequal variances across groups as well as Mann-
Whitney U tests. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                            40
Panel A: Comparison of 2006 characteristics of all institutions

                                  Bottom obs        Bottom        Others obs   Others   Difference    t-statistic   Mann-Whitney
                                                     mean                       mean                                  z-statistic
Return in 2006                         51           0.1240           296       0.1186    0.0054         0.1552          0.4443
Book-to-market                         51           0.6554           295       0.5897    0.0657        1.9265*         1.9444*
Log (market value)                     51           6.6793           296       5.9765    0.7028       2.0256**         1.7471*
Beta                                   51           0.7611           296       0.6909    0.0702         0.9343          0.9990
Leverage                               51           9.8911           295       7.1710    2.7201       3.4533***       4.5627***
Asset growth                           51           0.1675           296       0.0983    0.0692       4.8842***       5.2384***
Short-term funding                     51           0.1795           296       0.0845    0.0950       3.9715***       4.7230***
Commercial paper user                  29           0.3103           213       0.0986    0.2118       2.3582**        3.2397***
Deposits                               51           0.6451           294       0.7910    -0.1460     -3.6453***      -4.0243***
Rated                                  51           0.3137           296       0.1824    0.1313        1.8928*        2.1549**
Rating                                 16           7.6250            54       7.2037    0.4213         0.4737          0.1201
Investment securities                  51           0.1355           293       0.2002    -0.0647     -3.7072***      -4.4611***
Assets held for sale                   39           0.0144           280       0.0086    0.0058         1.1914         1.7033*
Trading securities                     49           0.0376           280       0.0063    0.0312       2.1245**        2.6611***
Income variability                     49           0.0016           287       0.0014    0.0001         0.4808          1.6000
Non-depository                         51           0.1176           296       0.0405    0.0771         1.6409        2.2899**

Panel B: Comparison of 1997 characteristics of all institutions

                                  Bottom obs        Bottom        Others obs   Others   Difference    t-statistic   Mann-Whitney
                                                     mean                       mean                                  z-statistic
Return in 1997                         44           0.6593           236       0.6418    0.0175         0.3075          0.3285
Book-to-market 1997                    40           0.5407           232       0.4635    0.0772       2.1000**        2.2069**
Log (market value) 1997                40           6.2036           233       5.6075    0.5961         1.6448          1.6041
Beta 1995-1997                         34           0.7357           194       0.3835    0.3523       3.0512***       3.1061***
Leverage 1997                          40           8.8120           232       5.5875    3.2245       3.5834***       4.4159***
Asset growth 1997                      38           0.2146           209       0.1476    0.0671       2.6570**        3.0582***
Short-term funding 1997                41           0.2707           238       0.0900    0.1807       4.3357***       3.9309***
Commercial paper user 1997             24           0.4583           192       0.0990    0.3594       3.3866***       4.7886***
Deposits 1997                          39           0.5861           234       0.8354    -0.2493     -4.4578***      -4.6027***
Rated 1997                             41           0.3659           239       0.1213    0.2445       3.0934***       3.9675***
Rating 1997                            15           7.4000            29       6.6552    0.7448         0.7492          0.6249
Investment securities 1997             34           0.1794           234       0.2387    -0.0593     -3.0094***      -2.5810***
Assets held for sale 1997              29           0.0307           221       0.0097    0.0211         1.5121        3.3736***
Trading securities 1997                38           0.0536           221       0.0028    0.0507       2.4399**        3.8830***
Income variability 1997                10           0.0020            51       0.0017    0.0003         0.4421          0.9546


                                                                               41
Panel C: Comparison of 2006 characteristics of depository institutions

                                Bottom obs      Bottom       Others obs    Others   Difference   t-statistic   Mann-Whitney
                                                 mean                       mean                                 z-statistic
Return in 2006                      45          0.1112           284       0.1144    -0.0032       -0.0867         0.1990
Book-to-market                      45          0.6779           284       0.5867     0.0912      2.5592**       2.5302**
Log (market value)                  45          6.2694           284       5.9347     0.3347        1.0177         0.8923
Beta                                45          0.7134           284       0.6808     0.0327        0.4056         0.4301
Leverage                            45          9.3665           284       7.1763     2.1901      2.6542**       3.7262***
Tier 1 capital ratio                40          9.4580           279      11.0646    -1.6066     -5.1015***     -3.8184***
Asset growth                        45          0.1667           284       0.0965     0.0702      4.5784***      4.8951***
Short-term funding                  45          0.1424           284       0.0747     0.0677      3.8519***      4.3672***
Commercial paper user               23          0.2174           204       0.1029     0.1145        1.2648         1.6303
Deposits                            45          0.7272           284       0.8189    -0.0917     -3.5872***     -3.4310***
Rated                               45          0.2444           284       0.1761     0.0684        0.9965         1.0951
Rating                              11          8.8182            50       7.2600     1.5582        1.5005        1.7750*
Investment securities               45          0.1367           284       0.2037    -0.0671     -4.5776***     -4.2221***
Assets held for sale                39          0.0144           279       0.0085     0.0059        1.2216        1.7410*
Trading securities                  43          0.0109           270       0.0022     0.0087        1.4653         1.5222
Ln(1+Derivatives)                   22          0.3752           205       0.1118     0.2634        1.4484         1.2804
Non-interest income                 40          0.1927           284       0.2530    -0.0602     -3.2280***     -3.2614***
Income variability                  43          0.0016           278       0.0012     0.0004        1.3472       2.0058**




                                                                          42
Panel D: Comparison of 1997 characteristics of depository institutions

                                Bottom obs      Bottom       Others obs    Others   Difference   t-statistic   Mann-Whitney
                                                 mean                       mean                                 z-statistic
Return in 1997                      38          0.6451           227       0.6504    -0.0053       -0.0827        -0.2630
Book-to-market 1997                 34          0.5442           222       0.4606     0.0836      2.2188**       2.1912**
Log (market value) 1997             34          5.8066           222       5.5544     0.2522        0.7127         0.7984
Beta 1995-1997                      28          0.5528           188       0.3673     0.1855       1.8479*       1.9642**
Leverage 1997                       34          7.3583           222       5.6245     1.7338      3.1622***      3.2955***
Tier 1 capital ratio 1997           29          9.6931           228      11.8026    -2.1095     -3.2279***     -3.1642***
Asset growth 1997                   32          0.2161           202       0.1473     0.0688      2.5829**       2.8275***
Short-term funding 1997             35          0.2024           228       0.0814     0.1210      3.2197***      2.8698***
Commercial paper user 1997          19          0.3684           188       0.1011     0.2674      2.3085**       3.3431***
Deposits 1997                       34          0.6702           229       0.8503    -0.1801     -3.6983***     -3.8466***
Rated 1997                          35          0.2857           229       0.1135     0.1722      2.1449**       2.7592***
Rating 1997                         10          8.9000            26       6.4615     2.4385      2.4288**       2.3920**
Investment securities 1997          32          0.1863           229       0.2427    -0.0564     -2.8272***      -2.3825**
Assets held for sale 1997           29          0.0307           220       0.0097     0.0210        1.5087       3.3536***
Trading securities 1997             33          0.0169           216       0.0019     0.0150        1.3369       2.9472***
Ln(1+Derivatives 1997)              14          0.0574           170       0.0398     0.0176        0.3090        -0.4348
Non-interest income 1997            28          0.1964           187       0.1836     0.0128        0.3883        -0.8469
Income variability 1997              6          0.0028            45       0.0013     0.0015        1.8078         1.5787




                                                                          43
Table 9: Probit regressions predicting membership in the bottom performer group
The table shows marginal effects from probit regressions predicting whether a financial institution‟s stock return is
in the bottom tercile both in the 1998 crisis and the financial crisis of 2007/2008. Panel A uses firm characteristics in
2006 to predict membership in the bottom performer group, and panel B uses firm characteristics in 1997. Models
(1) through (3) include commercial banks, savings institutions, and non-depository institutions. Model (4) excludes
non-depository institutions, and models (5) and (6) contain variables that are available for commercial banks
regulated by the FDIC only. All variables are defined in the caption of Table 8. Numbers in parentheses are z-
statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: 2006 firm characteristics
                                     (1)           (2)               (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
Short-term funding               0.6214***                       0.6524***   0.6033***        0.1841         0.2856*
                                   (2.84)                          (2.75)      (2.63)         (1.13)          (1.75)
Deposits                                        -0.2740*
                                                 (-1.74)
Non-depository                       -0.1225     -0.1378
                                      (-1.35)     (-1.05)
Asset growth                     0.7835***      0.8659***        0.3452**     0.2922**       0.2052*         0.1706*
                                   (4.68)         (4.91)           (2.44)       (2.15)        (1.83)          (1.78)
Commercial paper user                                                                         0.0475         0.0409
                                                                                              (1.27)         (1.32)
Rated                                                             -0.1854     -0.1567         -0.2775        -0.2100
                                                                   (-1.07)     (-0.85)         (-1.51)        (-1.36)
Rating                                                            0.0180       0.0171         0.0270         0.0224
                                                                  (1.02)       (0.92)         (1.41)         (1.37)
Investment securities                                        -0.6184***      -0.5437***
                                                               (-3.95)         (-3.55)
Assets held for sale                                              -0.4039     -0.1760
                                                                   (-0.83)     (-0.38)
Trading securities                                                -1.2327     -0.2369
                                                                   (-1.06)     (-0.31)
Income variability                                                -7.6055      1.7938         -5.8043        -4.1478
                                                                   (-0.53)     (0.15)          (-0.46)        (-0.54)
Non-interest income                                                          -0.3801***     -0.3491**       -0.2622*
                                                                               (-2.71)        (-2.36)        (-1.88)
Ln(1+Derivatives)                                                                             0.0113         0.0262
                                                                                              (0.37)         (1.05)
Return in 2006                       0.1830*     0.1679          0.1731**     0.1841**        0.0613         0.0344
                                      (1.75)     (1.64)            (2.07)       (2.28)        (0.94)         (0.67)
Book-to-market                        0.0716     0.0617           0.0622       0.0595         -0.0404        0.0429
                                      (0.58)     (0.50)           (0.59)       (0.61)          (-0.48)       (0.78)
Log (market value)                    0.0124     0.0118           0.0240       0.0263        0.0346*         0.0076
                                      (1.13)     (1.03)           (1.33)       (1.48)         (1.89)         (0.65)
Beta                                 -0.0389     -0.0240          -0.0573     -0.0471         -0.0394        -0.0111
                                      (-0.94)     (-0.60)          (-1.57)     (-1.33)         (-1.40)        (-0.52)
Leverage                             0.0180**   0.0214***         0.0156*     0.0157**       0.0134*
                                       (2.54)     (3.02)           (1.88)       (2.01)        (1.69)
Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                                        -0.0101*
                                                                                                             (-1.92)
Number of observations                 346         344              297         297             219            219




                                                            44
Panel B: 1997 firm characteristics
                                     (1)           (2)               (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
Short-term funding 1997          0.5995***                         0.4268     0.3971     -0.4318    -0.4698
                                   (2.98)                          (1.61)     (1.52)      (-0.72)    (-0.77)

Deposits 1997                                   -0.5427***
                                                  (-3.43)

Non-depository                       -0.1737     -0.2457*
                                      (-1.26)     (-1.68)

Asset growth 1997                    0.2843       0.2101           0.1344     0.1765     0.0540     0.0613
                                     (1.63)       (1.25)           (0.82)     (1.01)     (0.34)     (0.36)

Commercial paper user 1997                                                               0.1321     0.1250
                                                                                         (1.08)     (0.90)

Rated 1997                                                        -0.6171*
                                                                   (-1.85)

Rating 1997                                                       0.0812**
                                                                    (2.16)

Investment securities 1997                                        -0.3208    -0.3596*
                                                                   (-1.63)    (-1.88)

Assets held for sale 1997                                          0.4255    1.1616*
                                                                   (0.94)     (1.81)

Trading securities 1997                                            1.2841     3.8173
                                                                   (1.17)     (0.57)

Non-interest income 1997                                                     -0.5870**   -0.1002    -0.1340
                                                                               (-2.00)    (-0.32)    (-0.39)

Ln(1+Derivatives 1997)                                                                   -1.3113    -1.0702
                                                                                          (-0.70)    (-0.66)

Return in 1997                       0.0928       0.0703          0.1163*    0.1128*     0.0472     0.0238
                                     (1.32)       (1.06)           (1.94)     (1.89)     (0.52)     (0.24)

Book-to-market 1997                  0.0700      -0.0513           0.1638     -0.0179    0.0332     0.2524
                                     (0.32)       (-0.26)          (0.89)      (-0.10)   (0.10)     (0.77)

Log (market value) 1997              -0.0048     -0.0037           0.0296     0.0276     0.0040     -0.0078
                                      (-0.20)     (-0.16)          (1.11)     (0.93)     (0.13)      (-0.23)

Beta 1995-1997                       0.0717      -0.0114          -0.1101     -0.0470    0.0592     0.0816
                                     (0.76)       (-0.12)          (-1.24)     (-0.45)   (0.48)     (0.60)

Leverage 1997                        0.0253*    0.0312**           0.0177    0.0259*     0.0276
                                      (1.79)      (2.37)           (1.38)     (1.90)     (1.11)

Tier 1 capital ratio 1997                                                                           -0.0072
                                                                                                     (-0.90)
Number of observations                 225         221              189         163        83          82




                                                             45
Table 10: Firm characteristics in 2006 and performance during the 1998 crisis
The table shows results from cross-sectional regressions of various firm characteristics of the sample banks in 2006 on the banks' performance during the crisis of
1998 and control variables. The dependent variables are: leverage, the Tier 1 capital ratio, distance to default (DTD), short-term funding, and asset growth.
“Leverage” is defined as book value of assets minus book value of equity plus market value of equity divided by market value of equity, and “Tier 1 capital
ratio” is obtained from the Compustat Bank database. “Distance to default” is estimated as the natural logarithm of (CAR+ROA)/volatility(ROA), where CAR is
the capital to assets ratio, ROA is the return on assets, and the volatility of ROA is measured on a quarterly basis from 2003-2006. “Short-term funding” is
calculated as debt in current liabilities divided by total liabilities, and “asset growth” is the annualized growth rate of total assets from fiscal year end 2003
through 2006. We report results both for the full sample and for the sample of depository institutions only, except for the Tier 1 capital ratio and the distance to
default, which are available for depository institutions only. “Crisis return 1998” is the bank's stock return from the first trading date in August 1998 until the day
in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its lowest price. “Rebound return 1998” is the stock return over the six months after the date on which the lowest price
occurs. Control variables are measured at the end of 2005 for the leverage, Tier 1 capital, distance to default, and short-term funding regressions. For the asset
growth regressions, they are measured at the end of 2003 since asset growth itself is measured during 2004-2006. Control variables include the bank's equity beta
measured during the previous three years, the stock return in the previous calendar year, the book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of the
bank's equity, and, for the asset growth regressions only, leverage, and the Tier 1 capital ratio. Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                 46
Dependent variable:               Leverage             Tier 1        DTD          Short-term funding             Asset growth
Institutions in sample:       All       Depository   Depository   Depository       All       Depository       All        Depository
                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)
Crisis return 1998        -3.7974*** -3.8898***      5.4236***     0.5327       -0.0428       -0.0837**   -0.1505***     -0.1245**
                            (-2.61)      (-2.89)       (3.96)       (1.24)       (-0.91)        (-2.32)     (-2.89)        (-2.02)

Rebound return 1998       3.0070***     1.9567**       0.4865     -0.5139*     0.1593***      0.0260        0.0308        0.0099
                            (4.03)        (2.27)       (0.54)      (-1.82)       (6.62)       (1.12)        (1.21)        (0.28)

Previous year return      -7.0665***   -7.6500***      0.1474      0.3686      -0.0816**    -0.1412***    0.0364**       0.0406*
                            (-6.79)      (-7.95)       (0.14)      (1.16)        (-2.43)      (-5.47)       (2.16)        (1.76)

Book-to-market            4.7956***    4.7076***      -0.6914     -0.5710*     0.0849***      0.0248       -0.0525      -0.1187***
                            (4.74)       (4.96)        (-0.71)     (-1.87)       (2.60)       (0.97)        (-1.32)       (-2.93)

Log (market value)         -0.0821      -0.2724**    -0.6646***    0.0687*     0.0096***    0.0145***       0.0055        0.0009
                            (-0.72)       (-2.49)      (-5.96)      (1.97)       (2.61)       (4.94)        (1.15)        (0.16)

Beta                      -1.5515***   -1.1566***    1.6118***    -0.3031**     0.0159        -0.0130      -0.0416       -0.0229
                            (-3.31)      (-2.63)       (3.60)       (-2.16)     (1.05)         (-1.10)      (-1.64)       (-0.79)

Leverage                                                                                                  -0.0047**
                                                                                                            (-2.08)

Tier 1 capital ratio                                                                                                      0.0007
                                                                                                                          (0.37)

Constant                  4.6113***    5.6428***     15.4833***   5.8804***    -0.0601*       -0.0348     0.0931**       0.1175**
                            (4.46)       (5.90)        (15.65)      (18.97)     (-1.80)        (-1.36)      (2.45)         (2.12)
Number of observations       345          328            318          318         345            328         345            287
R-squared                    0.33         0.40           0.15         0.07        0.29           0.22        0.11           0.08




                                                                    47
Table 11: Robustness tests
The table shows robustness tests for the cross-sectional regressions of annualized buy-and-hold returns for banks
from July 2007 to December 2008 on the banks' performance during the crisis of 1998 and firm characteristics.
Models (1) and (2) estimate median regressions instead of ordinary least squares. Models (3) and (4) use an
alternative definition of 1998 crisis and rebound returns and estimate OLS regressions. For columns 1 and 2, “Crisis
return 1998” is the bank's stock return from the first trading day in August 1998 until the day in 1998 on which the
bank's stock attains its lowest price. “Crisis return 1998 (Alternative)” is the bank‟s stock return from August 3,
1998 to October 1, 1998, and “Rebound return 1998 (Alternative)” uses returns from October 2, 1998 to April 1,
1999. Control variables include the bank's equity beta measured during 2004 – 2006 and the stock return in calendar
year 2006. The additional control variables are measured at the end of fiscal year 2006 and include the book-to-
market ratio, the natural log of the market value of the bank's equity, leverage, and the Tier 1 capital ratio. Numbers
in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

                                                    (1)              (2)          (3)            (4)
              Crisis return 1998                  0.4324         0.5995**
                                                  (1.60)           (2.16)

              Rebound return 1998                -0.0009          -0.0062
                                                  (-0.01)          (-0.03)

              Crisis return 1998                                              0.4124***      0.4162**
              (Alternative)                                                     (2.61)         (2.38)

              Rebound return 1998                                               0.1356         0.1125
              (Alternative)                                                     (1.38)         (0.92)

              Return in 2006                    -0.3595**         -0.2548    -0.2756***      -0.2094*
                                                  (-2.09)          (-1.35)     (-2.70)        (-1.83)

              Book-to-market                     -0.3412*        -0.3903**     -0.1841      -0.3698***
                                                  (-1.70)          (-2.13)      (-1.53)       (-3.31)

              Log (market value)               -0.0526***         -0.0175    -0.0521***      -0.0228*
                                                 (-2.61)           (-0.81)     (-4.29)        (-1.66)

              Beta                              0.1541**         0.1523**     0.1187***      0.0901**
                                                  (2.37)           (2.28)       (3.05)         (2.16)

              Leverage                           -0.0153                     -0.0229***
                                                  (-1.64)                      (-3.65)

              Tier 1 capital ratio                               0.0242**                    0.0203***
                                                                   (2.17)                      (2.99)

              Constant                          0.4013**          -0.1178     0.3084***       -0.1252
                                                  (2.08)           (-0.46)      (2.69)         (-0.80)
              Number of observations               345               318         345             318
              R-squared                                                          0.15            0.13




                                                            48
Table 12: Placebo regressions
The table shows placebo regressions predicting buy-and-hold returns for banks during various time periods using the
return during the 1998 crisis and placebo returns during a hypothetical 1997 “crisis”. Models (1) through (4) predict
stock returns during the recent financial crisis from July 2007 through December 2008. Models (5) and (6) use the
crisis return in 1998 to predict the return from July 2005 through December 2006. “Crisis return 1998” is the bank's
stock return from the first trading day in August 1998 until the day in 1998 on which the bank's stock attains its
lowest price. “Placebo return 1997” measures a hypothetical crisis return as the return from the first trading day in
August 1997 over the following 50 trading days, i.e. the average number of days over which the 1998 crisis return is
measured. “Large bank” is an indicator variable equal to one if the bank‟s book value of assets at the end of 2006
(end of 2004 for model (6)) was above the sample median, and zero otherwise. Firm characteristics are measured at
the end of the fiscal year preceding the year for which returns are predicted, that is they are measured in 2006 for
models (1) through (4), and 2004 for models (5) and (6). Firm characteristics include the bank‟s stock return during
the previous year, the book-to-market ratio, the natural log of the market value of the bank's equity, and leverage.
The firm‟s beta is measured over the previous three years, i.e. from 2004 through 2006 for models (1) through (4),
and 2002 through 2004 for models (5) and (6). Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                  (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)        (6)
                              Financial       Financial        Financial       Financial       Return     Return
                             crisis return   crisis return    crisis return   crisis return    2005 -     2005 -
                                                                                                2006       2006
Crisis return 1998            0.4756***        0.1846                                         -0.0197     0.0290
                                (3.49)         (1.01)                                          (-0.28)    (0.33)

Crisis return 1998 x Large                    0.5949**                                                   -0.0630
bank                                            (2.24)                                                    (-0.48)

Placebo return 1997                                               0.0498        0.0239
                                                                  (0.33)        (0.13)

Placebo return 1997 x                                                           0.0716
Large bank                                                                      (0.23)

Large bank                                   0.2256***                          0.0719                   -0.0736*
                                               (2.64)                           (0.93)                    (-1.81)

Previous year return          -0.2521**      -0.2318**        -0.3591***      -0.3367***      0.0183      0.0249
                                (-2.49)        (-2.29)          (-3.36)         (-3.11)       (0.38)      (0.52)

Book-to-market                 -0.1937        -0.2087*         -0.2634**      -0.2600**       0.0782      0.0759
                                (-1.63)        (-1.77)           (-2.05)        (-2.02)       (1.20)      (1.17)

Log (market value)           -0.0454***      -0.0539***       -0.0518***      -0.0636***      -0.0002     0.0076
                               (-4.22)         (-3.82)          (-4.69)         (-4.42)        (-0.03)    (1.00)

Beta                          0.1185***       0.0885**        0.1167***         0.0869*       0.0552     0.0779**
                                (3.08)          (2.06)          (2.89)           (1.90)       (1.59)       (2.12)

Leverage                     -0.0195***      -0.0178***       -0.0255***      -0.0254***      0.0020      0.0012
                               (-3.17)         (-2.89)          (-3.98)         (-3.96)       (0.52)      (0.32)

Constant                      0.3055***       0.2606**        0.3215***       0.3717***       0.0087     -0.0028
                                (2.86)          (2.16)          (2.72)          (3.00)        (0.16)      (-0.05)
Number of observations           346             346             303             303           346          346
R-squared                        0.16            0.18            0.17            0.18          0.02         0.04



                                                             49
