                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              DYNAMICS AND STAGNATION IN THE MALTHUSIAN EPOCH

                                           Quamrul Ashraf
                                            Oded Galor

                                        Working Paper 17037
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17037


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




The authors are grateful to a co-editor, four anonymous referees, and Yona Rubinstein for detailed
and insightful comments, and to David de la Croix, Peter Howitt, Oksana Leukhina, Ross Levine,
Joachim Voth, and David Weil for helpful suggestions. Nathan Greenberg provided able research assistance.
Financial support from the Watson Institute at Brown University is gratefully acknowledged. Galor's
research is supported by NSF grant SES-0921573. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch
Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor
NBER Working Paper No. 17037
May 2011
JEL No. J1,N0,O0

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper examines the central hypothesis of the influential Malthusian theory, according to which
improvements in the technological environment during the pre-industrial era had generated only temporary
gains in income per capita, eventually leading to a larger, but not significantly richer, population. Exploiting
exogenous sources of cross-country variations in land productivity and the level of technological advancement
the analysis demonstrates that, in accordance with the theory, technological superiority and higher
land productivity had significant positive effects on population density but insignificant effects on
the standard of living, during the time period 1-1500 CE.


Quamrul Ashraf
Williams College
Department of Economics
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
Quamrul.H.Ashraf@williams.edu

Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu
1     Introduction

The transition from an epoch of stagnation to an era of sustained economic growth has marked the onset of

one of the most remarkable transformations in the course of human history. While living standards in the

world economy stagnated during the millennia preceding the Industrial Revolution, income per capita has

encountered an unprecedented ten-fold increase in the past two centuries, profoundly altering the level and

the distribution of education, health and wealth across the globe.1

         The Malthusian theory has been a central pillar in the interpretation of the process of development

during the pre-industrial era and in the exploration of the forces that brought about the transition from

stagnation to growth. Nevertheless, the underlying premise of the theory, that technological progress and

resource expansion during this epoch had contributed primarily to the size of the population leaving income

per capita relatively unaffected in the long run, has not been tested.2

         The Malthusian theory, inspired by Thomas R. Malthus (1798), suggests that the worldwide stagna-

tion in income per capita during the pre-industrial epoch reflected the counterbalancing effect of population

growth on the expansion of resources, in an environment characterized by the positive effect of the standard

of living on population growth along with diminishing labor productivity. Periods marked by the absence of

changes in the level of technology or in the availability of land, were characterized by a stable population size

as well as a constant income per capita, whereas periods characterized by improvements in the technological

environment or in the availability of land generated only temporary gains in income per capita, eventually

leading to a larger but not richer population. Technologically superior economies ultimately had denser

populations but their standard of living did not reflect their technological advancement.

         This research conducts a cross-country empirical analysis of the predictions of the influential Malthu-

sian theory.3 It exploits exogenous sources of cross-country variation in land productivity and technological
    1 The transition from stagnation to growth has been examined by Oded Galor and David N. Weil (1999, 2000), Galor and

Omer Moav (2002), Gary D. Hansen and Edward C. Prescott (2002), Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (2002), Nils-Petter Lagerlöf (2003,
2006), Matthias Doepke (2004), Galor (2005), Kevin H. O’Rourke, Ahmed S. Rahman, and Alan M. Taylor (2008), Holger
Strulik and Jacob L. Weisdorf (2008), and others, while the associated phenomenon of the Great Divergence in income per
capita has been analyzed by Galor and Andrew Mountford (2006, 2008), Nico Voigtländer and Hans-Joachim Voth (2006, 2009),
Quamrul Ashraf and Galor (2007), and Galor (2010) amongst others.
    2 Recent country-specific studies provide evidence in support of one of the elements of the Malthusian hypothesis – the

positive effect of income on fertility and its negative effect on mortality. See, Nicholas Crafts and Terence C. Mills (2009) for
England in the 16-18th centuries, Morgan Kelly and Cormac Ó Gráda (2010) in the context of medieval and early modern
England, and Lagerlöf (2009) for Sweden in the 18-19th centuries.
    3 In contrast to the current study, which tests the Malthusian prediction regarding the positive effect of the technological

environment on population density but its neutrality for income per capita, Michael Kremer (1993) examines the prediction of
a Malthusian-Boserupian interaction. Accordingly, if population size has a positive effect on the rate of technological progress,
as argued by Ester Boserup (1965), this effect should manifest itself as a proportional effect on the rate of population growth,
taking as given the positive Malthusian feedback from technology to population size. Based on this premise, Kremer’s study
defends the role of scale effects in endogenous growth models by empirically demonstrating that the rate of population growth
in the world has indeed been proportional to the level of world population throughout human history. Thus, Kremer does not
test the absence of a long-run effect of the technological environment on income per capita nor does he examine the positive
effect of technology on population size.



                                                               1
levels to examine their hypothesized differential effects on population density versus income per capita during

the time period 1–1500 CE.

        In light of the potential endogeneity of population and technological progress (Boserup, 1965),

this research develops a novel identification strategy to examine the hypothesized effects of technological

advancement on population density and income per capita. It establishes that the onset of the Neolithic

Revolution that marked the transition of societies from hunting and gathering to agriculture, as early as

10,000 years ago, triggered a sequence of technological advancements that had a significant effect on the level

of technology in the Middle Ages. As argued by Jared Diamond (1997), an earlier onset of the Neolithic

Revolution has been associated with a developmental head start that enabled the rise of a non-food-producing

class whose members were essential for the advancement of written language, science and technology, and

for the formation of cities, technology-based military powers and nation states. Thus, variations in favorable

biogeographical factors (i.e., prehistoric domesticable species of wild plants and animals) that led to an

earlier onset of the Neolithic Revolution across the globe are exploited as exogenous sources of variation in

the onset of the Neolithic Revolution and, consequently, in the level of technological advancement during

the time period 1–1500 CE.

        Consistent with Malthusian predictions, the analysis uncovers statistically significant positive effects

of land productivity and the technological level on population density in the years 1 CE, 1000 CE, and

1500 CE. In contrast, the effects of land productivity and technology on income per capita in these periods

are not significantly different from zero. Moreover, the estimated elasticities of income per capita with

respect to these two channels are about an order of magnitude smaller than the corresponding elasticities of

population density.

        Importantly, the qualitative results remain robust to controls for the confounding effects of a large

number of geographical factors, including absolute latitude, access to waterways, distance to the technological

frontier, and the share of land in tropical versus temperate climatic zones, which may have had an impact on

aggregate productivity either directly, by affecting the productivity of land, or indirectly via the prevalence

of trade and the diffusion of technologies. Furthermore, the results are also qualitatively unaffected when a

direct measure of technological sophistication, rather than the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, is employed

as an indicator of the level of aggregate productivity. Finally, the study establishes that the results are not

driven by unobserved time-invariant country fixed effects. In particular, it demonstrates that, while the

change in the level of technology between 1000 BCE and 1 CE was indeed associated with a significant

change in population density over the 1–1000 CE time horizon, the level of income per capita during this

time period was relatively unaffected, as suggested by the Malthusian theory.


                                                       2
2       The Malthusian Model

2.1     The Basic Structure of the Model

Consider an overlapping-generations economy in which activity extends over infinite discrete time. In every

period, the economy produces a single homogeneous good using land and labor as inputs. The supply of land

is exogenous and fixed over time whereas the evolution of labor supply is governed by households’ decisions

in the preceding period regarding the number of their children.


2.1.1    Production

Production occurs according to a constant-returns-to-scale technology. The output produced at time t, Yt ,

is:

                                            Yt = (AX)α L1−α
                                                        t   ;          α ∈ (0, 1),                                          (1)


where Lt and X are, respectively, labor and land employed in production in period t, and A measures the

technological level.4 The technological level may capture the percentage of arable land, soil quality, climate,

cultivation and irrigation methods, as well as the knowledge required for engagement in agriculture (i.e.,

domestication of plants and animals). Thus, AX captures the effective resources used in production.

         Output per worker produced at time t, yt ≡ Yt /Lt , is therefore:


                                                      yt = (AX/Lt )α .                                                      (2)


2.1.2    Preferences and Budget Constraints

In each period t, a generation consisting of Lt identical individuals joins the workforce. Each individual has

a single parent. Members of generation t live for two periods. In the first period of life (childhood), t − 1,

they are supported by their parents. In the second period of life (parenthood), t, they inelastically supply

their labor, generating an income that is equal to the output per worker, yt , which they allocate between

their own consumption and that of their children.
  4 The pace of technological progress, and thus the level of technology, may be determined by the size of the population (e.g.,

Kremer, 1993; Galor and Weil, 2000; Shekhar Aiyar, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, and Moav, 2008) without disrupting the long run
Malthusian equilibrium.




                                                               3
          Individuals generate utility from consumption and the number of their (surviving) children:5


                                              ut = (ct )1−γ (nt )γ ;     γ ∈ (0, 1),                                            (3)


where ct is the consumption and nt is the number of children of an individual of generation t.

          Members of generation t allocate their income between their consumption, ct , and expenditure on

children, ρnt , where ρ is the cost of raising a child.6 Hence, the budget constraint for a member of generation

t (in the second period of life) is:

                                                         ρnt + ct ≤ yt .                                                        (4)


2.1.3    Optimization

Members of generation t allocate their income optimally between consumption and child rearing, so as to

maximize their intertemporal utility function (3) subject to the budget constraint (4). Hence, individuals

devote a fraction (1 − γ) to consumption and a fraction γ of their income to child rearing:


                                                         ct = (1 − γ)yt ;
                                                                                                                                (5)
                                                         nt = γyt /ρ.


Thus, in accordance with the Malthusian paradigm, income has a positive effect on the number of surviving

children.


2.2     The Evolution of the Economy

2.2.1    Population Dynamics

The evolution of the working population is determined by the initial size of the working population, L0 > 0,

and the number of (surviving) children per adult, nt . Specifically, the size of the working population in

period t + 1, Lt+1 , is:

                                                          Lt+1 = nt Lt .                                                        (6)


where Lt is the size of the working population in period t, and L0 > 0 is given.
    5 For simplicity, parents derive utility from the expected number of surviving offspring and the parental cost of child rearing

is associated only with surviving children. The incorporation of parental cost for non-surviving children would not affect the
qualitative predictions of the model.
    6 If the cost of children is a time cost then the qualitative results will be maintained as long as individuals are subjected to

a subsistence consumption constraint (Galor and Weil, 2000), possibly reflecting the Malthusian effects on body size (Dalgaard
and Strulik, 2010). If both time and goods are required to produce children, the results of the model will not be affected
qualitatively. As the economy develops and wages increase, the time cost will rise proportionately with the increase in income,
but the cost in terms of goods will decline. Hence, individuals will be able to afford more children.



                                                                 4
                  Lt +1                                             Lt +1 = Lt
                                                                                          Lt +1 = φ ( Lt ; Ah )


                                                                                          Lt +1 = φ ( Lt ; A)




                          45D
                                                                                                           Lt
                                               L ( A)        L ( Ah )

                                      Figure 1: The Evolution of Population Size


         Substituting (2) and (5) into (6), the time path of the working population is governed by the first-

order difference equation:

                                         Lt+1 = (γ/ρ)(AX)α L1−α
                                                            t   ≡ φ(Lt ; A),                                               (7)


where, as depicted in Figure 1, φL (Lt ; A) > 0 and φLL (Lt ; A) < 0 so φ(Lt ; A) is strictly concave in Lt , and

φ(0; A) = 0, limLt →0 φL (Lt ; A) = ∞ and limLt →∞ φL (Lt ; A) = 0.

         Hence, for a given level of technology, A, noting that L0 > 0, there exists a unique, stable steady-state

level of the adult population, L̄:7

                                               L̄ = (γ/ρ)1/α (AX) ≡ L̄(A),                                                 (8)


and population density, P̄d :

                                           P̄d ≡ L̄/X = (γ/ρ)1/α A ≡ P̄d (A).                                              (9)


         Importantly, as is evident from (8) and (9), an improvement in the technological environment, A,

increases the steady-state levels of the adult population, L̄, and population density, P̄d :

                                                  ∂ L̄         ∂ P̄d
                                                       > 0 and       > 0.                                                 (10)
                                                  ∂A           ∂A


         As depicted in Figure 1, if the economy is in a steady-state equilibrium, an increase in the techno-
   7 The trivial steady state, L̄ = 0, is unstable. Thus, given that L > 0, this equilibrium will not be an absorbing state for
                                                                      0
the population dynamics.



                                                              5
logical level from A to Ah generates a transition process in which population gradually increases from its

initial steady-state level, L̄, to a higher one, L̄h . Similarly, a decline in the population due to an epidemic

such as the Black Death (1348-1350 CE) would temporarily reduce population, while temporarily increasing

income per capita. The rise in income per capita, however, will generate a gradual increase in population

back to the initial steady-state level, L̄.


2.2.2    The Time Path of Income per Worker

The evolution of income per worker is determined by the initial level of income per worker and the number

of (surviving) children per adult. Specifically, income per worker in period t + 1, yt+1 , noting (2) and (6), is:


                                                            α                    α
                                    yt+1 = [(AX)/Lt+1 ] = [(AX)/nt Lt ] = yt /nα
                                                                               t.                                             (11)


          Substituting (5) into (11), the time path of income per worker is governed by the first-order difference

equation:

                                                yt+1 = (ρ/γ)α yt1−α ≡ ψ(yt ),                                                 (12)


where, as depicted in Figure 2, ψ 0 (yt ) > 0 and ψ 00 (yt ) < 0 so ψ(yt ) is strictly concave, and ψ(0) = 0,

limyt →0 ψ 0 (yt ) = ∞ and limyt →∞ ψ 0 (yt ) = 0.

          Hence, given y0 > 0, there exists a unique, stable steady-state level of income per worker, ȳ:8


                                                           ȳ = (ρ/γ).                                                        (13)


          Importantly, as is evident from (2) and (13), while an advancement in the level of technology, A,

increases the level of income per worker in the short-run, yt , it does not affect the steady-state level of income

per worker, ȳ:
                                                    ∂yt         ∂ ȳ
                                                        > 0 and      = 0.                                                     (14)
                                                    ∂A          ∂A

          As depicted in Figures 1 and 2, if the economy is in a steady-state equilibrium, an increase in the

technological level from Al to Ah generates a transition process in which income per worker initially increases

to a higher level, ỹ, reflecting higher labor productivity in the absence of population adjustment. However,

as population increases, income per worker gradually declines to the initial steady-state equilibrium, ȳ.

Similarly, a decline in the population due to an epidemic such as the Black Death (1348-1350 CE) would
   8 The trivial steady state, ȳ = 0, is unstable. Thus, given that y > 0, this equilibrium will not be an absorbing state for the
                                                                      0
income dynamics.



                                                                6
                  yt +1                                              yt +1 = yt




                                                                                           yt +1 = ψ ( yt )




                          45D
                                                                                                              yt
                                            y                           y

                                     Figure 2: The Evolution of Income per Worker


temporarily reduce population to L̃, while temporarily increasing income per capita to ỹ. The rise in income

per worker will generate a gradual increase in population back to the steady-state level, L̄, and thus a gradual

decline in income per worker back to ȳ.


2.3     Testable Predictions

The Malthusian theory generates the following testable predictions:


   1. Within a country, an increase in productivity would lead in the long run to a larger population, without

      altering the long-run level of income per capita.

   2. Across countries, those characterized by superior land productivity or a superior level of technology

      would have, all else equal, higher population densities in the long run, but their standards of living

      would not reflect the degree of their technological advancement.


         These predictions emerge from a Malthusian model as long as the model is based upon two fun-

damental features: (a) a positive effect of the standard of living on population growth, and (b) decreasing

returns to labor due to the presence of a fixed factor of production – land.9
   9 Specifically, these predictions would arise in the presence of a dynastic representative agent Malthusian framework (Lucas,

2002), a reduced-form Malthusian-Boserupian interaction between population size and productivity growth (Kremer, 1993),
exogenous technological progress (Hansen and Prescott, 2002), and endogenous technological progress that reflects the positive
impact of population size on aggregate productivity (Galor and Weil, 2000).




                                                               7
3     Empirical Framework

3.1     Empirical Strategy

The empirical examination of the central hypothesis of the Malthusian theory exploits exogenous sources of

cross-country variation in land productivity and technological levels to examine their hypothesized differential

effects on population density and income per capita during the time period 1–1500 CE.

         In light of the potential endogeneity of population and technological progress, this research develops a

novel identification strategy to examine the hypothesized effects of technological advancement on population

density and income per capita. First, it establishes that the onset of the Neolithic Revolution, which marked

the transition of societies from hunting and gathering to agriculture as early as 10,000 years ago, triggered a

sequence of technological advancements that had a significant effect on the level of technology in the Middle

Ages. As argued by Diamond (1997), an earlier onset of the Neolithic Revolution has been associated with a

developmental head start that enabled the rise of a non-food-producing class whose members were essential

for the advancement of written language, science and technology, and for the formation of cities, technology-

based military powers and nation states.10 Thus, variation in the onset of the Neolithic Revolution across

the globe is exploited as a proxy for variation in the level of technological advancement during the time

period 1–1500 CE.

         In addition, to address the possibility that the relationship between the timing of the Neolithic

transition and population density in the Common Era may itself be spurious, being perhaps co-determined by

an unobserved channel such as human capital, the analysis appeals to the role of prehistoric biogeographical

endowments in determining the timing of the Neolithic Revolution. Importantly, the productivity of land

for agriculture in the Common Era is largely independent of the initial geographical and biogeographical

endowments that were conducive for the onset of the Neolithic Revolution. While agriculture originated in

regions of the world to which the most valuable domesticable wild plant and animal species were native,

other regions proved more fertile and climatically favorable once the diffusion of agricultural practices brought

the domesticated varieties to them (Diamond, 1997). Thus, the analysis adopts an instrumental variables

strategy, exploiting variation in the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals that

were native to a region prior to the onset of sedentary agricultural practices as exogenous sources of variation

for the number of years elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution to demonstrate its causal effect on population
  10 See also Weisdorf (2005, 2009). In the context of the Malthusian model presented earlier, the Neolithic Revolution should

be viewed as a large positive shock to the level of technology, A, followed by a long series of incremental aftershocks. Thus,
at any given point in time, a society that experienced the Neolithic Revolution earlier would have a longer history of these
aftershocks and would therefore reflect a larger steady-state population size (or, equivalently, a higher steady-state population
density).




                                                               8
density in the Common Era.11

          Moreover, a direct, period-specific measure of technological sophistication is also employed as an

alternative metric of the level of aggregate productivity to demonstrate the qualitative robustness of the

baseline results for the years 1000 CE and 1 CE.12 Once again, the link running from the exogenous prehistoric

biogeographical endowments to the level of technological advancement in the Common Era, via the timing

of the Neolithic transition, enables the analysis to exploit the aforementioned biogeographical variables as

instruments for the indices of technological sophistication in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE to establish their

causal effects on population density in these periods.

          Finally, in order to ensure that the results from the level regressions are not driven by unobserved

time-invariant country fixed effects, this research also employs a first-difference estimation strategy with a

lagged explanatory variable. In particular, the robustness analysis exploits cross-country variation in the

change in the level of technological sophistication between the years 1000 BCE and 1 CE to explain the

cross-country variations in the change in population density and the change in income per capita over the

1–1000 CE time horizon.


3.2     The Data

The most comprehensive worldwide cross-country historical estimates of population and income per capita

since the year 1 CE have been assembled by Colin McEvedy and Richard Jones (1978) and Angus Mad-

dison (2003) respectively.13 Indeed, despite inherent problems of measurement associated with historical

data, these sources remain unparalleled in providing comparable estimates across countries in the last 2000

years and have, therefore, widely been regarded as standard sources for such data in the long-run growth

literature.14 For the purposes of the current analysis, the population density of a country for a given year is
  11 The insufficient number of observations arising from the greater paucity of historical income data, as compared to data

on population density, does not permit a similar instrumental variables strategy to be pursued when examining the impact of
the timing of the Neolithic Revolution on income per capita. In particular, since most of the cross-sectional variation in the
numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of wild plants and animals, as reported by Ola Olsson and Douglas A. Hibbs, Jr.
(2005), occurs between regions rather than within regions, the small sample size imposed by the availability of historical income
data results in an insufficient amount of variation in explanatory variables for the first-stage regressions.
  12 The absence of sufficient variation in the underlying data obtained from Peter N. Peregrine (2003) prevents the construction

of a corresponding technology measure for the year 1500 CE.
  13 It is important to note that, while the urbanization rate in 1500 CE has sometimes been used as an indicator of pre-

industrial economic development, it is not an alternative measure for income per capita. As suggested by the Malthusian
hypothesis, technologically advanced economies have higher population densities and may thus be more urbanized, but the
extent of urbanization has little or no bearing on the standard of living in the long run – it is largely a reflection of the level
of technological sophistication. Indeed, the results in this study are qualitatively unaffected, particularly with respect to the
impact of technological levels (as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution), when the urbanization rate in 1500 CE is
used in lieu of population density as the outcome variable.
  14 Nevertheless, in the context of the current study, the use of Maddison’s (2003) income per capita data could have posed

a significant hurdle if the data were in part been imputed with a Malthusian viewpoint of the pre-industrial world in mind.
While Maddison (2008) suggests that this is not the case, the empirical investigation to follow performs a rigorous analysis to
demonstrate that the baseline results remain robust under alternative specifications designed to address this particular concern
surrounding Maddison’s income per capita estimates. Regarding the historical population data from McEvedy and Jones (1978),



                                                                9
computed as population in that year, as reported by McEvedy and Jones (1978), divided by total land area.

          The measure of land productivity employed is the first principal component of the percentage of

arable land and an index reflecting the overall suitability of land for agriculture, based on geospatial soil

quality and temperature data, as reported by Navin Ramankutty et al. (2002) and aggregated to the country

level by Stelios Michalopoulos (2008).15 The variable for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, constructed

by Louis Putterman (2008), measures the number of thousand years elapsed, relative to the year 2000 CE,

since the majority of the population residing within a country’s modern national borders began practicing

sedentary agriculture as the primary mode of subsistence.

          The index of technological sophistication is constructed based on historical cross-cultural technology

data, reported with global coverage in Peregrine’s (2003) Atlas of Cultural Evolution. In particular, for

a given time period and for a given culture in the archaeological record, the Atlas of Cultural Evolution

draws on various anthropological and historical sources to report the level of technological advancement, on

a 3-point scale, in each of four sectors of the economy, including communications, industry (i.e., ceramics

and metallurgy), transportation, and agriculture. The index of technological sophistication is constructed

following the aggregation methodology of Diego Comin, William Easterly, and Erick Gong (2008).16


3.3     The Neolithic Revolution and Technological Advancement

This section establishes that the Neolithic Revolution triggered a cumulative process of economic develop-

ment, conferring a developmental head start to societies that experienced the agricultural transition earlier.

In line with this assertion, Table 1 reveals preliminary results indicating that an earlier onset of the Neolithic

Revolution is indeed positively and significantly correlated with the level of technological sophistication in

non-agricultural sectors of the economy in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE. For instance, the coefficient esti-

mates for the year 1000 CE, all of which are statistically significant at the 1 percent level, indicate that a 1

percent increase in the number of years elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution is associated with

an increase in the level of technological advancement in the communications, industrial, and transportation
while some of their estimates remain controversial, particularly those for sub-Saharan Africa and pre-Columbian Mesoamerica,
a recent assessment (see, e.g., www.census.gov/ipc/www/worldhis.html) conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau finds that their
aggregate estimates indeed compare favorably with those obtained from other studies. Moreover, the regional estimates of
McEvedy and Jones are also very similar to those presented in the more recent study by Massimo Livi-Bacci (2001).
   15 The use of contemporary measures of land productivity necessitates an identifying assumption that the spatial distribution

of factors governing the productivity of land for agriculture has not changed significantly in the past 2000 years. In this regard,
it is important to note that the analysis at hand exploits worldwide variation in such factors, which changes dramatically only
in geological time. Hence, while the assumption may not necessarily hold at a sub-regional level in some cases (e.g., in regions
south of the Sahara where the desert has been known to be expanding gradually in the past few centuries), it is unlikely that
the moments of the global spatial distribution of land productivity are significantly different today than they were two millennia
ago. Moreover, the stability of the results over the 1–1500 CE time horizon further alleviates this potential concern.
   16 For descriptive statistics as well as the definitions and sources of all the primary and control variables employed by the

analysis, see Appendices B and C.




                                                                10
                     Table 1: The Neolithic Revolution as a proxy for Technological Advancement

                                      (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)                (6)
                                      OLS               OLS                OLS               OLS              OLS                OLS
                                                                     Dependent Variable is Level of:
                                      Log Communications                    Log Industrial                     Log Transportation
                                         Technology in:                    Technology in:                        Technology in:
                                     1000 CE          1 CE              1000 CE          1 CE               1000 CE          1 CE
 Log Years since Neolithic           0.368***         0.283***          0.074***            0.068***        0.380***           0.367***
   Transition                        (0.028)           (0.030)            (0.014)           (0.015)          (0.029)            (0.031)
 Observations                          143              143                143                143             143                 143
 R-squared                             0.48             0.26               0.17               0.12            0.52                0.51
 Summary – This table demonstrates that the timing of the Neolithic Revolution is positively and significantly correlated with the
 level of technology in multiple non-agricultural sectors of an economy in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE.
 Notes – (i) the level of technology in communications is indexed according to the absence of both true writing and mnemonic or
 non-written records, the presence of only mnemonic or non-written records, or the presence of both; (ii) the level of technology in
 industry is indexed according to the absence of both metalworks and pottery, the presence of only pottery, or the presence of both;
 (iii) the level of technology in transportation is indexed according to the absence of both vehicles and pack or draft animals, the
 presence of only pack or draft animals, or the presence of both; (vi) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses;
 (v) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided
 hypothesis tests.



sectors by 0.37, 0.07, and 0.38 percent respectively.

         These findings lend credence to the empirical strategy employed by this research to test the Malthu-

sian theory. Specifically, they provide evidence justifying the use of the exogenous source of cross-country

variation in the timing of the Neolithic Revolution as a proxy for the variation in the level of technolog-

ical advancement across countries during the agricultural stage of development. Moreover, they serve as

an internal consistency check between the cross-country Neolithic transition-timing variable and those on

historical levels of technological sophistication, all of which are relatively new in terms of their application

in the empirical literature on long-run development.


3.4     The Basic Regression Model

Formally, the baseline specifications adopted to test the Malthusian predictions regarding the effects of land

productivity and the level of technological advancement on population density and income per capita are:

                                                                                        0            0
                           ln Pi,t    =       α0,t + α1,t ln Ti + α2,t ln Xi + α3,t Γi + α4,t Di + δi,t ,                                 (15)
                                                                                    0            0
                           ln yi,t    =       β0,t + β1,t ln Ti + β2,t ln Xi + β3,t Γi + β4,t Di + εi,t ,                                 (16)


where Pi,t is the population density of country i in year t; yi,t is country i’s income per capita in year t; Ti is

the number of years elapsed since the onset of agriculture in country i; Xi is a measure of land productivity

for country i, based on the percentage of arable land and an index of agricultural suitability; Γi is a vector

of geographical controls for country i, including absolute latitude and variables gauging access to waterways;



                                                                     11
Di is a vector of continental dummies; and, δi,t and εi,t are country-specific disturbance terms for population

density and income per capita, respectively, in year t.



4     Cross-Country Evidence

Consistent with the predictions of the Malthusian theory, the results demonstrate highly statistically signif-

icant positive effects of land productivity and the number of years elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution on

population density in the years 1500 CE, 1000 CE and 1 CE. The effects of these explanatory channels on in-

come per capita in the corresponding periods, however, are not significantly different from zero, a result that

fully complies with Malthusian priors. These results are shown to be robust to controls for other geographical

factors, including absolute latitude, access to waterways, distance to the nearest technological frontier, the

percentage of land in tropical versus temperate climatic zones, and small island and landlocked dummies, all

of which may have had an impact on aggregate productivity either directly, by affecting the productivity of

land, or indirectly by affecting trade and the diffusion of technologies.17 Moreover, as foreshadowed by the

initial findings in Table 1, the results are qualitatively unaffected when the index of technological sophisti-

cation, rather than the number of years elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution, is employed as a proxy for

the level of aggregate productivity.


4.1     Population Density in 1500 CE

This section establishes the significant positive effects of land productivity and the level of technological

advancement, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density in the year

1500 CE. The results from regressions explaining log population density in the year 1500 CE are presented

in Table 2. In particular, a number of specifications comprising different subsets of the explanatory variables

in equation (15) are estimated to examine the independent and combined effects of the transition-timing and

land-productivity channels, while controlling for other geographical factors and continental fixed effects.
   17 Appendix D presents additional findings demonstrating robustness. Specifically, it establishes that the results for population

density and income per capita in 1500 CE are robust under two alternative specifications that relax potential constraints imposed
by the baseline regression models, including (i) the treatment of the Americas as a single entity in accounting for continental
fixed effects, and (ii) the employment of only the common variation in (the logs of) the percentage of arable land and the index
of agricultural suitability when accounting for the effect of the land-productivity channel by way of the first principal component
of these two variables. Moreover, given that historical population estimates are also available from Maddison (2003), albeit for
a smaller set of countries than McEvedy and Jones (1978), the appendix demonstrates that the baseline results for population
density in the three historical periods, obtained using data from McEvedy and Jones, are indeed qualitatively unchanged under
Maddison’s alternative population estimates. Finally, given the possibility that the disturbance terms in the baseline regression
models may be non-spherical in nature, particularly since economic development has been spatially clustered in certain regions
of the world, the appendix presents results from repeating the baseline analyses for population density and income per capita
in the three historical periods, with the standard errors of the point estimates corrected for spatial autocorrelation following
the methodology of Timothy G. Conley (1999).




                                                                12
                                      Table 2: Explaining Population Density in 1500 CE

                                         (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
                                         OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS                IV
                                                       Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1500 CE
  Log Years since Neolithic           0.833***                            1.025***         1.087***          1.389***          2.077***
    Transition                          (0.298)                            (0.223)          (0.184)           (0.224)           (0.391)
  Log Land Productivity                                 0.587***          0.641***         0.576***          0.573***          0.571***
                                                         (0.071)           (0.059)          (0.052)           (0.095)           (0.082)
  Log Absolute Latitude                                 -0.425***         -0.353***        -0.314***         -0.278**          -0.248**
                                                         (0.124)           (0.104)          (0.103)           (0.131)           (0.117)
  Mean Distance to Nearest                                                                 -0.392***           0.220             0.250
   Coast or River                                                                           (0.142)           (0.346)           (0.333)
  Percentage of Land within                                                                0.899***          1.185***          1.350***
    100 km of Coast or River                                                                (0.282)           (0.377)           (0.380)
  Continent Dummies                      Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
  Observations                           147               147              147               147               96                 96
  R-squared                              0.40              0.60             0.66              0.73             0.73               0.70
  First-stage F-statistic                 –                 –                –                 –                 –               14.65
  Overid. p-value                         –                 –                 –                –                –                0.440
  Summary – This table establishes, consistently with Malthusian predictions, the significant positive effects of land productivity and
  the level of technological advancement, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density in the year
  1500 CE, while controlling for access to navigable waterways, absolute latitude, and unobserved continental fixed effects.
  Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
  agricultural suitability index; (ii) the IV regression employs the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals
  as instruments for log transition timing; (iii) the statistic for the first-stage F-test of these instruments is significant at the 1
  percent level; (iv) the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test corresponds to Hansen’s J statistic, distributed in this case as
  chi-square with one degree of freedom; (v) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the
  historical period examined; (vi) regressions (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent
  in the IV data-restricted sample; (vii) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (viii) *** denotes statistical
  significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



          Consistent with Malthusian predictions, Column 1 reveals the positive relationship between log

years since transition and log population density in the year 1500 CE, while controlling for continental fixed

effects.18 Specifically, the estimated OLS coefficient implies that a 1 percent increase in the number of years

elapsed since the Neolithic transition increases population density in 1500 CE by 0.83 percent, an effect that

is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.19 Moreover, based on the R-squared of the regression, the

transition-timing channel appears to explain 40 percent of the variation in log population density in 1500 CE

along with the dummies capturing unobserved continental characteristics.

          The effect of the land-productivity channel, controlling for absolute latitude and continental fixed

effects, is reported in Column 2. In line with theoretical predictions, a 1 percent increase in land productivity

raises population density in 1500 CE by 0.59 percent, an effect that is also significant at the 1 percent level.

Interestingly, in contrast to the relationship between absolute latitude and contemporary income per capita,

the estimated elasticity of population density in 1500 CE with respect to absolute latitude suggests that
  18 The results presented throughout are robust to the omission of continental dummies from the regression specifications.

Without continental fixed effects, the coefficient of interest in Column 1 is 1.294 [0.169], with the standard error (in brackets)
indicating statistical significance at the 1 percent level.
  19 Evaluating these percentage changes at the sample means of 4,877.89 for years since transition and 6.06 for population

density in 1500 CE implies that an earlier onset of the Neolithic Revolution by about 500 years is associated with an increase
in population density in 1500 CE by 0.5 persons per square kilometer.




                                                                     13
economic development during this period was on average higher at latitudinal bands closer to the equator.20

Thus, while proximity to the equator was beneficial in the agricultural stage of development, it appears

detrimental in the industrial stage. The R-squared of the regression indicates that, along with continental

fixed effects and absolute latitude, the land-productivity channel explains 60 percent of the cross-country

variation in log population density in 1500 CE.

          Column 3 presents the results from examining the combined explanatory power of the previous two

regressions. The estimated coefficients on the transition-timing and land-productivity variables remain highly

statistically significant and continue to retain their expected signs, while increasing slightly in magnitude

in comparison to their estimates in earlier columns. Furthermore, transition timing and land productivity

together explain 66 percent of the variation in log population density in 1500 CE, along with absolute latitude

and continental fixed effects.

          The explanatory power of the regression in Column 3 improves by an additional 7 percentage points

once controls for access to waterways are accounted for in Column 4, which constitutes the baseline regression

specification for population density in 1500 CE. In comparison to the estimates reported in Column 3, the

effects of the transition-timing and land-productivity variables remain reassuringly stable in both magnitude

and statistical significance when subjected to the additional geographical controls. Moreover, the estimated

coefficients on the additional geographical controls indicate significant effects consistent with the assertion

that better access to waterways has been historically beneficial for economic development by fostering ur-

banization, international trade and technology diffusion. To interpret the baseline effects of the variables of

interest, a 1 percent increase in the number of years elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution raises population

density in 1500 CE by 1.09 percent, conditional on land productivity, absolute latitude, waterway access

and continental fixed effects. Similarly, a 1 percent increase in land productivity generates, ceteris paribus, a

0.58 percent increase in population density in 1500 CE.21 These conditional effects of the transition-timing

and land-productivity channels from the baseline specification are depicted as partial regression lines on the

scatter plots in Figures 3(a) and 3(b) respectively.

          The analysis now turns to address issues regarding causality, particularly with respect to the

transition-timing variable. Specifically, while variations in land productivity and other geographical char-
  20 An interesting potential explanation for this finding comes from an admittedly contested hypothesis in the field of evo-

lutionary ecology. In particular, biodiversity tends to decline as one moves farther away from the equator – a phenomenon
known as Rapoport’s Rule – due to the stronger forces of natural selection arising from wider seasonal variation in climate at
higher absolute latitudes. Lower resource diversity at higher absolute latitudes would imply lower carrying capacities of these
environments due to the greater extinction susceptibility of the resource base under adverse natural shocks such as disease and
sudden climatic fluctuations. The lower carrying capacities of these environments would, in turn, imply lower levels of human
population density.
  21 In the absence of continental fixed effects, the coefficient associated with the transition-timing channel is 1.373 [0.118] while

that associated with the land-productivity channel is 0.586 [0.058], with the standard errors (in brackets) indicating statistical
significance at the 1 percent level.



                                                                 14
                          (a) The Partial Effect of Transition Timing on Population Density in 1500 CE




                         (b) The Partial Effect of Land Productivity on Population Density in 1500 CE

                 Figure 3: Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Population Density in 1500 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the partial regression line for the effect of transition timing (land productivity) on population density in
the year 1500 CE, while controlling for the influence of land productivity (transition timing), absolute latitude, access to waterways,
and continental fixed effects. Thus, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing transition timing (land productivity)
and population density, respectively, on the aforementioned set of covariates.




                                                                   15
acteristics are inarguably exogenous to the cross-country variation in population density, the onset of the

Neolithic Revolution and the outcome variable of interest may in fact be endogenously determined. Specifi-

cally, although reverse causality is not a source of concern, given that the vast majority of countries underwent

the Neolithic transition prior to the Common Era, the OLS estimates of the effect of the time elapsed since

the transition to agriculture may suffer from omitted variable bias, reflecting spurious correlations with the

outcome variable being examined.

           To establish the causal effect of the timing of the Neolithic transition on population density in the

Common Era, the investigation appeals to Diamond’s (1997) hypothesis on the role of exogenous geographical

and biogeographical endowments in determining the timing of the Neolithic Revolution. Accordingly, the

emergence and subsequent diffusion of agricultural practices were primarily driven by geographical conditions

such as climate, continental size and orientation, as well as the availability of wild plant and animal species

amenable to domestication. However, while geographical factors certainly continued to play a direct role

in economic development after the onset of agriculture, it is postulated that the availability of prehistoric

domesticable wild plant and animal species did not influence population density in the Common Era other

than through the timing of the Neolithic Revolution. The analysis consequently adopts the numbers of

prehistoric domesticable species of wild plants and animals, obtained from the dataset of Olsson and Hibbs

(2005), as instruments to establish the causal effect of the timing of the Neolithic transition on population

density.

           The final two columns in Table 2 report the results associated with a subsample of countries for which

data on the biogeographical instruments are available. To allow meaningful comparisons between IV and OLS

coefficient estimates, Column 5 repeats the baseline OLS regression analysis on this particular subsample

of countries, revealing that the coefficients on the explanatory variables of interest remain largely stable in

terms of both magnitude and significance compared to those estimated using the baseline sample. This is a

reassuring indicator that any additional sampling bias introduced by the restricted sample, particularly with

respect to the transition-timing and land-productivity variables, is negligible. Consistent with this assertion,

the explanatory powers of the baseline and restricted sample regressions are nearly identical.

           Column 6 presents the IV regression results from estimating the baseline specification with log years

since transition instrumented by the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals.22

The estimated causal effect of the timing of the Neolithic transition on population density not only retains

statistical significance at the 1 percent level but is substantially stronger in comparison to the estimate
  22 Table A.1 in Appendix A summarizes the first-stage regression results from all IV regressions examined by the current

analysis.




                                                           16
in Column 5. This pattern is consistent with attenuation bias afflicting the OLS coefficient as a result of

measurement error in the transition-timing variable. To interpret the causal impact of the timing of the

Neolithic Revolution, a 1 percent increase in years elapsed since the onset of agriculture causes, ceteris

paribus, a 2.08 percent increase in population density in the year 1500 CE.

         The coefficient on land productivity, which maintains stability in both magnitude and statistical

significance across the OLS and IV regressions, indicates that a 1 percent increase in land productivity raises

population density by 0.57 percent, conditional on the timing of the Neolithic transition, other geographical

factors and continental fixed effects. Finally, the rather strong F-statistic from the first-stage regression

provides verification for the significance and explanatory power of the biogeographical instruments employed

for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, while the high p-value associated with the test for overidentifying

restrictions is supportive of the claim that these instruments do not exert any independent influence on

population density in 1500 CE other than through the transition-timing channel.


4.2     Population Density in Earlier Historical Periods

This section demonstrates the significant positive effects of land productivity and the level of technological

advancement, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density in the years

1000 CE and 1 CE. The results from regressions explaining log population density in the years 1000 CE and

1 CE are presented in Tables 3 and 4 respectively. As before, the independent and combined explanatory

powers of the transition-timing and land-productivity channels are examined while controlling for other

geographical factors and unobserved continental characteristics.

         In line with the empirical predictions of the Malthusian theory, the findings reveal highly statisti-

cally significant positive effects of land productivity and an earlier transition to agriculture on population

density in these earlier historical periods as well. Moreover, the positive impact on economic development

of geographical factors capturing better access to waterways is also confirmed for these earlier periods.23

         The stability patterns exhibited by the magnitude and significance of the coefficients on the explana-

tory variables of interest in Tables 3-4 are strikingly similar to those observed in the 1500 CE analysis. Thus,

for instance, while statistical significance remains unaffected across specifications, the independent effects of

Neolithic transition timing and land productivity from the first two columns in each table increase slightly in
  23 The inverse correlation between absolute latitude and population density is maintained in the 1000 CE analysis, but appears

ambiguous in the 1 CE analysis. This pattern may, in part, reflect increasing returns associated with societies residing closer to
the equator during the Malthusian stage of development. In particular, as a result of agglomeration and latitudinally-specific
technology diffusion, the initial advantage enjoyed by equatorial societies during the Malthusian epoch became more pronounced
over time. Thus, the observed negative cross-sectional relationship between absolute latitude and population density, which is
somewhat weak in the year 1 CE, becomes progressively stronger in the years 1000 CE and 1500 CE.




                                                               17
                                      Table 3: Explaining Population Density in 1000 CE

                                         (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
                                         OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS                IV
                                                       Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1000 CE
  Log Years since Neolithic           1.232***                            1.435***         1.480***          1.803***          2.933***
    Transition                          (0.293)                            (0.243)          (0.205)           (0.251)           (0.504)
  Log Land Productivity                                 0.470***          0.555***         0.497***          0.535***          0.549***
                                                         (0.081)           (0.065)          (0.056)           (0.098)           (0.092)
  Log Absolute Latitude                                 -0.377**          -0.283**         -0.229**           -0.147            -0.095
                                                         (0.148)           (0.116)          (0.111)           (0.127)           (0.116)
  Mean Distance to Nearest                                                                 -0.528***           0.147             0.225
   Coast or River                                                                           (0.153)           (0.338)           (0.354)
  Percentage of Land within                                                                 0.716**          1.050**           1.358***
    100 km of Coast or River                                                                (0.323)           (0.421)           (0.465)
  Continent Dummies                      Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
  Observations                           142               142              142               142               94                 94
  R-squared                              0.38              0.46             0.59              0.67             0.69               0.62
  First-stage F-statistic                 –                 –                –                 –                 –               15.10
  Overid. p-value                         –                 –                 –                –                –                0.281
  Summary – This table establishes, consistently with Malthusian predictions, the significant positive effects of land productivity and
  the level of technological advancement, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density in the year
  1000 CE, while controlling for access to navigable waterways, absolute latitude, and unobserved continental fixed effects.
  Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
  agricultural suitability index; (ii) the IV regression employs the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals
  as instruments for log transition timing; (iii) the statistic for the first-stage F-test of these instruments is significant at the 1
  percent level; (iv) the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test corresponds to Hansen’s J statistic, distributed in this case as
  chi-square with one degree of freedom; (v) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the
  historical period examined; (vi) regressions (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent
  in the IV data-restricted sample; (vii) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (viii) *** denotes statistical
  significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



magnitude when both channels are examined concurrently in Column 3, and remain stable thereafter when

subjected to the additional geographical controls in the baseline regression specification of the fourth column.

This is a reassuring indicator that the variance-covariance characteristics of the regression samples employed

for the different periods are not fundamentally different from one another, despite differences in sample size

due to the greater unavailability of population density data in the earlier historical periods. The qualitative

similarity of the results across periods also suggests that the empirical findings are indeed more plausibly

associated with the Malthusian theory as opposed to being consistently generated by spurious correlations

between population density and the explanatory variables of interest across the different historical periods.

          To interpret the baseline effects of interest from Column 4 of the analysis for each historical period, a

1 percent increase in the number of years elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution raises population

density in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE by 1.48 and 1.93 percent respectively, conditional on the productivity

of land, absolute latitude, access to waterways and continental fixed effects.24 Similarly, a 1 percent increase

in land productivity is associated with, ceteris paribus, a 0.50 percent increase in population density in
  24 In both the 1000 CE and 1 CE samples, evaluating these percentage changes at the sample means for years since transition

and population density implies that an earlier onset of the Neolithic Revolution by about 500 years is associated with an increase
in population density by 0.5 persons per square kilometer. Despite differences in the estimated elasticities between the two
periods, the similarity of the effects at the sample means arises due to counteracting differences in the sample means themselves.
Specifically, while population density in 1000 CE has a sample mean of 3.59, the mean in 1 CE is only 2.54.



                                                                     18
                                       Table 4: Explaining Population Density in 1 CE

                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
                                        OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS                IV
                                                        Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in 1 CE
 Log Years since Neolithic           1.560***                            1.903***         1.930***          2.561***          3.459***
   Transition                          (0.326)                            (0.312)          (0.272)           (0.369)           (0.437)
 Log Land Productivity                                 0.404***          0.556***         0.394***          0.421***          0.479***
                                                        (0.106)           (0.081)          (0.067)           (0.094)           (0.089)
 Log Absolute Latitude                                  -0.080            -0.030            0.057             0.116             0.113
                                                        (0.161)           (0.120)          (0.101)           (0.121)           (0.113)
 Mean Distance to Nearest                                                                 -0.685***          -0.418            -0.320
  Coast or River                                                                           (0.155)           (0.273)           (0.306)
 Percentage of Land within                                                                 0.857**          1.108***          1.360***
   100 km of Coast or River                                                                (0.351)           (0.412)           (0.488)
 Continent Dummies                      Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
 Observations                           128               128              128               128               83                 83
 R-squared                              0.47              0.41             0.59              0.69             0.75               0.72
 First-stage F-statistic                 –                 –                –                 –                 –               10.85
 Overid. p-value                         –                 –                 –                –                –                0.590
 Summary – This table establishes, consistently with Malthusian predictions, the significant positive effects of land productivity and
 the level of technological advancement, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density in the year
 1 CE, while controlling for access to navigable waterways, absolute latitude, and unobserved continental fixed effects.
 Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
 agricultural suitability index; (ii) the IV regression employs the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals
 as instruments for log transition timing; (iii) the statistic for the first-stage F-test of these instruments is significant at the 1
 percent level; (iv) the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test corresponds to Hansen’s J statistic, distributed in this case as
 chi-square with one degree of freedom; (v) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the
 historical period examined; (vi) regressions (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent
 in the IV data-restricted sample; (vii) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (viii) *** denotes statistical
 significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



1000 CE and a 0.39 percent increase in population density in 1 CE.25

         For the 1000 CE analysis, the additional sampling bias introduced on OLS estimates by moving

to the IV-restricted subsample in Column 5 is similar to that observed earlier in Table 2, whereas the

bias appears somewhat larger for the analysis in 1 CE. This is partly attributable to the smaller size of

the subsample in the latter analysis. The IV regressions in Column 6, however, once again reflect the

pattern that the causal effect of transition timing on population density in each period is stronger than

its corresponding reduced-form effect, while the effect of land productivity remains rather stable across the

OLS and IV specifications. In addition, the strength and credibility of the numbers of domesticable plant

and animal species as instruments continue to be supported by their explanatory power in the first-stage

regressions and by the results of the overidentifying restrictions tests. The similarity of these findings with

those obtained in the 1500 CE analysis reinforces the validity of these instruments and, thereby, lends further

credence to the causal effect of the timing of the Neolithic transition on population density.

         Finally, turning attention to the differences in coefficient estimates obtained for the three periods, it

is interesting to note that, while the positive effect of land productivity on population density remains rather
  25 Appendix D depicts these conditional effects as partial regression lines on the scatter plots in Figures D.1(a) and D.1(b)

for the 1000 CE analysis, and in Figures D.2(a) and D.1(b) for the 1 CE analysis.




                                                                    19
stable, that of the number of years elapsed since the onset of agriculture declines over time. For instance,

comparing the IV coefficient estimates on the transition-timing variable across Tables 2-4, the positive causal

impact of the Neolithic Revolution on population density diminishes by 0.53 percentage points over the 1–

1000 CE time horizon and by 0.85 percentage points over the subsequent 500-year period. This pattern is

consistently reflected by all regression specifications examining the effect of the transition-timing variable,

lending support to the assertion that the process of development initiated by the technological breakthrough

of the Neolithic Revolution conferred social gains characterized by diminishing returns over time.26


4.3     Income per Capita versus Population Density

This section examines the Malthusian prediction regarding the neutrality of the standard of living with

respect to land productivity and the level of technological advancement, as proxied by the timing of the

Neolithic Revolution. Table 5 presents the results from estimating the baseline empirical model, as specified

in equation (16), for income per capita in the years 1500 CE, 1000 CE and 1 CE. Since historical income

per capita data are available for a relatively smaller set of countries, the analysis at hand also conducts

corresponding tests for population density using the income per capita data-restricted samples for the three

historical periods. This permits an impartial assessment of whether higher land productivity and an earlier

onset of the Neolithic Revolution are manifested mostly in terms of higher population density, as opposed

to higher income per capita, as the Malthusian theory would predict.

          Columns 1-3 reveal that income per capita in each historical period is effectively neutral to varia-

tions in the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, the agricultural productivity of land, and other productivity-

enhancing geographical factors, conditional on continental fixed effects.27 In particular, the effects of tran-

sition timing and land productivity on income per capita are not only substantially smaller than those on

population density, they are also not statistically different from zero at conventional levels of significance.28
  26 The assertion that the process of development initiated by the Neolithic Revolution was characterized by diminishing returns

over time implies that, given a sufficiently large lag following the transition, societies should be expected to converge towards
a Malthusian steady-state conditional on the productivity of land and other geographical factors. Hence, the cross-sectional
relationship between population density and the number of years elapsed since the Neolithic transition should be expected to
exhibit some concavity. This prediction was tested using the following specification:
                                                                                 0          0
                              ln Pi,t = θ0,t + θ1,t Ti + θ2,t Ti2 + θ3,t ln Xi + θ4,t Γi + θ5,t Di + ωi,t .
   Consistent with the aforementioned prediction, the OLS regression for 1500 CE yields θ1,1500 = 0.630 [0.133] and θ2,1500 =
−0.033 [0.011] with the standard errors (in brackets) indicating that both estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level. Moreover, in line with the prediction that a concave relationship should not necessarily be observed in an earlier period,
the regression for 1 CE yields θ1,1 = 0.755 [0.172] and θ2,1 = −0.020 [0.013] with the standard errors indicating that the first-
order (linear) effect is statistically significant at the 1 percent level whereas the second-order (quadratic) effect is statistically
insignificant.
  27 The rather high R-squared associated with each of these regressions is due to the inclusion of continental fixed effects in

the specification.
  28 Although Putterman (2008) reports a positive and significant effect of transition timing on income per capita in the year

1500 CE, this finding is, in fact, entirely spurious. Specifically, the relationship reported by Putterman disappears (i.e., the



                                                                  20
                             Table 5: Effects on Income per Capita versus Population Density

                                        (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                                        OLS              OLS               OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS
                                                                          Dependent Variable is:
                                           Log Income per Capita in:                             Log Population Density in:
                                      1500 CE       1000 CE          1 CE                  1500 CE      1000 CE           1 CE
  Log Years since Neolithic             0.159            0.073            0.109            1.337**          0.832**           1.006**
    Transition                         (0.136)          (0.045)           (0.072)           (0.594)          (0.363)           (0.481)
  Log Land Productivity                 0.041            -0.021           -0.001          0.584***          0.364***          0.681**
                                       (0.025)          (0.025)           (0.027)           (0.159)          (0.110)           (0.255)
  Log Absolute Latitude                -0.041            0.060            -0.175            0.050           -2.140**          -2.163**
                                       (0.073)          (0.147)           (0.175)           (0.463)          (0.801)           (0.979)
  Mean Distance to Nearest              0.215            -0.111           0.043             -0.429           -0.237            0.118
   Coast or River                      (0.198)          (0.138)           (0.159)           (1.237)          (0.751)           (0.883)
  Percentage of Land within             0.124            -0.150           0.042            1.855**          1.326**            0.228
    100 km of Coast or River           (0.145)          (0.121)           (0.127)           (0.820)          (0.615)           (0.919)
  Continent Dummies                     Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
  Observations                           31                26               29                31               26                29
  R-squared                             0.66              0.68             0.33              0.88             0.95              0.89
  Summary – This table establishes, consistently with Malthusian predictions, the relatively small effects of land productivity and
  the level of technological advancement, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on income per capita in the years
  1500 CE, 1000 CE and 1 CE, but their significantly larger effects on population density in the same time periods, while controlling
  for access to navigable waterways, absolute latitude, and unobserved continental fixed effects.
  Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
  agricultural suitability index; (ii) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the historical
  period examined; (iii) regressions (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this
  continent in the corresponding regression samples, restricted by the availability of income per capita data; (iv) robust standard
  error estimates are reported in parentheses; (v) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level,
  and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



Moreover, the other geographical factors, which, arguably, had facilitated trade and technology diffusion, do

not appear to significantly affect income per capita.

          In contrast, the regressions in Columns 4-6 reveal, exploiting the same variation in explanatory

variables as in the preceding income per capita regressions, that the elasticities of population density in each

period with respect to Neolithic transition timing and land productivity are not only highly statistically

significant, but are also larger by about an order of magnitude than the corresponding elasticities of income

per capita. Thus, for the year 1500 CE, a 1 percent increase in the number of years elapsed since the

Neolithic Revolution raises population density by 1.34 percent but income per capita by only 0.16 percent,

conditional on land productivity, geographical factors and continental fixed effects. Similarly, a 1 percent

increase in land productivity is associated, ceteris paribus, with a 0.58 percent increase in population density

in 1500 CE but only a 0.04 percent increase in income per capita in the same time period. The conditional

effects of Neolithic transition timing and land productivity on income per capita versus population density

in the year 1500 CE are depicted as partial regression lines on the scatter plots in Figures 4(a) and 4(b) for

income per capita, and in Figures 5(a) and 5(b) for population density.
coefficient on transition timing is nearly zero and statistically insignificant) once continental fixed effects are added to the
regression.




                                                                    21
                          (a) The Partial Effect of Transition Timing on Income per Capita in 1500 CE




                         (b) The Partial Effect of Land Productivity on Income per Capita in 1500 CE

                 Figure 4: Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Income per Capita in 1500 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the partial regression line for the effect of transition timing (land productivity) on income per capita in
the year 1500 CE, while controlling for the influence of land productivity (transition timing), absolute latitude, access to waterways,
and continental fixed effects. Thus, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing transition timing (land productivity)
and income per capita, respectively, on the aforementioned set of covariates.




                                                                   22
                          (a) The Partial Effect of Transition Timing on Population Density in 1500 CE




                          (b) The Partial Effect of Land Productivity on Population Density in 1500 CE

                 Figure 5: Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Population Density in 1500 CE
Summary – This figure depicts, using the income per capita data-restricted sample, the partial regression line for the effect of transition
timing (land productivity) on population density in the year 1500 CE, while controlling for the influence of land productivity (transition
timing), absolute latitude, access to waterways, and continental fixed effects. Thus, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from
regressing transition timing (land productivity) and population density, respectively, on the aforementioned set of covariates.




                                                                    23
                            Table 6: Robustness to Income per Capita Data Quality Concerns

                                         (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                                      Weighted         Weighted          Weighted         Weighted         Weighted          Weighted
                                        OLS              OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS
                                                               Observations Weighted According to:
                                               Income Data Frequency                        Total Population Size

                                                          Dependent Variable is Log Income per Capita in:
                                      1500 CE          1000 CE        1 CE           1500 CE       1000 CE                     1 CE
  Log Years since Neolithic            0.173            0.122*            0.189             0.278           0.143*            0.289
    Transition                         (0.162)          (0.063)          (0.121)           (0.171)          (0.068)           (0.175)
  Log Land Productivity                0.039            -0.045*           0.008            -0.005           -0.062*           -0.011
                                       (0.023)          (0.022)          (0.031)           (0.026)          (0.030)           (0.027)
  Log Absolute Latitude                -0.042           0.205*            -0.442           -0.089          0.298***           0.080
                                       (0.080)          (0.108)          (0.362)           (0.052)          (0.031)           (0.089)
  Mean Distance to Nearest             0.219           -0.370**           0.139           0.332**          -0.592***          -0.180
   Coast or River                      (0.202)          (0.148)          (0.298)           (0.148)          (0.108)           (0.189)
  Percentage of Land within            0.153            -0.228            0.159             0.329          -0.477***          0.003
    100 km of Coast or River           (0.169)          (0.137)          (0.257)           (0.227)          (0.122)           (0.277)
  Continent Dummies                     Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
  Observations                           31               26                29               31                26               29
  R-squared                             0.54             0.79              0.29             0.74              0.83             0.45
  Summary – This table demonstrates that the relatively small effects of land productivity and the level of technological advancement,
  as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on income per capita in the years 1500 CE, 1000 CE and 1 CE remain robust
  under two different weighted regression methodologies, designed to dispel concerns regarding the quality of the historical income
  per capita data series.
  Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
  agricultural suitability index; (ii) the weight of country i in regressions (1)-(3) is inversely proportional to the frequency with
  which i’s income per capita occurs in the corresponding samples, i.e., wi = n−1
                                                                                      P −1
                                                                                  i /    i ni , where ni is the number of countries with
  income per capita identical to i; (iii) the weight Pof country i in regressions (4)-(6) is directly proportional to the population size
  of i in the corresponding samples, i.e., wi = pi / i pi , where pi is the size of the population of i; (iv) a single continent dummy
  is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the historical period examined; (v) regressions (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) do not
  employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent in the corresponding regression samples, restricted by the
  availability of income per capita data; (vi) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vii) *** denotes statistical
  significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



          While the results revealing the cross-country neutrality of income per capita, despite differences in

aggregate productivity, are fully consistent with Malthusian predictions, there may exist potential concerns

regarding the quality of the income per capita data employed by the current analysis. In particular, contrary

to Maddison’s (2008) implicit assertion, if the historical income per capita estimates were in part imputed

under the Malthusian prior regarding similarities in the standard of living across countries, then applying

these data to test the Malthusian theory itself would clearly be invalid.29

          The current investigation therefore performs a rigorous robustness analysis of the baseline results

with respect to the aforementioned data quality concerns. In particular, Columns 1-3 in Table 6 reveal the
   29 A closer look at some properties of Maddison’s (2003) data suggests that this need not be a concern. Figure D.3, presented

in Appendix D, depicts the cross-sectional variability of income per capita according to Maddison’s estimates for the year
1500 CE, plotting the cumulative distribution of income per capita against quantiles of the data. The 45-degree line in the
figure therefore corresponds to a uniform distribution, wherein each observation would possess a unique value for income per
capita. Indeed, the close proximity of Maddison’s observations to the 45-degree line indicates a healthy degree of variability
across countries, suggesting that the data were not conditioned to conform to a Malthusian view of the world. Moreover,
Figure D.4, illustrating the intertemporal variability of income per capita over the 1000-1500 CE time horizon, provides further
assurance that Maddison’s estimates are not tainted by implicit assumptions that make the data unreliable for testing the
Malthusian theory. In particular, the departure of the vast majority of observations from the 45-degree line in the figure is at
odds with an unconditional Malthusian prior that would otherwise necessitate stagnation in income per capita over time, and
hence require a greater proximity of observations to the 45-degree line.



                                                                    24
results from estimating the baseline specification for income per capita in the three historical periods, using

regressions where each observation is weighted down according to the number of observations in the sample

reported to possess the same level of income per capita as the observation in question.30 To the extent

that the potential lack of variability in subsets of Maddison’s income per data may have biased the baseline

results in favor of the Malthusian theory, this methodology alleviates such bias in the regression by reducing

the relative importance of clusters of the data where observed variation is lacking.

          A comparison of each of the first three columns between Tables 5 and 6 indicates that the baseline

results remain both quantitatively and qualitatively robust with respect to the aforementioned weighting

procedure. The quantitative robustness of the results are verified by the fact that, despite the statistical

significance of some of the effects in the year 1000 CE under the weighted methodology, the transition-timing

and land-productivity channels continue to remain economically non-substantial for income per capita in all

three periods, as reflected by estimated elasticities that are still about an order of magnitude smaller than

those of population density in the corresponding periods.

          Reassuringly, a similar robustness pattern of the baseline results for income per capita is observed

with respect to Columns 4-6 of Table 6 where an alternative sample weighting procedure is employed, with

individual observations weighted up according to their respective population densities. To the extent that

the sample variation in income per capita may have been artificially introduced under the premise that

technologically advanced societies, as reflected by their higher population densities, also enjoyed marginally

higher standards of living, this weighting procedure would a priori amplify the manifestation of technological

differences as differences in income per capita, and thus bias the results against Malthusian predictions.

Nevertheless, despite exacerbating any systematic bias in favor of rejecting the theory, the results obtained

under this weighting procedure continue to demonstrate the insignificance of the land-productivity and

transition-timing channels for income per capita in all three historical periods.

          To summarize the main findings of the analysis thus far, the results indicate that more productive

societies sustained higher population densities, as opposed to higher standards of living, during the time

period 1–1500 CE. These findings are entirely consistent with the Malthusian prediction that in pre-industrial

economies, resources temporarily generated by more productive technological environments were ultimately

channeled into population growth, with negligible long-run effects on income per capita.
 30 The   notes to Table 6 provide more formal details on the sample weighting methodologies.




                                                             25
                        Table 7: Robustness to Direct Measures of Technological Sophistication

                                       (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                       OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS
                                       Full             Full             Income           Income            Income           Income
                                      Sample           Sample            Sample           Sample            Sample           Sample
                                                                        Dependent Variable is:
                                        Log Population                     Log Income per                      Log Population
                                          Density in:                         Capita in:                         Density in:
                                     1000 CE          1 CE              1000 CE          1 CE              1000 CE          1 CE
 Log Technology Index in             4.315***         4.216***           0.064             0.678          12.762***         7.461**
   Relevant Period                    (0.850)          (0.745)           (0.230)          (0.432)           (0.918)          (3.181)
 Log Land Productivity               0.449***         0.379***           -0.016            0.004           0.429**          0.725**
                                      (0.056)          (0.082)           (0.030)          (0.033)           (0.182)          (0.303)
 Log Absolute Latitude               -0.283**          -0.051            0.036            -0.198          -1.919***        -2.350***
                                      (0.120)          (0.127)           (0.161)          (0.176)           (0.576)          (0.784)
 Mean Distance to Nearest           -0.638***        -0.782***           -0.092            0.114            0.609             0.886
  Coast or River                      (0.188)          (0.198)           (0.144)          (0.164)           (0.469)          (0.904)
 Percentage of Land within            0.385             0.237            -0.156            0.092           1.265**            0.788
   100 km of Coast or River           (0.313)          (0.329)           (0.139)          (0.136)           (0.555)          (0.934)
 Continent Dummies                     Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Observations                          140              129                26               29                26               29
 R-squared                             0.61             0.62              0.64             0.30              0.97             0.88
 Summary – This table demonstrates that the relatively small effect of the level of technological advancement on income per capita in
 the years 1000 CE and 1 CE, but its significantly larger effect on population density in the same time periods, remains qualitatively
 robust when direct measures of technological sophistication for the corresponding years are used in lieu of the timing of the Neolithic
 Revolution.
 Notes – (i) the technology index for a given time period reflects the average degree of technological sophistication across commu-
 nications, transportation, industrial, and agricultural sectors in that period; (ii) the almost perfect collinearity between the degree
 of technological sophistication in the agricultural sector and the timing of the Neolithic transition does not permit the use of the
 latter as a covariate in these regressions; (iii) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage
 of arable land and the log of an agricultural suitability index; (iv) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas,
 which is natural given the historical period examined; (v) regressions (3)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single
 observation for this continent in the corresponding regression samples, restricted by the availability of income per capita data;
 (vi) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (vii) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, **
 at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



4.4    Technological Sophistication

This section demonstrates the qualitative robustness of the results, regarding the significant positive effect

of technology, as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density, but its neutrality

for income per capita, under direct measures of technological advancement. In particular, Table 7 presents

the findings from estimating the baseline specification for population density and income per capita in the

years 1000 CE and 1 CE, employing the index of technological sophistication corresponding to these periods,

in lieu of the number of years elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution, as an indicator of the level of aggregate

productivity.

         As mentioned previously, the index of technological sophistication in each period is based on cross-

cultural, sector-specific technology data from Peregrine (2003), aggregated up to the country level by averag-

ing across sectors and cultures within a country, following the aggregation methodology of Comin, Easterly,

and Gong (2008). Specifically, the index not only captures the level of technological advancement in com-

munications, transportation, and industry, but also incorporates information on the prevalence of sedentary


                                                                   26
agricultural practices relative to hunting and gathering.31 Since the timing of the Neolithic transition is a

priori expected to be highly correlated with the prevalence of agriculture across countries in both 1000 CE

and 1 CE, its inclusion as an explanatory variable in the current analysis would constitute the exploitation

of redundant information and potentially obfuscate the results of the analysis. The regressions in Table 7

therefore omit the timing of the Neolithic Revolution as an explanatory variable for both population density

and income per capita in the two periods examined.32

           Foreshadowing the qualitative robustness of the findings from previous sections, the logged indices

of technology in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE are indeed highly correlated with the logged transition-timing

variable. For instance, in the full cross-country samples employed by the population density regressions in

Section 4.2, the logged Neolithic transition-timing variable possesses correlation coefficients of 0.73 and 0.62

with the logged indices of technology in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE respectively. Similarly, in the income

per capita data-restricted samples employed in Section 4.3, the corresponding correlation coefficients are

0.82 and 0.74.

           Columns 1-2 reveal the full-sample regression results for population density in the years 1000 CE

and 1 CE. Consistent with Malthusian predictions, the regressions indicate highly statistically significant

positive relationships between technological sophistication and population density in the two time periods.

To interpret the coefficients of interest, a 1 percent increase in the level of technological sophistication in the

years 1000 CE and 1 CE corresponds to a rise in population density in the respective time periods by 4.32 and

4.22 percent, conditional on the productivity of land, geographical factors, and continental fixed effects.33 In

addition, Columns 1-2 also indicate that the effects of the land-productivity channel on population density

remain largely stable in comparison to previous estimates presented in Tables 3-4.

           The results from replicating the 1000 CE and 1 CE analyses of Section 4.3, using the period-specific

indices of technology as opposed to the timing of the Neolithic transition, are presented in Columns 3-6. For

each time period examined, the regressions for income per capita and population density reveal, exploiting

identical variations in explanatory variables, that the estimated elasticity of population density with respect

to the degree of technological sophistication is not only highly statistically significant, but at least an order of

magnitude larger than the corresponding elasticity of income per capita. Indeed, the conditional correlation

between technology and income per capita is not statistically different from zero at conventional levels of

significance. A similar pattern also emerges for the estimated elasticities of population density and income
  31 See Appendix B for additional details.
  32 Consistent  with the symptoms of multicollinearity, the inclusion of the transition-timing variable in these regressions
results in the coefficients of interest possessing larger standard errors with relatively minor effects on the coefficient magnitudes
themselves.
  33 The partial regression lines associated with these coefficients appear in Figures D.5(a) and D.5(b) in Appendix D.




                                                                 27
per capita in each period with respect to the land-productivity channel. These findings therefore confirm

the Malthusian prior that, in pre-industrial times, variations in the level of technological advancement were

ultimately manifested as variations in population density as opposed to variations in the standard of living

across regions.

         The remainder of the analysis in this section is concerned with establishing the causal effect of

technology on population density in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE. Since the measures of technology employed

by the preceding analysis are contemporaneous to population density in the two periods examined, the issue

of endogeneity is perhaps more germane in this case than it was when examining the effect of the timing

of the Neolithic Revolution on population density under the OLS estimator. In particular, the estimated

coefficients associated with the period-specific technology indices in Columns 1-2 of Table 7 may, in part, be

capturing reverse causality, due to the potential scale effect of population on technological progress, as well

as the latent influence of unobserved country-specific characteristics that are correlated with both technology

and population density. To address these issues, the analysis to follow appeals to Diamond’s (1997) argument,

regarding the Neolithic transition to agriculture as a triggering event for subsequent technological progress,

to exploit the exogenous component of cross-country variation in technology during the first millennium CE,

as determined by the variation in the prehistoric biogeographical endowments that led to the differential

timing of the Neolithic Revolution itself.34

         The analysis proceeds by first establishing the causal effect of the Neolithic Revolution on subsequent

technological progress. Given the high correlation between the prevalence of sedentary agricultural practices

in Peregrine’s (2003) dataset and the timing of the Neolithic transition, the current analysis exploits, for

each period examined, an alternative index of technological sophistication that is based only on the levels

of technological advancement in communications, transportation, and industry, but otherwise identical in

its underlying aggregation methodology to the index employed thus far. This permits a more transparent

assessment of the argument that the Neolithic Revolution triggered a cumulative process of development,

fueled by the emergence and propagation of a non-food producing class within agricultural societies that

enabled sociocultural and technological advancements over and above subsistence activities.

         Table 8 presents the results of regressions examining the impact of the timing of the Neolithic

Revolution on the level of non-agricultural technological sophistication in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE, while

controlling for land productivity, absolute latitude, access to waterways, and continental fixed effects. In line

with priors, the regressions in Columns 1 and 4 establish a highly statistically significant positive relationship
  34 The potential issue of endogeneity arising from the latent influence of unobserved country fixed effects is also addressed by

a first-difference estimation methodology employing data on population density and technological sophistication at two points
in time. This strategy is pursued in Section 4.6 below.



                                                               28
               Table 8: The Causal Effect of the Neolithic Revolution on Technological Sophistication

                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
                                         OLS               OLS               IV                OLS               OLS                IV
                                        Full            Restricted        Restricted           Full           Restricted        Restricted
                                       Sample            Sample            Sample             Sample           Sample            Sample
                                                      Dependent Variable is Log Non-Agricultural Technology in:
                                                      1000 CE                                         1 CE
 Log Years since Neolithic            0.115***          0.146***          0.279***           0.152***          0.174***          0.339***
   Transition                          (0.024)           (0.030)           (0.073)            (0.027)           (0.029)           (0.074)
 Log Land Productivity                  -0.006            -0.012            -0.009          -0.024***           -0.027*            -0.023
                                       (0.008)           (0.015)           (0.014)            (0.008)           (0.016)           (0.019)
 Log Absolute Latitude                  0.012             0.000             0.005            0.039**             0.026             0.032
                                       (0.014)           (0.019)           (0.018)            (0.016)           (0.022)           (0.020)
 Mean Distance to Nearest               0.008            0.117**           0.129**             0.007             0.050             0.066
  Coast or River                       (0.033)           (0.053)           (0.051)            (0.035)           (0.084)           (0.078)
 Percentage of Land within              0.024             0.080            0.112*              0.047             0.110            0.149**
   100 km of Coast or River            (0.038)           (0.052)           (0.058)            (0.048)           (0.070)           (0.076)
 Continent Dummies                       Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
 Observations                            143                93                93               143                93                 93
 R-squared                               0.76              0.72              0.67              0.59              0.55               0.47
 First-stage F-statistic                  –                 –               13.47               –                  –               13.47
 Overid. p-value                          –                 –               0.256               –                 –                0.166
 Summary – This table presents the causal effect of the timing of the Neolithic Revolution on the level of technology in non-
 agricultural sectors in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE, while controlling for land productivity, access to navigable waterways, absolute
 latitude, and unobserved continental fixed effects.
 Notes – (i) unlike the regular technology index, the index of non-agricultural technology for a given time period reflects the average
 degree of technological sophistication across only communications, transportation, and industrial sectors in that period; (ii) log
 land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an agricultural suitability
 index; (iii) the IV regressions employ the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants and animals as instruments for log
 transition timing; (iv) the statistic for the first-stage F-test of these instruments is significant at the 1 percent level; (v) the p-values
 for the overidentifying restrictions tests correspond to Hansen’s J statistic, distributed in both instances as chi-square with one
 degree of freedom; (vi) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the historical period
 examined; (vii) regressions (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent
 in the IV data-restricted sample; (viii) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (ix) *** denotes statistical
 significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



between the timing of the Neolithic Revolution and the level of non-agricultural technological sophistication in

each period, exploiting variation across the full sample of countries. To allow fair comparisons with the results

from subsequent IV regressions, Columns 2 and 5 repeat the preceding OLS analyses but on the subsample

of countries for which data on the biogeographical instruments for the timing of the Neolithic Revolution are

available. The results indicate that the OLS coefficients of interest from the preceding full-sample analyses

remain robust to this change in the regression sample. Finally, Columns 3 and 6 establish the causal effect

of the Neolithic Revolution on the level of non-agricultural technological sophistication in the two time

periods, employing the prehistoric availability of domesticable species of plants and animals as instruments

for the timing of the Neolithic transition. Not surprisingly, as observed with earlier IV regressions, the

causal impact of the Neolithic transition is, in each case, larger relative to its impact obtained under the

OLS estimator, a pattern that is consistent with measurement error in the transition-timing variable and

the resultant attenuation bias afflicting OLS coefficient estimates.

         In light of the causal link between the timing of the Neolithic transition and the level of technological



                                                                     29
                  Table 9: The Causal Effect of Technological Sophistication on Population Density

                                        (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
                                        OLS              OLS                IV               OLS               OLS                IV
                                       Full           Restricted         Restricted          Full           Restricted        Restricted
                                      Sample           Sample             Sample            Sample           Sample            Sample
                                                          Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in:
                                                      1000 CE                                         1 CE
 Log Technology Index in             4.315***          4.198***          14.530***         4.216***         3.947***          10.798***
   Relevant Period                     (0.850)          (1.164)           (4.437)           (0.745)           (0.983)          (2.857)
 Log Land Productivity               0.449***          0.498***          0.572***          0.379***          0.350**           0.464**
                                       (0.056)          (0.139)           (0.148)           (0.082)           (0.172)          (0.182)
 Log Absolute Latitude                -0.283**          -0.185            -0.209            -0.051            0.083             -0.052
                                       (0.120)          (0.151)           (0.209)           (0.127)           (0.170)          (0.214)
 Mean Distance to Nearest            -0.638***          -0.363            -1.155*         -0.782***           -0.625            -0.616
  Coast or River                       (0.188)          (0.426)           (0.640)           (0.198)           (0.434)          (0.834)
 Percentage of Land within             0.385             0.442             0.153             0.237            0.146             -0.172
   100 km of Coast or River            (0.313)          (0.422)           (0.606)           (0.329)           (0.424)          (0.642)
 Continent Dummies                      Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
 Observations                           140                92                92              129                83                83
 R-squared                              0.61              0.55              0.13             0.62              0.58              0.32
 First-stage F-statistic                 –                 –               12.52              –                  –              12.00
 Overid. p-value                         –                 –               0.941              –                 –               0.160
 Summary – This table presents the causal effect of direct measures of technological sophistication in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE, as
 determined by exogenous factors governing the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on population density in the same time periods,
 while controlling for land productivity, access to navigable waterways, absolute latitude, and unobserved continental fixed effects.
 Notes – (i) the technology index for a given time period reflects the average degree of technological sophistication across commu-
 nications, transportation, industrial, and agricultural sectors in that period; (ii) the almost perfect collinearity between the degree
 of technological sophistication in the agricultural sector and the timing of the Neolithic transition does not permit the use of the
 latter as a covariate in these regressions; (iii) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of
 arable land and the log of an agricultural suitability index; (iv) the IV regressions employ the numbers of prehistoric domesticable
 species of plants and animals as instruments for the log of the technology index in each of the two periods; (v) in both cases, the
 statistic for the first-stage F-test of these instruments is significant at the 1 percent level; (vi) the p-values for the overidentifying
 restrictions tests correspond to Hansen’s J statistic, distributed in both instances as chi-square with one degree of freedom; (vii) a
 single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the historical period examined; (viii) regressions
 (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent in the IV data-restricted
 sample; (ix) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (x) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent
 level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



advancement in the first millennium CE, the analysis may now establish the causal impact of technology on

population density in the two time periods examined. This is accomplished by exploiting exogenous variation

in the level of technological advancement generated ultimately by differences in prehistoric biogeographical

endowments that led to the differential timing of the transition to agriculture across countries. Table 9 reveals

the results of this analysis where, as in Table 7, the measure of technology employed is the overall index that

incorporates information on the prevalence of sedentary agriculture along with the level of advancement in

non-agricultural technologies.

         To facilitate comparisons of results obtained under the OLS and IV estimators, the full-sample OLS

results from Table 7 for the years 1000 CE and 1 CE are again presented in Columns 1 and 4 of Table 9, while

Columns 2 and 5 present the same regressions conducted on the IV-restricted subsample of countries. The

causal effects of the level of technological advancement in the years 1000 CE and 1 CE, instrumented by the

prehistoric availability of domesticable plant and animal species, on population density in the corresponding

periods are revealed in Columns 3 and 6. The estimated IV coefficients indicate a much larger causal impact


                                                                    30
of technology on population density, with a 1 percent increase in the level of technological sophistication in

1000 CE and 1 CE raising population density in the respective time periods by 14.53 and 10.80 percent,

conditional on the productivity of land, absolute latitude, access to waterways, and continental fixed effects.

Thus, in line with the predictions of the Malthusian theory, the results indicate that, during the agricultural

stage of development, temporary gains due to improvements in the technological environment were indeed

channeled into population growth, thereby leading more technologically advanced societies to sustain higher

population densities.


4.5    Robustness to Technology Diffusion and Geographical Factors

This section establishes the robustness of the results for population density and income per capita in the

year 1500 CE with respect to the spatial influence of technological frontiers, as well as other geographical

factors such as climate and small island and landlocked dummies, all of which may have had an effect on

aggregate productivity either directly, by affecting the productivity of land, or indirectly, by affecting the

prevalence of trade and technology diffusion. Specifically, the technology-diffusion hypothesis suggests that

spatial proximity to societies at the world technology frontier confers a beneficial effect on development

by facilitating the diffusion of new technologies from the frontier through trade as well as sociocultural

and geopolitical influences. In particular, the diffusion channel implies that, ceteris paribus, the greater

the geographical distance from the technological leaders in a given period, the lower the level of economic

development amongst the followers in that period.

        To account for the technology-diffusion channel, the current analysis employs as a control variable the

great-circle distance from the capital city of a country to the closest of eight worldwide regional technological

frontiers. These centers of technology diffusion are derived by Ashraf and Galor (2010), who employ historical

urbanization estimates provided by Tertius Chandler (1987) and George Modelski (2003) to identify frontiers

based on the size of urban populations. Specifically, for a given time period, their procedure selects from

each continent the two largest cities in that period, belonging to distinct sociopolitical entities. Thus, the

set of regional technological frontiers identified for the year 1500 CE comprises London and Paris in Europe,

Fez and Cairo in Africa, Constantinople and Peking in Asia, and Tenochtitlan and Cuzco in the Americas.

        Column 1 of Table 10 reveals the qualitative robustness of the full-sample regression results for

population density in the year 1500 CE under controls for distance to the closest regional frontier as well

as small island and landlocked dummies. To the extent that the gains from trade and technology diffusion

are manifested primarily in terms of population size, as the Malthusian theory would predict, distance to

the frontier has a highly statistically significant negative impact on population density. Nevertheless, the


                                                       31
                                           Table 10: Additional Robustness Checks

                                        (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                        OLS              OLS              OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS
                                       Full             Full             Income           Income            Income           Income
                                      Sample           Sample            Sample           Sample            Sample           Sample
                                                                         Dependent Variable is:
                                         Log Population                     Log Income per                      Log Population
                                           Density in                         Capita in                           Density in
                                            1500 CE                            1500 CE                             1500 CE
  Log Years since Neolithic          0.828***         0.877***            0.117            0.103           1.498**           1.478**
    Transition                        (0.208)           (0.214)          (0.221)          (0.214)           (0.546)          (0.556)
  Log Land Productivity              0.559***         0.545***            0.036            0.047           0.596***         0.691***
                                      (0.048)           (0.063)          (0.032)          (0.037)           (0.123)          (0.122)
  Log Absolute Latitude              -0.400***         -0.301**           -0.020           0.028            -0.354            0.668
                                      (0.108)           (0.129)          (0.110)          (0.247)           (0.392)          (0.783)
  Mean Distance to Nearest           -0.403***        -0.388***           0.175            0.202             0.394            0.594
   Coast or River                     (0.152)           (0.144)          (0.286)          (0.309)           (0.994)          (0.844)
  Percentage of Land within          0.870***         0.837***            0.160            0.245           1.766***         2.491***
    100 km of Coast or River          (0.272)           (0.280)          (0.153)          (0.208)           (0.511)          (0.754)
  Log Distance to Frontier           -0.186***        -0.191***           -0.005           -0.001           -0.130*          -0.108*
                                      (0.035)           (0.036)          (0.011)          (0.013)           (0.066)          (0.055)
  Small Island Dummy                   0.067            0.086             -0.118           -0.046          1.962**          2.720***
                                      (0.582)           (0.626)          (0.216)          (0.198)           (0.709)          (0.699)
  Landlocked Dummy                     0.131            0.119             0.056            0.024           1.490***         1.269***
                                      (0.209)           (0.203)          (0.084)          (0.101)           (0.293)          (0.282)
  Percentage of Land in                                 -0.196                             -0.192                            -1.624*
    Temperate Zones                                     (0.513)                           (0.180)                            (0.917)
  Percentage of Land in                                 0.269                              -0.025                             1.153
    (Sub)Tropical Zones                                 (0.307)                           (0.308)                            (1.288)
  Continent Dummies                     Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
  Observations                          147              147                31               31               31               31
  R-squared                             0.76             0.76              0.67             0.67             0.94             0.96
  Summary – This table demonstrates that the relatively small effects of land productivity and the level of technological advancement,
  as proxied by the timing of the Neolithic Revolution, on income per capita in the year 1500 CE, but their significantly larger effects
  on population density in the same time period, remain robust under additional controls for technology diffusion and climatic factors.
  Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
  agricultural suitability index; (ii) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the historical
  period examined; (iii) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (iv) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1
  percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



regression coefficients associated with the Neolithic transition-timing and land-productivity channels remain

largely stable, albeit somewhat less so for the former, in comparison to their baseline estimates from Column 4

in Table 2. Indeed, the lower magnitude of the coefficient associated with the transition-timing channel is

attributable to the fact that several frontiers in the year 1500 CE, including Egypt, China, and Mexico, were

also centers of diffusion of agricultural practices during the Neolithic Revolution and, as such, distance to

the frontier in 1500 CE is partly capturing the effect of the differential timing of the Neolithic transition

itself.

          The regression in Column 2 extends the robustness analysis of Column 1 by adding controls for the

percentage of land in temperate and tropical zones. The findings demonstrate that the effects of the Neolithic

transition-timing, land-productivity, and spatial technology-diffusion channels on population density are

indeed not spuriously driven by these additional climatological factors.


                                                                   32
         Columns 3-6 reveal the robustness of the results for income per capita as well as population density

in the income per capita data-restricted sample, under controls for the technology-diffusion channel and

additional geographical factors. In comparison to the relevant baseline regressions presented in Columns 1

and 4 of Table 5, the coefficients associated with the transition-timing and land-productivity channels remain

both qualitatively and quantitatively stable. In particular, the estimated elasticities of population density

with respect to these channels are about an order of magnitude larger than the corresponding elasticities of

income per capita regardless of the set of additional controls included in the specification.

         With regard to the influence of technology diffusion, the qualitative pattern of the effects on pop-

ulation density versus income per capita is similar to those associated with the transition-timing and land-

productivity channels. The finding that the negative elasticity of income per capita with respect to distance

to the frontier is not only statistically insignificant but also at least an order of magnitude smaller than that

of population density confirms Malthusian priors that the gains from trade and technology diffusion were

primarily channeled into population growth rather than to improvements in living standards during pre-

industrial times.35 While this finding may also be consistent with a non-Malthusian migration-driven theory

of population movements against a spatial productivity gradient, the results uncovered by the first-difference

estimation strategy pursued in the next section provide evidence in favor of the proposed Malthusian inter-

pretation.


4.6     Robustness to Alternative Theories and Country Fixed Effects

This section examines the robustness of the empirical findings to alternative theories and time-invariant coun-

try fixed effects. Specifically, the level regression results may be explained by the following non-Malthusian

theory. In a world where labor is perfectly mobile, regions with higher aggregate productivity would expe-

rience labor inflows until regional wage rates were equalized, implying that, in levels, technology should be

positively associated with population density but should not be correlated with income per capita across

regions. Such a theory would also imply, however, that increases in the level of technology in any given

region should generate increases in the standard of living in all regions. This runs contrary to the Malthu-

sian prediction that increases in the level of technology in a given region should ultimately translate into

increases in population density in that region, leaving income per capita constant at the subsistence level in

all regions. Thus, examining the effect of a change in technology on changes in population density versus

income per capita, as opposed to the impact of the level of technology on the levels of population density
  35 Galor and Mountford (2008) reveal similar findings amongst non-OECD countries in the period spanning 1985-90, indi-

cating that this phenomenon is more broadly associated with economies in the agricultural stage of development, even in the
contemporary period.



                                                            33
versus income per capita, constitutes a more discriminatory test of the Malthusian model.

         Moreover, the level regressions in Table 7, indicating the significant positive relationship between

the level of technology and population density but the absence of a systematic relationship with income

per capita, could potentially reflect spurious correlations between technology and one or more unobserved

time-invariant country fixed effects. By investigating the effect of changes on changes, however, one may

“difference out” time-invariant country fixed effects, thereby ensuring that the coefficients of interest in the

regression will not be afflicted by any such omitted variable bias. In addition, while the relationship between

contemporaneous changes in technology and population density or income per capita could reflect reverse

causality, this endogeneity issue may be alleviated somewhat by examining the impact of the lagged change

in technology on changes in population density versus income per capita.

         The current investigation thus examines the effect of the change in the level of technology between

the years 1000 BCE and 1 CE on the change in population density, versus its effect on the change in income

per capita, over the 1–1000 CE time horizon. In particular, the analysis compares the results from estimating

the following empirical models:


                                       ∆ ln Pi,t    = µ0 + µ1 ∆ ln Ai,t−1 + φi,t ,                                      (17)

                                        ∆ ln yi,t   = ν0 + ν1 ∆ ln Ai,t−1 + ψi,t ,                                      (18)


where ∆ ln Pi,t ≡ ln Pi,t+1 − ln Pi,t (i.e., the difference in log population density in country i between 1 CE

and 1000 CE); ∆ ln yi,t ≡ ln yi,t+1 − ln yi,t (i.e., the difference in log income per capita of country i between

1 CE and 1000 CE); ∆ ln Ai,t−1 ≡ ln Ai,t − ln Ai,t−1 (i.e., the difference in log technology of country i

between 1000 BCE and 1 CE); and, φi,t and ψi,t are country-specific disturbance terms for the changes in

log population density and log income per capita. In addition, the intercept terms, µ0 and ν0 , capture the

average trend growth rates of population density and income per capita respectively over the 1–1000 CE

time horizon. These models are the first-difference counterparts of (15) and (16), given that (i) ln Ai,t−1

is used in lieu of ln Ti , and (ii) the fixed effects of land productivity and the other geographical controls,

including continental dummies, are time-invariant in those specifications.36
  36 In particular, equations (17) and (18) are obtained by applying the first-difference method to the following variants of

equations (15) and (16):
                                                                            0       0
                                                                                            P
                                  ln Pi,t = γ0 + µ1 ln Ai,t−1 + γ1 ln Xi + γ2 Γi + γ3 Di + ξi,t ,
                                                                              0     0      y
                                 ln yi,t = λ0 + ν1 ln Ai,t−1 + λ1 ln Xi + λ2 Γi + λ3 Di + ξi,t ,
                                  P and ξ y , being modeled as:
with the respective error terms, ξi,t    i,t

                                                     P
                                                    ξi,t = ηiP + µ0 t + σi,t
                                                                         P
                                                                             ,
                                                      y
                                                     ξi,t = ηiy + ν0 t + σi,t
                                                                          y
                                                                              ,



                                                                34
               Table 11: Robustness to Alternative Theories and Time-Invariant Country Fixed Effects

                                                    (1)                             (2)                               (3)
                                                    OLS                             OLS                               OLS
                                                   Full                           Income                             Income
                                                  Sample                          Sample                             Sample
                                                                         Dependent Variable is Diff. in:
                                                        Log Population Density                             Log Income per Capita
                                                      between 1 CE and 1000 CE                           between 1 CE and 1000 CE
  Diff. in Log Technology Index                  1.747***                          3.133*                            0.073
    between 1000 BCE and 1 CE                     (0.429)                         (1.550)                            (0.265)
  Constant                                       0.451***                          -0.026                            -0.040
                                                  (0.053)                         (0.204)                            (0.064)
  Observations                                      126                              26                                26
  R-squared                                         0.17                            0.34                              0.00
  Summary – This table establishes that the change in the level of technological sophistication that occurred between the years
  1000 BCE and 1 CE was primarily associated with a change in population density as opposed to a change in income per capita
  over the 1–1000 CE time horizon, and also reveals that there was no trend growth in income per capita during this period,
  thereby demonstrating robustness to time-invariant country fixed effects and dispelling an alternative migration-driven theory that
  is consistent with the level regression results.
  Notes – (i) the technology index for a given time period reflects the average degree of technological sophistication across commu-
  nications, transportation, industrial, and agricultural sectors in that period; (ii) the absence of controls from both regressions is
  justified by the removal of time-invariant country fixed effects through the application of the first-difference methodology; (iii) ro-
  bust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (iv) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the
  5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



          As discussed earlier, the alternative migration-driven theory predicts that an increase in technology

in a given region will not differentially increase income per capita in that region due to the cross-regional

equalization of wage rates, but will increase income per capita in all regions. In light of the specifications

defined above, this theory would therefore imply that ν1 = 0 and ν0 > 0. According to the Malthusian

theory, on the other hand, not only will the long-run level of income per capita remain unaffected in the

region undergoing technological advancement, it will remain unaffected in all regions as well. The Malthusian

theory thus implies that both ν1 = 0 and ν0 = 0.

          Table 11 presents the results from estimating equations (17) and (18). As predicted by the Malthu-

sian theory, the slope coefficients in Columns 1 and 2 indicate that the change in the level of technology

between the years 1000 BCE and 1 CE has a positive and statistically significant effect on the change in

population density over the 1–1000 CE time horizon. In contrast, Column 3 reveals that the corresponding

effect on the change in income per capita over the time period 1–1000 CE is relatively marginal and not

statistically significantly different from zero. Moreover, the intercept coefficient in Column 3 suggests that

the standard of living in 1000 CE was not significantly different from that in 1 CE, a finding that accords

where ηiP and ηiy are unobserved time-invariant country fixed effects on population density and income per capita in country
i; µ0 and ν0 are global year fixed effects on population density and income per capita in year t; and, finally, σi,tP and σ y are
                                                                                                                             i,t
country-year-specific disturbance terms for population density and income per capita. Thus, the error terms in equations (17)
                                                                                                                        P
and (18) represent the changes over time in the aforementioned country-year-specific disturbance terms, i.e., φi,t ≡ σi,t+1      P
                                                                                                                              − σi,t
               y        y
and ψi,t ≡ σi,t+1   − σi,t . Strictly speaking, given that equations (15) and (16) allow for time-varying fixed effects, the actual
first-difference counterparts of these equations, augmented with ln Ai,t−1 as an additional explanatory variable, would also have
to control for transition timing, land productivity, and the other baseline controls, including continental dummies. Results (not
shown) from estimating these augmented first-difference specifications, however, are qualitatively similar to those obtained from
estimating equations (17) and (18).


                                                                    35
well with the Malthusian viewpoint. Overall, the results from the first-difference estimation strategy pursued

in this section lend further credence to the Malthusian interpretation of the level regression results presented

in earlier sections.



5     Concluding Remarks

This paper examines the central hypothesis of the influential Malthusian theory, according to which im-

provements in the technological environment during the pre-industrial era had generated only temporary

gains in income per capita, eventually leading to a larger, but not significantly richer, population. It ex-

ploits exogenous sources of cross-country variation in land productivity and technological levels to examine

their hypothesized differential effects on population density versus income per capita during the time period

1–1500 CE.

         Consistent with Malthusian predictions, the analysis uncovers statistically significant positive effects

of land productivity and the technological level on population density in the years 1500 CE, 1000 CE and

1 CE. In contrast, the effects of land productivity and technology on income per capita in these periods

are not significantly different from zero. Moreover, the estimated elasticities of income per capita with

respect to these two channels are about an order of magnitude smaller than the corresponding elasticities of

population density. Importantly, the qualitative results remain robust to controls for the confounding effects

of a large number of geographical factors, including absolute latitude, access to waterways, distance to the

technological frontier, and the share of land in tropical versus temperate climatic zones, which may have

had an impact on aggregate productivity either directly, by affecting the productivity of land, or indirectly

via the prevalence of trade and the diffusion of technologies. Furthermore, the results are also qualitatively

unaffected when a direct measure of technological sophistication, rather than the timing of the Neolithic

Revolution, is employed as an indicator of the level of aggregate productivity. Finally, the study establishes

that the results are not driven by unobserved time-invariant country fixed effects.

         The analysis also dispels a non-Malthusian theory that may appear consistent with the level regres-

sion results. Specifically, in a world with perfect labor mobility, regions with higher aggregate productivity

would have experienced labor inflows until regional wage rates were equalized, implying that technology

should be positively associated with population density but should not be correlated with income per capita.

However, labor inflows in response to technological improvements in a given region would result in higher

income per capita in all regions, implying that changes in the level of technology should be positively asso-

ciated with changes in the standard of living. On the contrary, using a first-difference estimation strategy



                                                       36
with a lagged explanatory variable, the analysis demonstrates that, while changes in the level of technology

between 1000 BCE and 1 CE were indeed associated with significant changes in population density over the

1–1000 CE time horizon, the level of income per capita across regions during this period was, in fact, largely

unaffected, as suggested by the Malthusian theory.

        In the course of the analysis, the paper generates three additional findings. First, in contrast to the

positive relationship between absolute latitude and contemporary income per capita, population density in

pre-industrial times was on average higher at latitudinal bands closer to the equator. Thus, while proximity to

the equator has been found to be detrimental in the industrial stage of development, it appears to have been

beneficial during the agricultural stage. Second, the paper also establishes the importance of technological

diffusion in the pre-industrial world. To the extent that the gains from trade and technology diffusion are

manifested primarily in terms of population size, as the Malthusian theory would predict, distance to the

frontier has a highly statistically significant negative impact on population density. Finally, the analysis

provides the first test of Diamond’s (1997) influential hypothesis in the context of pre-industrial societies,

establishing that, indeed, an earlier onset of the Neolithic Revolution contributed to the level of technological

sophistication and thus population density in the pre-modern world.

        Interestingly, the epoch of Malthusian stagnation in income per capita masked a dynamism that may

have ultimately brought about the phase transition that was associated with the take-off from the Malthusian

regime. Although the growth of income per capita was minuscule over the Malthusian epoch, in the course of

the Malthusian interaction between technology and population, technological progress intensified and world

population significantly increased in size – a dynamism that was instrumental for the emergence of economies

from the Malthusian trap.




                                                       37
Appendix A                  First-Stage Regressions

                                               Table A.1: First-Stage Regressions

                                      (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
                                      OLS               OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS               OLS
                                                                  Second-Stage Dependent Variable is:
                                     Log of            Log of             Log of         Log of             Log of           Log of
                                   Population        Population         Population     Technology         Population       Population
                                   Density in        Density in         Density in      Index in          Density in       Density in
                                    1500 CE           1000 CE             1 CE         1/1000 CE           1000 CE           1 CE

                                                                         Endogenous Variable is:
                                                                                                               Log Technology
                                                                                                                  Index in:
                                               Log Years since Neolithic Transition                        1000 CE          1 CE
Excluded Instruments:
Domesticable Plants                  0.012**          0.013**            0.012**         0.012**            0.001           0.007***
                                     (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.006)          (0.005)           (0.001)           (0.002)
Domesticable Animals                 0.067**          0.064**            0.048*          0.063**           0.020***           -0.002
                                     (0.029)           (0.028)           (0.029)          (0.028)           (0.006)           (0.008)
Second-Stage Controls:
Log Land Productivity                 0.040            0.025              -0.011          0.023             0.002             -0.003
                                     (0.049)           (0.049)           (0.037)          (0.049)           (0.014)           (0.017)
Log Absolute Latitude               -0.127***        -0.130***           -0.083*        -0.120***           -0.015            -0.005
                                     (0.042)           (0.043)           (0.044)          (0.044)           (0.014)           (0.019)
Mean Distance to Nearest              0.127            0.103              0.094           0.079            0.112**            0.055
 Coast or River                      (0.141)           (0.140)           (0.156)          (0.143)           (0.044)           (0.093)
Percentage of Land within             -0.165           -0.190            -0.227*          -0.171            0.044             0.061
  100 km of Coast or River           (0.137)           (0.136)           (0.136)          (0.137)           (0.036)           (0.063)
Continent Dummies                      Yes              Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                            96               94                83               93                92               83
R-squared                              0.68             0.70              0.71             0.67              0.71             0.51
Partial R-squared                      0.27            0.28               0.25             0.26             0.17              0.16
F-statistic                           14.65            15.10              10.85           13.47             12.52             12.00
Summary – This table collects the first-stage regression results for all IV regressions examined in the text. Specifically, regressions
(1), (2), and (3) represent, respectively, the first stage of regression (6) in Tables 2, 3, and 4. Regression (4) corresponds to the
first stage of both regressions (3) and (6) in Table 8. Finally, regressions (5) and (6) represent the first stage of regressions (3) and
(6), respectively, in Table 9.
Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
agricultural suitability index; (ii) the partial R-squared reported is for the excluded instruments only; (iii) the F-statistic is from
the test of excluded instruments and is always significant at the 1 percent level; (iv) a single continent dummy is used to represent
the Americas, which is natural given the historical period examined; (v) the dummy for Oceania is not employed due to the presence
of a single observation for this continent in the corresponding regression samples; (vi) robust standard error estimates are reported
in parentheses; (vii) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent
level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                   38
Appendix B               Variable Definitions and Sources

Population Density in 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE: Population density in a given year is calculated

as population in that year, as reported by Colin McEvedy and Richard Jones (1978), divided by land

area today, as reported by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The cross-sectional unit of

observation in McEvedy and Jones’ dataset is a region delineated by its international borders in 1975.

Historical population estimates are provided for regions corresponding to either individual countries or, in

some cases, to sets comprised of 2-3 neighboring countries (e.g., India, Pakistan and Bangladesh). In the

latter case, a set-specific population density figure is calculated based on total land area and the figure is then

assigned to each of the component countries in the set. The same methodology is also employed to obtain

population density for countries that exist today but were part of a larger political unit (e.g., the former

Yugoslavia) in 1975. The population data reported by the authors are based on a wide variety of country

and region-specific historical sources, the enumeration of which would be impractical for this appendix. The

interested reader is therefore referred to McEvedy and Jones (1978) for more details on the original data

sources cited therein.


Income per Capita in 1 CE, 1000 CE, and 1500 CE: The level of income per capita, as reported

by Angus Maddison (2003), for a given year. Additional details are available on the author’s website.

The interested reader is also referred to www.ggdc.net/maddison/other%5Fbooks/HS-8%5F2003.pdf for a

discussion of the data by the author.


Years since Neolithic Transition: The number of thousand years elapsed, until the year 2000, since the

majority of the population residing within a country’s modern national borders began practicing sedentary

agriculture as the primary mode of subsistence. This measure, reported by Louis Putterman (2008), is com-

piled using a wide variety of both regional and country-specific archaeological studies as well as more general

encyclopedic works on the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture during the Neolithic. The

reader is referred to www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Louis%5FPutterman/agricultural%20data%20page.htm for a

detailed description of the primary and secondary data sources employed by the author in the construction

of this variable.


Plants and Animals (used as instrumental variables): The number of domesticable species of plants

and animals, respectively, that were prehistorically native to the continent or landmass to which a country

belongs. These variables are obtained from the dataset of Ola Olsson and Douglas A. Hibbs, Jr. (2005).



                                                        39
Land Productivity: This measure is composed of (1) the percentage of arable land, as reported by the

World Development Indicators, and (2) an index of the suitability of land for agriculture, based on geospatial

soil pH and temperature data, as reported by Navin Ramankutty et al. (2002) and aggregated to the country

level by Stelios Michalopoulos (2008). In particular, log land productivity is the first principal component

of the logs of these variables, capturing 83 percent of their combined variation.


Absolute Latitude: The absolute value of the latitude of a country’s approximate geodesic centroid,

as reported by The World Factbook, an online resource maintained by Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),

accessible at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/.


Mean Distance to Nearest Coast or River: The distance, in thousands of kilometers, from a GIS grid cell

to the nearest ice-free coastline or sea-navigable river, averaged across the grid cells of a country. This variable

is part of Harvard University’s Center for International Development (CID) Research Datasets on General

Measures of Geography, available online at http://www.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/geographydata.htm.


Percentage of Land within 100 km of Coast or River: The percentage of a country’s total land area

that is located within 100 kilometers of an ice-free coastline or sea-navigable river, as reported by the CID

Research Datasets on General Measures of Geography.


Technology Index in 1000 BCE, 1 CE, and 1000 CE: The index of technology for a given year is

constructed using worldwide historical cross-cultural data on sector-specific levels of technology, reported

on a 3-point scale by the Atlas of Cultural Evolution (Peter N. Peregrine, 2003). Following the aggregation

methodology adopted by Diego Comin, William Easterly, and Erick Gong (2008), the index employs technol-

ogy data on four sectors, including communications, industry (i.e., ceramics and metallurgy), transportation,

and agriculture.

        The level of technology in each sector is indexed as follows. In the communications sector, the index

is assigned a value of 0 under the absence of both true writing and mnemonic or non-written records, a value

of 1 under the presence of only mnemonic or non-written records, and a value of 2 under the presence of

both. In the industrial sector, the index is assigned a value of 0 under the absence of both metalworks and

pottery, a value of 1 under the presence of only pottery, and a value of 2 under the presence of both. In the

transportation sector, the index is assigned a value of 0 under the absence of both vehicles and pack or draft

animals, a value of 1 under the presence of only pack or draft animals, and a value of 2 under the presence

of both. Finally, in the agricultural sector, the index is assigned a value of 0 under the absence of sedentary

agriculture, a value of 1 when agriculture is practiced but only as a secondary mode of subsistence, and a


                                                        40
value of 2 when agriculture is practiced as the primary mode of subsistence. In all cases, the sector-specific

indices are normalized to assume values in the [0, 1]-interval. The technology index for a given culture is

thus the unweighted average across sectors of the sector-specific indices for that culture.

        Given that the cross-sectional unit of observation in Peregrine’s dataset is an archaeological tradition

or culture, specific to a given region on the global map, and since spatial delineations in Peregrine’s dataset

do not necessarily correspond to contemporary international borders, the culture-specific technology index

in a given year is aggregated to the country level by averaging across those cultures from Peregrine’s map

that appear within the modern borders of a given country. For more details on the underlying data and the

aggregation methodology employed to construct this index, the reader is referred to Peregrine (2003) and

Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2008).


Non-agricultural Technology Index in 1000 BCE, 1 CE, and 1000 CE: The index of non-agricultural

technology for a given year is based on the same underlying data and aggregation methodology discussed

above for the overall technology index. However, unlike the overall index, the non-agricultural counterpart

incorporates data on the sector-specific technology indices for only the communications, industrial (i.e.,

ceramics and metallurgy), and transportation sectors.


Distance to Frontier in 1500 CE: The distance, in thousands of kilometers, from a country’s modern

capital city to the closest regional technological frontier in the year 1500 CE, as reported by Quamrul Ashraf

and Oded Galor (2010). Specifically, the authors employ historical urbanization estimates from Tertius

Chandler (1987) and George Modelski (2003) to identify frontiers based on the size of urban populations,

selecting the two largest cities from each continent that belong to different sociopolitical entities. Thus,

in the year 1500 CE, the set of regional frontiers comprises London (UK), Paris (France), Cairo (Egypt),

Fez (Morocco), Constantinople (Turkey), Peking (China), Tenochtitlan (Mexico), and Cuzco (Peru). For

additional details, the reader is referred to Ashraf and Galor (2010).


Percentage of Land in Temperate Zones: The percentage of a country’s total land area in Köppen-

Geiger temperate zones (including zones classified as Cf, Cs, Df, and Dw), as reported by the CID Research

Datasets on General Measures of Geography.


Percentage of Land in Tropical and Subtropical Zones: The percentage of a country’s total land

area in Köppen-Geiger tropical and subtropical zones (including zones classified as Af, Am, Aw, and Cw),

as reported by the CID Research Datasets on General Measures of Geography.



                                                      41
Small Island and Landlocked Dummies: 0/1-indicators for whether or not a country is a small island

nation, and whether or not it possesses a coastline. These variables are constructed by the authors based on

information reported by the CIA in The World Factbook online resource.




                                                    42
Appendix C              Descriptive Statistics

                      Table C.1: Descriptive Statistics – Means and Standard Deviations

                                                       Obs.       Mean         S.D.        Min.    Max.
Log Population Density in 1500 CE                         184      0.883      1.424       -3.817   4.135
Log Population Density in 1000 CE                         177      0.449      1.366       -4.510   3.442
Log Population Density in 1 CE                            155     -0.163      1.455       -4.510   3.170
Log Income per Capita in 1500 CE                           31      6.343      0.260        5.991   7.003
Log Income per Capita in 1000 CE                           28      6.084      0.141        5.991   6.477
Log Income per Capita in 1 CE                              30      6.129      0.163        5.991   6.696
Log Years since Neolithic Transition                      164      8.313      0.642        5.892   9.259
Log Technology Index in 1000 CE                           149      0.573      0.160        0.118   0.693
Log Technology Index in 1 CE                              149      0.529      0.163        0.061   0.693
Log Land Productivity                                     158      0.000      1.293       -4.815   1.657
Log Absolute Latitude                                     205      2.913      0.967       -0.693   4.277
Mean Distance to Nearest Coast or River                   160      0.342      0.471        0.008   2.386
Percentage of Land within 100 km of Coast or River        160      0.463      0.375        0.000   1.000
Log Distance to Frontier                                  207      7.499      1.435        0.000   9.288
Percentage of Land in Temperate Zones                     160      0.297      0.420        0.000   1.000
Percentage of Land in (Sub)Tropical Zones                 160      0.364      0.433        0.000   1.000




                                                     43
                                                         Table C.2: Descriptive Statistics – Pairwise Correlations

                                      (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)    (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)
     Log Population Density         1.000
       in 1500 CE                   (184)
     Log Population Density         0.965    1.000
       in 1000 CE                   (177)    (177)
     Log Population Density         0.881    0.940     1.000
       in 1 CE                      (155)    (155)     (155)
     Log Income per Capita          0.726    0.641     0.670    1.000
       in 1500 CE                    (31)     (29)      (29)     (31)
     Log Income per Capita          0.128    0.238     0.253    0.106    1.000
       in 1000 CE                    (28)     (26)      (26)     (28)     (28)
     Log Income per Capita          0.225    0.323     0.453    0.337    0.485    1.000
       in 1 CE                       (30)     (29)      (29)     (27)     (27)     (30)
     Log Years since Neolithic      0.498    0.571     0.638    0.561    0.463    0.415    1.000
       Transition                   (158)    (152)     (135)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (164)
     Log Technology Index           0.584    0.562     0.565    0.646    0.303    0.329    0.715    1.000




44
       in 1000 CE                   (148)    (143)     (131)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (146)    (149)
     Log Technology Index           0.495    0.524     0.554    0.635    0.283    0.380    0.597    0.827    1.000
       in 1 CE                      (148)    (144)     (132)     (30)     (27)     (30)    (146)    (148)    (149)
     Log Land Productivity          0.509    0.433     0.397    0.408   -0.115   -0.051   -0.002   -0.011   -0.126    1.000
                                    (152)    (147)     (131)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (151)    (146)    (146)    (158)
     Log Absolute Latitude          0.139    0.147     0.347    0.320   -0.363   -0.302    0.304    0.325    0.279    0.120    1.000
                                    (184)    (177)     (155)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (163)    (149)    (149)    (158)    (205)
     Mean Distance to Nearest      -0.302   -0.326    -0.358   -0.387    0.173   -0.123   -0.020    0.003   -0.042   -0.167   -0.014    1.000
       Coast or River               (157)    (152)     (136)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (154)    (148)    (148)    (153)    (160)    (160)
     Percentage of Land within      0.367    0.343     0.365    0.452   -0.417    0.002    0.091    0.086    0.095    0.215    0.212   -0.670    1.000
       100 km of Coast or River     (157)    (152)     (136)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (154)    (148)    (148)    (153)    (160)    (160)    (160)
     Log Distance to Frontier      -0.351   -0.363    -0.429   -0.168   -0.025   -0.055   -0.396   -0.271   -0.258   -0.121   -0.369    0.156   -0.195    1.000
                                    (184)    (177)     (155)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (164)    (149)    (149)    (158)    (205)    (160)    (160)    (207)
     Percentage of Land in          0.355    0.347     0.372    0.420   -0.544   -0.188    0.273    0.258    0.168    0.326    0.605   -0.263    0.422   -0.327    1.000
       Temperate Zones              (157)    (152)     (136)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (154)    (148)    (148)    (153)    (160)    (160)    (160)    (160)    (160)
     Percentage of Land in         -0.071   -0.094    -0.225   -0.226   -0.007   -0.093   -0.436   -0.476   -0.461    0.160   -0.710   -0.136    0.024    0.334   -0.577
       (Sub)Tropical Zones          (157)    (152)     (136)     (31)     (28)     (30)    (154)    (148)    (148)    (153)    (160)    (160)    (160)    (160)    (160)
     Notes – Number of observations in parentheses.
Appendix D              Supplementary Results

This appendix section collects some supplementary figures referred to in the text, and presents some addi-

tional findings demonstrating the robustness of the main results.

        Figures D.1(a) and D.1(b) depict the partial regression lines associated with the transition-timing

and land-productivity channels, respectively, in the baseline regression for population density in 1000 CE,

whereas Figures D.2(a) and D.2(b) perform the same for population density in 1 CE. Moreover, Figures D.3

and D.4 illustrate the extent of cross-sectional and intertemporal variation prevalent across Maddison’s (2003)

historical income per capita estimates. Finally, the partial regression lines associated with the period-specific

indices of technology in the baseline regressions for population density in 1000 CE and 1 CE are depicted in

Figures D.5(a) and D.5(b) respectively.

        With respect to additional results demonstrating robustness, Table D.1 establishes that the results

for population density and income per capita in 1500 CE are robust under two alternative specifications

that relax potential constraints imposed by the baseline regression models, including (i) the treatment of

the Americas as a single entity in accounting for continental fixed effects, and (ii) the employment of only

the common variation in (the logs of) the percentage of arable land and the index of agricultural suitability

when accounting for the effect of the land-productivity channel by way of the first principal component of

these two variables.

        Given that historical population estimates are also available from Maddison (2003), albeit for a

smaller set of countries than McEvedy and Jones (1978), Table D.2 demonstrates that the baseline results for

population density in the three historical periods, obtained using data from McEvedy and Jones, are indeed

qualitatively unchanged under Maddison’s alternative population estimates. Finally, given the possibility

that the disturbance terms in the baseline regression models may be non-spherical in nature, particularly

since economic development has been spatially clustered in certain regions of the world, Tables D.3 and D.4

repeat the baseline analyses for population density and income per capita in the three historical periods (i.e.,

the years 1500 CE, 1000 CE, and 1 CE), with the standard errors of the point estimates corrected for spatial

autocorrelation following the methodology of Timothy G. Conley (1999).




                                                       45
                          (a) The Partial Effect of Transition Timing on Population Density in 1000 CE




                         (b) The Partial Effect of Land Productivity on Population Density in 1000 CE

                Figure D.1: Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Population Density in 1000 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the partial regression line for the effect of transition timing (land productivity) on population density in
the year 1000 CE, while controlling for the influence of land productivity (transition timing), absolute latitude, access to waterways,
and continental fixed effects. Thus, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing transition timing (land productivity)
and population density, respectively, on the aforementioned set of covariates.




                                                                   46
                           (a) The Partial Effect of Transition Timing on Population Density in 1 CE




                           (b) The Partial Effect of Land Productivity on Population Density in 1 CE

                  Figure D.2: Transition Timing, Land Productivity, and Population Density in 1 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the partial regression line for the effect of transition timing (land productivity) on population density in
the year 1 CE, while controlling for the influence of land productivity (transition timing), absolute latitude, access to waterways, and
continental fixed effects. Thus, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing transition timing (land productivity) and
population density, respectively, on the aforementioned set of covariates.




                                                                   47
                     Figure D.3: The Cross-Sectional Variability of Income per Capita in 1500 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the cross-sectional variability of Maddison’s (2003) income per capita estimates for the year 1500 CE.
The x-axis plots the cumulative fraction of the data corresponding to each observation (in ascending order), and the y-axis plots the
quantiles of the uniform distribution of log income per capita in 1500 CE. The closer the observations are to the 45-degree line, the
more uniformly distributed is the data and, hence, the larger is the cross-sectional variability.




                    Figure D.4: The Intertemporal Variability of Income per Capita, 1000-1500 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the intertemporal variability of Maddison’s (2003) income per capita estimates over the time period
1000-1500 CE. The x- and y-axes plot income per capita in the years 1000 CE and 1500 CE respectively. The farther the observations
are from the 45-degree line, the greater is the intertemporal variability.




                                                                 48
                             (a) The Partial Effect of Technology on Population Density in 1000 CE




                              (b) The Partial Effect of Technology on Population Density in 1 CE

               Figure D.5: Technological Sophistication and Population Density in 1000 CE and 1 CE
Summary – This figure depicts the partial regression lines for the effect of technological sophistication on population density in the
years 1000 CE and 1 CE, respectively, while controlling for the influence of land productivity, absolute latitude, access to waterways,
and continental fixed effects. Thus, for a given year, the x- and y-axes plot the residuals obtained from regressing the technology index
and population density, respectively, for that year on the aforementioned set of covariates.




                                                                   49
                                                           Table D.1: Robustness to Alternative Specifications

                                            (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
                                         Standard         Standard          Standard         Weighted          Standard          Standard          Standard         Weighted
                                           OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS               OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS
                                           Full            Income            Income            Income            Full             Income            Income           Income
                                          Sample           Sample            Sample            Sample           Sample            Sample            Sample           Sample
                                                                                 Alternative Specification Includes:
                                                  Both North and South America Dummies                         Both Components of Land Productivity

                                                                                               Dependent Variable is:
                                             Log Population                     Log Income per                     Log Population                       Log Income per
                                               Density in                         Capita in                          Density in                           Capita in
                                                1500 CE                            1500 CE                            1500 CE                              1500 CE
     Log Years since Neolithic           1.169***          1.390**            0.160            0.174           1.079***          1.536**             0.145            0.151
       Transition                         (0.183)          (0.649)           (0.143)           (0.166)           (0.183)          (0.596)           (0.163)          (0.208)
     Log Land Productivity               0.562***         0.562***            0.040            0.039
                                          (0.052)          (0.157)           (0.025)           (0.023)




50
     Log Absolute Latitude              -0.341***           -0.091            -0.045           -0.043          -0.325***           0.124            -0.046            -0.046
                                          (0.104)          (0.554)           (0.086)           (0.084)           (0.108)          (0.423)           (0.067)          (0.071)
     Mean Distance to Nearest           -0.477***           -0.501            0.213            0.219           -0.390***          -0.248             0.203            0.187
      Coast or River                      (0.142)          (1.300)           (0.198)           (0.206)           (0.142)          (1.102)           (0.226)          (0.267)
     Percentage of Land within            0.703**          1.803*             0.122            0.153           0.900***          1.693**             0.135            0.153
       100 km of Coast or River           (0.302)          (0.865)           (0.147)           (0.173)           (0.284)          (0.723)           (0.135)          (0.178)
     Log Arable Percentage of                                                                                  0.343***           -0.315             0.064            0.079
       Land                                                                                                      (0.095)          (0.504)           (0.085)          (0.117)
     Log Suitability Index for                                                                                 0.270***           0.736*            -0.008            -0.017
       Agriculture                                                                                               (0.086)          (0.356)           (0.067)          (0.084)
     Continent Dummies                     Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
     Observations                          147                31                31               31               147               31                31                31
     R-squared                             0.74              0.89              0.66             0.54              0.73             0.90              0.66              0.54
     Notes – (i) log land productivity in regressions (1)-(4) is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of the agricultural
     suitability index that are used in regressions (5)-(8); (ii) the weight of country i in regressions (4) and (8) is inversely proportional to the frequency with which i’s
                                                                                  P −1
     income per capita occurs in the corresponding samples, i.e., wi = n−1   i /    i ni , where ni is the number of countries with income per capita identical to i; (iii) a
     single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas in regressions (5)-(8); (iv) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (v) *** denotes
     statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
                  Table D.2: Robustness to Population Data from Maddison’s Historical Statistics

                                      (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
                                      OLS               OLS              OLS              OLS               OLS                OLS
                                      Full             Income            Full            Income             Full              Income
                                     Sample            Sample           Sample           Sample            Sample             Sample
                                                            Dependent Variable is Log Population Density
                                                                based on Maddison’s Estimates for:
                                             1500 CE                        1000 CE                                   1 CE
Log Years since Neolithic           1.190***            0.984*         1.845***         0.809***          1.865***           0.824***
  Transition                         (0.287)           (0.498)          (0.360)          (0.273)           (0.576)            (0.277)
Log Land Productivity               0.481***           0.625***        0.489***         0.348***          0.474***            0.582**
                                     (0.115)           (0.184)          (0.137)          (0.104)           (0.163)            (0.219)
Log Absolute Latitude                -0.102             0.109            0.012          -1.838**            0.092            -2.207***
                                     (0.293)           (0.401)          (0.297)          (0.635)           (0.265)            (0.638)
Mean Distance to Nearest             -0.983*            -0.844          -0.941*           -0.616           -1.128             -0.501
 Coast or River                      (0.551)           (1.066)          (0.535)          (0.606)           (0.707)            (0.601)
Percentage of Land within           1.546**            1.492**           0.954           1.446**            1.182              1.119
  100 km of Coast or River           (0.583)           (0.688)          (0.725)          (0.630)           (0.773)            (0.733)
Continent Dummies                     Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                           48                 31              47                26                43                29
R-squared                             0.85               0.88            0.84              0.95              0.81              0.92
Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
agricultural suitability index; (ii) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the historical
period examined; (iii) regressions (4)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation for this continent in the
corresponding regression samples; (iv) robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; (v) *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                           Table D.3: Robustness to Corrections for Spatial Autocorrelation

                                       (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
                                   Corrected           Spatial         Corrected         Spatial          Corrected           Spatial
                                      OLS               GMM              OLS              GMM               OLS               GMM
                                      Full          Restricted           Full           Restricted          Full             Restricted
                                     Sample          Sample             Sample           Sample            Sample             Sample
                                                          Dependent Variable is Log Population Density in:
                                             1500 CE                        1000 CE                                   1 CE
Log Years since Neolithic           1.087***           2.038***        1.480***         2.713***          1.930***           3.322***
  Transition                         [0.184]            [0.387]         [0.213]           [0.498]          [0.316]            [0.404]
Log Land Productivity               0.576***           0.583***        0.497***         0.575***          0.394***           0.448***
                                     [0.053]            [0.092]         [0.066]           [0.095]          [0.076]            [0.093]
Log Absolute Latitude              -0.314***           -0.257*          -0.229*           -0.117            0.057              0.124
                                     [0.108]            [0.141]         [0.123]           [0.138]          [0.101]            [0.115]
Mean Distance to Nearest            -0.392**            0.318          -0.528**           0.373           -0.685***           -0.423
 Coast or River                      [0.195]            [0.351]         [0.207]           [0.370]          [0.168]            [0.294]
Percentage of Land within           0.899***           1.395***        0.716**          1.550***           0.857**            1.143**
  100 km of Coast or River           [0.319]            [0.417]         [0.351]           [0.409]          [0.371]            [0.461]
Continent Dummies                     Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations                          147                 96             142                94               128                83
R-squared                             0.73               0.70            0.67              0.62              0.69              0.72
Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of an
agricultural suitability index; (ii) the spatial GMM regressions employ the numbers of prehistoric domesticable species of plants
and animals as instruments for log transition timing; (iii) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is
natural given the historical period examined; (iv) the spatial GMM regressions do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single
observation for this continent in the corresponding regression samples; (v) standard errors corrected for spatial autocorrelation
are reported in square brackets; (vi) the spatial distribution of countries in <2 is specified using aerial distances between geodesic
centroids; (vii) the spatial autocorrelation in error terms is modelled as declining linearly along a 4,000 km radius from each
observation; (viii) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent
level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                  51
                   Table D.4: Additional Robustness to Corrections for Spatial Autocorrelation

                                      (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
                                   Corrected        Corrected        Corrected        Corrected         Corrected        Corrected
                                     OLS              OLS              OLS               OLS              OLS              OLS
                                                                      Dependent Variable is:
                                        Log Income per Capita in:                            Log Population Density in:
                                   1500 CE       1000 CE          1 CE                 1500 CE       1000 CE          1 CE
Log Years since Neolithic           0.159**          0.073*            0.109           1.337***         0.832***         1.006***
  Transition                         [0.064]          [0.038]          [0.069]          [0.437]          [0.263]          [0.376]
Log Land Productivity               0.041**           -0.021           -0.001          0.584***         0.364***         0.681***
                                     [0.016]          [0.023]          [0.020]          [0.125]          [0.098]          [0.147]
Log Absolute Latitude                -0.041           0.060            -0.175            0.050         -2.140***        -2.163***
                                     [0.043]          [0.108]          [0.123]          [0.343]          [0.704]          [0.838]
Mean Distance to Nearest            0.215**           -0.111           0.043            -0.429           -0.237            0.118
 Coast or River                      [0.100]          [0.125]          [0.116]          [0.893]          [0.656]          [0.859]
Percentage of Land within           0.124*            -0.150           0.042           1.855***         1.326**            0.228
  100 km of Coast or River           [0.075]          [0.110]          [0.082]          [0.620]          [0.524]          [0.605]
Continent Dummies                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                           31               26               29               31               26               29
R-squared                             0.66             0.68             0.33             0.88             0.95             0.89
Notes – (i) log land productivity is the first principal component of the log of the percentage of arable land and the log of
an agricultural suitability index; (ii) a single continent dummy is used to represent the Americas, which is natural given the
historical period examined; (iii) regressions (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) do not employ the Oceania dummy due to a single observation
for this continent in the corresponding regression samples; (iv) standard errors corrected for spatial autocorrelation are reported
in square brackets; (v) the spatial distribution of countries in <2 is specified using aerial distances between geodesic centroids;
(vi) the spatial autocorrelation in error terms is modelled as declining linearly along a 4,000 km radius from each observation;
(vii) *** denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level, all for
two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                52
References

Aiyar, Shekhar, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, and Omer Moav. 2008. “Technological Progress and Regress
   in Pre-Industrial Times.” Journal of Economic Growth, 13(2): 125–144.

Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2007. “Cultural Assimilation, Cultural Diffusion, and the Origin
   of the Wealth of Nations.” Brown University Working Paper 2007–3.

Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2010. “The Out-of-Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,
   and Comparative Economic Development.” Brown University Working Paper 2010–7.

Boserup, Ester. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change under
   Population Pressure. London, UK: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.

Chandler, Tertius. 1987. Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census. Lewiston, NY:
   The Edwin Mellen Press.

Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong. 2008. “Was the Wealth of Nations Determined in
  1000 B.C.?” Harvard Business School Working Paper 09–052.

Conley, Timothy G. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Economet-
   rics, 92(1): 1–45.

Crafts, Nicholas, and Terence C. Mills. 2009. “From Malthus to Solow: How did the Malthusian
   Economy Really Evolve?” Journal of Macroeconomics, 31(1): 68–93.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, and Holger Strulik. 2010. “The Physiological Foundations of the Wealth of
   Nations.” University of Copenhagen Discussion Paper 10–15.

Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York, NY: W. W.
   Norton & Co.

Doepke, Matthias. 2004. “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to Growth.” Journal
   of Economic Growth, 9(3): 347–383.

Galor, Oded. 2005. “From Stagnation to Growth: Unified Growth Theory.” In Handbook of Economic
   Growth, Vol IA, ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, 171–293. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
   Elsevier North-Holland.

Galor, Oded. 2010. “The 2008 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture – Comparative Economic Development: Insights
   from Unified Growth Theory.” International Economic Review, 51(1): 1–44.

Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 117(4): 1133–1191.

Galor, Oded, and Andrew Mountford. 2006. “Trade and the Great Divergence: The Family Connec-
   tion.” American Economic Review, 96(2): 299–303.

Galor, Oded, and Andrew Mountford. 2008. “Trading Population for Productivity: Theory and
   Evidence.” Review of Economic Studies, 75(4): 1143–1179.

Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. 1999. “From Malthusian Stagnation to Modern Growth.” American
   Economic Review, 89(2): 150–154.


                                                53
Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
   Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review, 90(4): 806–828.

Hansen, Gary D., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. “Malthus to Solow.” American Economic Review,
   92(4): 1205–1217.

Kelly, Morgan, and Cormac Ó Gráda. 2010. “Living Standards and Mortality in England since the
   Middle Ages: The Poor Law versus the Positive Check.” Unpublished.

Kremer, Michael. 1993. “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3): 681–716.

Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter. 2003. “From Malthus to Modern Growth: Can Epidemics Explain the Three
   Regimes?” International Economic Review, 44(2): 755–777.

Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter. 2006. “The Galor-Weil Model Revisited: A Quantitative Exercise.” Review of
   Economic Dynamics, 9(1): 116–142.

Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter. 2009. “Malthus in Sweden.” Unpublished.

Livi-Bacci, Massimo. 2001. A Concise History of World Population. 3rd ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
    Publishers Ltd.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 2002. “The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future.” In Lectures on Economic
   Growth, ed. Robert E. Lucas, Jr., 109–190. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris, France: OECD.

Maddison, Angus. 2008. “The West and the Rest in the World Economy: 1000-2030.” World Economics,
  9(4): 75–99.

Malthus, Thomas R. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London, UK: J. Johnson, in St.
  Paul’s Church-Yard.

McEvedy, Colin, and Richard Jones. 1978. Atlas of World Population History. New York, NY: Penguin
  Books Ltd.

Michalopoulos, Stelios. 2008. “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity: Theory and Evidence.” Tufts
   University Discussion Paper 0725.

Modelski, George. 2003. World Cities: -3000 to 2000. Washington, DC: FAROS 2000.

Olsson, Ola, and Douglas A. Hibbs, Jr. 2005. “Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development.”
   European Economic Review, 49(4): 909–938.

O’Rourke, Kevin H., Ahmed S. Rahman, and Alan M. Taylor. 2008. “Luddites and the Demo-
   graphic Transition.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14484.

Peregrine, Peter N. 2003. “Atlas of Cultural Evolution.” World Cultures: Journal of Comparative and
   Cross-Cultural Research, 14(1): 1–75.

Putterman, Louis. 2008. “Agriculture, Diffusion, and Development: Ripple Effects of the Neolithic
   Revolution.” Economica, 75(300): 729–748.


                                                54
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman, and Kevin McSweeney. 2002. “The
  Global Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change.”
  Global Ecology and Biogeography, 11(5): 377–392.

Strulik, Holger, and Jacob L. Weisdorf. 2008. “Population, Food, and Knowledge: A Simple Unified
   Growth Theory.” Journal of Economic Growth, 13(3): 195–216.

Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2006. “Why England? Demographic Factors, Structural
   Change and Physical Capital Accumulation During the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic
   Growth, 11(4): 319–361.

Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2009. “Malthusian Dynamism and the Rise of Europe:
   Make War, Not Love.” American Economic Review, 99(2): 248–254.

Weisdorf, Jacob L. 2005. “From Foraging to Farming: Explaining the Neolithic Revolution.” Journal of
   Economic Surveys, 19(4): 561–586.

Weisdorf, Jacob L. 2009. “Why did the First Farmers Toil? Human Metabolism and the Origins of
   Agriculture.” European Review of Economic History, 13(2): 157–172.




                                                  55
