                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       HEURISTIC THINKING AND LIMITED ATTENTION IN THE CAR MARKET

                                           Nicola Lacetera
                                            Devin G. Pope
                                           Justin R. Sydnor

                                         Working Paper 17030
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17030


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We are grateful to seminar participants at the Second Annual Behavioral Economics Conference, NBER
Summer Institute, FTC Microeconomics Conference, Case Western Reserve, Drexel, Harvard, Melbourne,
MIT, Sydney, Toronto, UC Berkeley, UT Dallas, and the Wharton School for helpful comments and
suggestions. Special thanks to Susan Helper, Glenn Mercer and Jim Rebitzer for help obtaining data
and advice on the auto industry. Financial support was provided by The Fishman Davidson Center
and The International Motor Vehicle Program. Part of this research was performed while Nicola Lacetera
and Justin Sydnor were at the Economics Department at Case Western Reserve University, and Devin
Pope was at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Nicola Lacetera, Devin G. Pope, and Justin R. Sydnor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Heuristic Thinking and Limited Attention in the Car Market
Nicola Lacetera, Devin G. Pope, and Justin R. Sydnor
NBER Working Paper No. 17030
May 2011
JEL No. D03,D12,L62

                                              ABSTRACT

Can heuristic information processing affect important product markets? We explore whether the tendency
to focus on the left-most digit of a number affects how used car buyers incorporate odometer values
in their purchase decisions. Analyzing over 22 million wholesale used-car transactions, we find substantial
evidence of this left-digit bias; there are large and discontinuous drops in sale prices at 10,000-mile
thresholds in odometer mileage, along with smaller drops at 1,000-mile thresholds. We obtain estimates
for the inattention parameter in a simple model of this left-digit bias. We also investigate whether this
heuristic behavior is primarily attributable to the final used-car customers or the used-car salesmen
who buy cars in the wholesale market. The evidence is most consistent with partial inattention by final
customers. We discuss the significance of these results for the literature on inattention and point to
other market settings where this type of heuristic thinking may be important. Our results suggest that
information-processing heuristics may be important even in markets with large stakes and where information
is easy to observe.


Nicola Lacetera                                      Justin R. Sydnor
University of Toronto                                University of Wisconsin
Rotman School of Management                          School of Business, ASRMI
105 St. George Street, Room 265                      975 University Ave, Room 5287
Toronto, ON M5S 2E9                                  Madison, WI 53726
and NBER                                             jsydnor@bus.wisc.edu
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca

Devin G. Pope
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
devin.pope@chicagobooth.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17030
1. Introduction
Although economic models are usually based on the assumption that agents are unconstrained in
their ability to process information, economists have long recognized that individuals have limited
cognitive abilities (Simon, 1955). An extensive literature on heuristics and biases, originating
primarily in psychology, has shown that people often use simple cognitive shortcuts when
processing information, leading to systematic biases in decision making.1 There is large evidence on
the nature of these heuristics from surveys and laboratory experiments, but there has been much less
research exploring whether these cognitive limitations impact important market settings.
           In this paper, we study the effects of heuristic information processing in the used-car
market. We investigate whether the market is affected by consumers exhibiting a heuristic known as
left-digit bias when they incorporate odometer mileages into their decision process. Left-digit bias is
the tendency to focus on the left-most digit of a number while partially ignoring other digits
(Korvost and Damian, 2008; Poltrock and Schwartz, 1984). We develop a simple model of left-digit
bias patterned after the model of inattention presented by DellaVigna (2009). The model predicts
that, if consumers use this heuristic when processing odometer values, cars will exhibit
discontinuous drops in value at mileage thresholds where left digits change (e.g., 10,000-mile marks).
           Using a rich and novel dataset on more than 22 million used-car transactions from wholesale
auctions, we show that there are clear threshold effects at 10,000-mile marks. These discontinuous
drops in value are evident in simple graphs of the raw data. For example, cars with odometer values
between 79,900 and 79,999 miles are sold on average for approximately $210 more than cars with
odometer values between 80,000 and 80,100 miles, but for only $10 less than cars with odometer
readings between 79,800 and 79,899. Regression analyses show significant price discontinuities at
each 10,000-mile threshold from 10,000 to 100,000 miles. The size of the discontinuities is similar
across each threshold, consistently on the order of $150 to $200. Consistent with our model, we also
find smaller price discontinuities at 1,000-mile thresholds.
           The left-digit bias we identify in this paper not only influences wholesale prices but also
affects supply decisions. If sellers are savvy and aware of threshold effects, they will have an
incentive to bring cars to auction before the vehicle‟s mileage crosses a threshold. Indeed we show
that there are large volume spikes in cars before 10,000-mile thresholds.




1   See Gilovich, Griffin, and Kahneman (2002) for a review.


                                                               1
        These volume spikes, however, also make the task of identifying unbiased estimates of the
price drops at thresholds more difficult. Because of the seller response to threshold effects, it is
necessary to account for potential selection in our analysis, and we do so in several different ways.
First, we present our findings after controlling for selection on observables, including fixed effects
for the combination of make, model, model year, body style of a car, and auction year. In our most
restrictive specification, we are able to identify the impact of crossing a 10,000-mile threshold by
comparing cars of the same make, model, model year, body style, and that are brought to auction by
the same seller in a given year. We also run our analyses separately for different types of sellers at the
auctions. All of the buyers at the wholesale auctions are licensed used-car dealers, but sellers can be
both car dealers and companies with fleets of cars, such as leasing companies and rental-car
companies. We show that the selection varies considerably across these seller types and yet we find
similar price discontinuities for both types. We also discuss additional selection issues and present a
range of evidence suggesting that unobserved heterogeneity is unlikely to affect our findings.
        We perform further checks in order to allay concerns that the observed threshold effects
might be a result of institutional features related to the used car market. The results are robust to
considering a number of alternative explanations, such as the potential for odometer tampering and
the structure of car warranties. We also test a secondary prediction of our model; because inattention
leads to discontinuous changes in perceived mileage around thresholds, the price discontinuities at
these thresholds should be larger for cars that are depreciating at a faster rate (i.e., those more
affected by mileage changes). Indeed we find larger price discontinuities for cars that depreciate
quickly (e.g., Hummers) than for cars that depreciate slowly (e.g., Honda Accords). Finally, we use a
smaller sample from Canadian data to construct a type of placebo test. We find price discontinuities
in Canadian used-car auctions at the 10,000-kilometer marks, but not at the 10,000-mile marks.
        The particular setting of our study – the wholesale used-car market – allows us to at least
partially investigate the influence of heuristic information processing on different economic agents.
The price discontinuities in the wholesale market may arise because used-car dealers who buy at the
auctions recognize that their final customers will exhibit the left-digit bias and purchase cars at the
auction accordingly. It is also possible, however, that it is the used car dealers themselves who are
subject to the left-digit bias. It is not easy to disentangle these cases because there is little
observational difference between the two. However, we can address whether inattention seems to be
driven primarily by used-car dealers or final customers. A range of evidence – including volume
patterns, purchase patterns for experienced versus inexperienced dealers at the auctions, pricing


                                                    2
dynamics right before thresholds, and data from an online retail used-car market – are all suggestive
that our findings are driven by limited attention of the final used-car customers.
         Our research is related to a growing body of literature that studies how inattention impacts
market outcomes. Gabaix and Laibson‟s (2006) work on shrouded attributes and Mullainathan,
Schwartzstein, and Shleifer‟s (2008) work on coarse thinking provide general frameworks for the
type of inattention we consider here. Our paper is also related to recent empirical work by Chetty,
Looney, and Kroft (2009), Finkelstein (2009), Hossain and Morgan (2006), Brown, Hossain, and
Morgan (2010), Lee and Malmendier (forthcoming), Englmaier and Schmoller (2008, 2009), and
Pope (2009). These papers find evidence of consumer inattention in market settings.2 Most of this
existing evidence comes from settings where certain product attributes are shrouded or hidden in
some way. Even in the cases within this literature where relevant information is not hidden, there is
a sense that people would “need to know” to look for or use the information. For example,
Englmaier and Schmoller (2008, 2009) and Pope (2009) show that people tend to use convenient
summary measures in market settings even when finer-level information underlying that summary
measure is informative and readily available.3 In our study, odometer mileage is not shrouded and is
clearly being used by market participants to determine their willingness to pay for a car. Our results
suggest that a natural information-processing heuristic can limit the extent to which market
participants incorporate even the information they are actively observing. As such, our findings
expand the implications of the literature on limited attention in market settings. Furthermore, used
cars are valuable durable goods, and buyers typically invest significant time and effort in the process
of buying them.4 This suggests that information-processing heuristics can be important beyond
settings where consumers are making quick and unconsidered decisions.
         Our paper is also linked to this existing literature because we use the same modeling
framework for inattention and use our data to generate structural estimates of the inattention
parameter. In our benchmark specification we estimate a value for the inattention parameter of 0.31,
which in our setting implies that approximately 30% of the reduction in value caused by increased


2 For evidence of the effects of limited attention in financial markets, see Cohen and Frazzini (2008), DellaVigna and
Pollet (2007, 2009), and Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009).
3 Englmaier and Schmoller (2009), is particularly related to our work, as they show that the asking prices for used cars in

an online market adjust discontinuously to registration-year changes even though there is information available on the
website about the exact date of first registration for a car. They, too, find sizeable economic magnitudes of inattention in
the used car market.
4 For example, JD Powers‟ Autoshopper.com Study for 2003 reports that the average amount of time automotive

internet shoppers spent shopping for cars was over 5 hours, and that these customers visited, on average, over 10
different websites before making their purchase decision.


                                                             3
mileage on a car will occur at salient mileage thresholds. Although the degree of inattention is likely
to be context-specific, we can compare our estimate of inattention to those elaborated by
DellaVigna (2009). He reports estimates of the inattention parameter ranging from 0.18 to 0.45 for
the work of Hosain and Morgan (2006) on inattention to shipping charges on Ebay, from 0.46 to
0.59 for the study of DellaVigna and Pollet (2007) on inattention to earnings announcements, and
0.75 for the field experiment of Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) on non-transparent sales taxes.
            Finally, our paper is related to the literature on 99-cent pricing (Basu, 1997, 2006; Ginzberg,
1936), which typically assumes left-digit bias causes the prevalence of prices ending with 99 cents
(e.g., $3.99).5 Our work provides a somewhat cleaner setting in which to test the impacts of this
heuristic on market outcomes. In most models of 99-cent pricing, a rational-expectations
equilibrium results when all firms use 99-cent pricing; therefore, all customers expect such pricing
and cannot benefit from paying attention to the full price. Thus, inattention can lead to 99-cent
pricing, but ubiquitous 99-cent pricing can also cause rational inattention. In contrast, our paper
analyzes a market where buyers could benefit from timing their purchases around thresholds. The
durable-good nature of used cars also ensures that anyone who buys a car with mileage just below a
threshold will soon see that car cross the threshold. In this paper, therefore, we are able to get a
sense of the cost that a given car buyer incurs due to inattention generated by left-digit bias.
            The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a simple model of left-digit bias and
discusses its predictions for used-car values and wholesale-auction prices in a competitive
environment. Section 3 describes the data used in our analyses and presents summary statistics.
Section 4 presents our empirical results, including a variety of robustness checks and additional
analyses. Section 5 reports our estimates of the level of inattention, while Section 6 discusses the
incidence of inattention on the different actors in the used-car market. We conclude the paper in
Section 7 with a brief discussion of the broader implications of this research for other industries and
settings, and of the question whether we should think of this as a case of “rational inattention.”


2. Model
In order to structure our thinking about the left-digit bias and its effects in the used-car market, we
lay out a simple model of consumer inattention to a continuous quality metric, and then incorporate
it into a market setting for used cars.


5   Prices of initial public offerings also seem to converge on integer values (Kandel et al., 2001; Bradley et al., 2004).


                                                                 4
2.1 Consumer inattention to continuous metrics
Our model follows the frameworks developed by Chetty et al. (2009), DellaVigna (2009) and
Finkelstein (2009), where an individual pays full attention to the visible component of a relevant
variable and only partial attention to the more opaque component of that variable. We apply this
approach to model how people with a left-digit bias process numbers. Any number can be broken
down as the sum of its assorted base-10 digits. Consistent with the left-digit bias reported in a
number of studies (Korvost and Damian, 2008; Poltrock and Schwartz, 1984), we assume that the
left-most digit of a number that a person observes is fully processed whereas the person may display
(partial) inattention to digits further to the right.
        Formally, let m be an observed continuous quality metric (in our case miles), H be the base-
10 power of the left-most, non-zero digit of m, and dH be the value of that digit, such that
d H {1, 2,...,9} . The perceived metric      is then given by:

                                                                  ,                                 (1)
where             is the inattention parameter. As an example, consider the case where m takes on the
value 49,000. From Equation 1, this would be processed as
        We can consider how different the perceived measure will be on either side of a left-digit
change by focusing on how          changes as the metric m ranges from, say, 40,000 to 50,000. As long
as m is below 50,000, the decision-maker will perceive a change of (1-θ) for every 1-unit increase in
m. However, when crossing over the threshold from 49,999 to 50,000, the change in perceived value
will be 1 + θ*9,999 or, in the limit, θ*10,000. The change in the left digit brings the perceived
measure in line with its actual value (because all digits except for the left-most one are zero) and
induces a discontinuous change in the perceived value.
        Figure 1 shows the effect that this inattention would have in the basic case in which the
perceived value of a product is a linear function of the perceived metric          :
                                                                                                   (2)
We assume a negative slope (as expressed by                 ) to match the used-car setting and demonstrate
how this value function would look over a range of m from 60,000 to 100,000. The graph shows that
the perceived value displays discontinuities at each 10,000 threshold. Because the value function is
linear, the size of these discontinuities is constant and equal to (αθ)*10,000.
        In the case of used cars, then, Figure 1 reveals a few basic predictions of the model. First,
and most importantly, if customers are inattentive to digits in the mileage (i.e., θ >0), there will be


                                                        5
discontinuities in the perceived value of cars at 10,000-mile thresholds. In the limit as θ goes to 1
and consumers are attentive only to the left-most digit, the value function will be a step function.
The second prediction is that, if the linear-value function holds, the size of these discontinuities will
be constant across thresholds changes of the same size that induce a change in the left-most digit.
Also, cars with a steeper slope of depreciation (i.e., larger ) will have larger price discontinuities.
Finally, holding fixed the inattention parameter, the model here predicts the same discontinuous
drop in prices at the 100,000 mark that is observed at the 10,000 marks from 10,000 through 90,000.
Since the 10,000-mile marks after 100,000 involve changes in digits beyond the left-most, the
discontinuities at those points may differ from the 10,000-mile marks prior to 100,000. Of course,
there is no reason to suspect a priori that the exact functional form in Equation 1 is appropriate. In
particular Equation 1 assumes that the individual is equally inattentive to all digits past the left-most
digit. A reasonable alternative would be decreasing attention to digits further to the right. This could
be captured by a reformulation of Equation 1 to:
                                                                                                                   .       (3)
As an example, consider the number 49,900 and assume that 1=2; using Equation 3, this would be
processed as                                                                      . With this specification, unlike
Equation 1, we would expect to see discontinuities at each digit threshold, with smaller
discontinuities for smaller thresholds. Although not a primary focus of this paper, our empirical
analysis allows us to shed light on the extent of increasing inattention to “smaller” digits.
         This model has the implication that limited attention always results in the perceived mileage
being less than or equal to the actual mileage. Although that feature matches our intuition about the
nature of left-digit bias, an alternative would be to assume that individuals act as if the perceived
mileage were equal to some benchmark like the midpoint of a range (e.g., 9,500). All of the basic
predictions of the model would hold in this alternative framework. The absolute values of the
perceived worth of the car would be affected by the exact nature of inattention, but the relative
values would not, and it is the prediction on relative values that we test empirically.6
         To provide more direct support for the mechanism behind our conceptual approach to the
left-digit bias, we provide evidence from a survey that we conducted with undergraduate students,
where they were provided information about two hypothetical compact cars. The mileage of these
6
  This distinction could matter, in our empirical setting if car dealers can selectively de-bias customers. In that case, dealers
could point out the true mileage to buyers who perceived mileage to be higher than it actually is. We suspect that this
type of selective de-biasing is difficult in practice. Empirically such a dynamic should produce price schedules that are
convex within 10,000-mileage bands and we see no evidence of that pattern.


                                                               6
cars was randomized across 4 different mileage pairs (62,113 and 89,847; 62,847 and 89,113; 69,113 and
82,847; and 69,847 and 82,113). After stating which car they were more likely to purchase, the
information about the cars disappeared and students were asked to recall the exact mileage of each
car they had just seen, or to guess a number that was as close as possible to the actual mileage if they
did not recall it. Although this recall task is not identical to the mental process a car buyer may
follow when purchasing a used car, the results are broadly consistent with our framework. Students
exhibited a left-digit bias in that they were able to recall the first digit of the mileage over 90% of the
time, the second digit just over 50% of the time, and the remaining digits less than 15% of the time.
Moreover, participants consistently underestimated mileage for cars with true mileages approaching
a 10,000-mile threshold (69,113, 69,847, 89,113, 89,847). Cars just above a 10,000-mile threshold
(62,113, 62,847, 82,113, 82,847) showed slight overestimation of mileage.7


2.2 Application to the used-car market
We now include this heuristic into a basic framework of competitive retail used-car markets and
auction-based wholesale markets. We show that, in such an environment, the observed market
prices of cars with different mileage exhibit the same patterns as the individual-level value function.
         Consider a market with N consumers interested in purchasing at most one used car; all
consumers have the same value function based on perceived mileage                             given by Equation 2.8
Assume these consumers observe all available used cars in the market at posted prices and purchase
the car that gives them the highest surplus. There is a competitive retail used-car market with an
arbitrarily large number of car dealers. These dealers purchase cars at competitive, ascending-bid
(i.e., English-style), wholesale auctions and resell them to the consumers. There are M cars with
varying mileage available at the wholesale auctions. Each of these cars has a reserve price of zero.9
As long as M ≤ N, there will not be an oversupply of cars and the market will be well-behaved.
         In this environment, the (unique) equilibrium will be characterized by all cars being sold, at a
price equal to the perceived consumer-value function                     . With car dealers driven to zero profits,
the price of a car at the auction will be equal to the price to the final consumer. If the equilibrium
price were above              for any arbitrary mileage m, cars of that mileage would not sell and a dealer
would have an incentive to lower the price. Further, as long as M ≤ N, if the equilibrium retail price


7 The online appendix reports a full description and statistics from the experiment.
8 We keep with the linear case here only for simplicity. The results do not depend on a linear value function.
9 This simplifying assumption matches roughly with the behavior of fleet/lease sellers we describe in the next section.




                                                            7
were below               for some m, a dealer could set a price above the going market price and make a
profit, which would violate the zero-profit assumption.
            Although we use a representative-agent framework here, the model can be generalized to
cases where consumers have heterogeneous demands. If consumers vary in their willingness to pay
for all cars (i.e., variation in K ), it can be shown that the market prices will reflect the perceived
value function of the marginal (i.e., Mth highest K) consumer. Similarly, if there is heterogeneity in
the degree of inattention (i.e., variation in θ) of the final customers, the observed market prices will
reflect the degree of inattention of the marginal buyer (i.e., Mth highest θ).10


3. Data
The data for this study come from one of the largest operators of wholesale used-car auctions in the
United States. The auction process starts when a seller brings a car to the one of the company‟s 89
auction facilities that hold auctions once or twice a week. Only licensed used-car dealers can
participate. Most sites have between 4 and 7 auction lanes operating simultaneously. Once on the
auction block, the car dealers bid for cars in a standard oral ascending-price auction that lasts around
2 minutes per car. The highest bidder receives the car and can take it back to his used-car lot by
himself or arrange delivery through independent agencies that operate at the auctions.
            Our dataset contains information about the auction outcome and other details for each car
brought to auction from January 2002 through September 2008. Table 1 provides summary statistics
for some of the key variables in the data. The full data set is comprised of just over 27 million cars.
For each car we observe the make, model, body style, model year, and odometer mileage as well as
an identifier for the seller of the car. We also observe whether the car sold at auction and the selling
price. The average car is 4 years old with about 57,000 miles on the odometer. Just over 82% of all
cars brought to auction sell, with an average price of $10,301.
            Although all of the buyers at the auctions are used-car dealers, there is more diversity in the
type of sellers. There are two major classes of sellers: car dealers and fleet/lease. A typical dealer sale
might involve a new-car dealer bringing a car to auction that she received via trade-in and does not
wish to sell on her own lot. The fleet/lease category includes cars from rental-car companies,
university or corporate fleets, and cars returned to leasing companies at the end of the lease period.
Table 1 breaks down the key variables by these two major seller categories. About 56% of cars in


10   To get the law of one price to hold, we make the usual assumption that high-value customers purchase first.


                                                              8
our dataset come from the dealer category. Dealer cars tend to be a bit older and have higher
mileage than fleet/lease cars. Possibly due to having better outside options for selling cars, dealer
cars are less likely to sell at auction; 96% of fleet/lease cars versus 71% of dealer cars.
        A number of details of the market give us confidence that the empirical results below reflect
responses to car mileage by market participants and are not driven by institutional features of the
auctions. First, the auction company‟s business model is based on charging fees to auction
participants, but these fees are not a direct function of the mileage of the car. Second, cars are not
sorted into auction lanes or grouped together based on mileage. Finally, and importantly, the used-
car dealers who purchase cars at the auction clearly observe the exact continuous mileage on a car.
This information is prominently displayed on a large screen that lists information about the car that
is currently on the block and the dealers can also look into the car to see the odometer.


4. Discontinuity Estimates
4.1 Graphical analysis
Raw Prices. We begin the empirical analysis with a simple plot of the raw price data as a function
of mileage using information on the over 22 million cars that were sold at auctions during our
sample period. In Figure 2, each dot shows the average sale price for cars in a 500-mile mileage bin,
starting at 1,000 miles. There is a dot for the average price of cars with 1,000 through 1,499 miles,
then a dot for cars with 1,500 to 1,999 miles, and so on through 125,000 miles. The vertical lines in
the graph indicate each 10,000-mile mark. As one would expect, average prices decrease with
increasing mileage. Within each 10,000-mile band, average prices decline quite smoothly. However,
there are clear and sizeable discontinuities in average prices at nearly all 10,000-mile marks.
        With no other explanation for the importance of 10,000-mile thresholds, these results
strongly suggest a role for inattention in this market. Yet although this analysis establishes that
mileage thresholds matter, estimating how much they matter requires further investigation. For
example, sellers may decide to bring cars to the auction before they cross a mileage threshold. To
the extent that this behavior could differ by seller types or by the type of car (e.g., luxury vs.
economy), the estimated size of price discontinuities will be biased. As such, it is necessary to
account for these selection issues.
        Volume. Figure 3 graphs the volume of cars brought to the auction using the full dataset
and the same 500-mile bins from Figure 2. The first aspect to notice is the presence of peculiar
patterns in the 30,000 to 50,000 range; as we discuss in more detail below, this pattern is largely


                                                     9
driven by dynamics of lease cars. Setting those patterns aside for now, it is clear that there are spikes
in volume right before the 10,000-mile thresholds at each threshold starting at 60,000 miles. These
patterns lend further support for the importance of mileage thresholds in the market and suggest
that at least some sellers of used cars are aware of the inattention-induced price discontinuities.
However, these results also make it clear that it is necessary to account for selection before obtaining
estimates of the size of price discontinuities.
         Residual Prices. The primary concern with interpreting the magnitude of price
discontinuities in the graph in Figure 2 is that the cars on either side of the thresholds may differ in
observable characteristics such as make, model, and age. Other than mileage, these characteristics of
a car are the primary determinants of prices. In order to account for these differences, we regress the
price of sold cars on fixed effects for the combination of make (e.g., Honda), model (e.g., Accord),
body style (e.g., EX Sedan), model year, and auction year. We also include a 7th-order polynomial in
mileage to account for continuous patterns of mileage depreciation.11 We then obtain a residual price
for each car based on this regression prediction. Figure 4 repeats the graphs in Figure 2 using these
residuals.12 This figure is much smoother than Figure 2 since the effect of different car types has
been netted out. The price discontinuities remain. In fact, they become more uniform (~$150-$200
each) and are evident at every threshold (although very small at 110,000 miles).
         Fleet/Lease vs. Dealer. Another area of potentially relevant selection is the seller type. As
we mentioned in Section 3, there are two distinct categories of sellers in the data: car dealers and
fleet/lease companies. Recall that fleet/lease companies tend to have somewhat newer cars than do
the dealers, bring cars in larger lots, and set low reserve prices. The auctions are also typically
organized so that the fleet/lease cars run in separate lanes from those of the dealers.13 These
differences suggest that we should conduct our analysis separately for the two seller types.
         Because the low reserve prices used by fleet/lease sellers more closely mirror our theoretical
discussion in Section 2, we begin with this category and then move to the dealer cars. Figure 5
repeats the same residual analysis from Figure 4 but now restricts cars to those in the fleet/lease


11 The 7th-order polynomial was chosen based on significance levels in regressions of price on mileage and visual checks
of predicted values vs. raw data patterns. We have also run more “local” regressions by restricting the sample to various
subsets (e.g., 25,000 to 35,000 mile cars), which does not require the parametric assumptions to be as strong and find
nearly identical results.
12 Rather than plotting the exact residual prices, we add the estimated polynomial in miles and a constant back into the

residual so that Figure 4 is visually similar to Figure 2. Note that the range of prices in Figure 4 ($7,000 to $14,000) is less
than that of Figure 2. This is because we are plotting residual prices after removing fixed effects such as age.
13 Car dealers who bid on cars at the auction can freely and easily move from lane to lane within the auction houses.




                                                              10
category. The results are very similar to those with the full sample of cars, again showing
pronounced discontinuities at the 10,000-mile marks.
         Figure 6 shows the probability of a car selling (Panel A) and the volumes of cars sold (Panel
B) by mileage for these cars in the fleet/lease category. This figure confirms our discussion from
Section 3 that the fleet/lease cars are sold with low reservation prices; the probability of selling is
nearly 1 across most of the mileage range. Furthermore, this probability does not vary around the
10,000-mile thresholds. The fact that these selling probabilities are very high and smooth through
the 10,000-mile marks gives us confidence that the inattention-effects that we observe are not driven
by variations in sale probabilities and that estimates of the price discontinuities can be obtained
without the complication of considering a two-stage selling process. Looking at the volume patterns
for fleet/lease cars, we see that this category has a good deal of variation in volume for cars with less
than 50,000 miles. This reflects institutional features of this segment of the car market. In particular,
there is a large spike in sales volume around the 36,000-mile mark, due to the prevalence of 3-year
leases with 12,000-mile-per-year limits.14 However, the patterns smooth out for higher mileages; in
particular, there are no volume spikes at the 50,000, 70,000, 80,000, or 90,000 thresholds. Since we
observe price discontinuities at each of these mileage marks, we are confident that the size of the
discontinuities in the residual graph (Figure 5) is not biased by selection.
         Turning to the dealer category, Figure 7 repeats this residual price analysis for dealer-sold
cars. This graph is almost identical to Figure 5 for the fleet/lease category, showing consistent
discontinuities of very similar magnitude to those in the fleet/lease category. Figure 8 shows the
probability-of-sale and volume-of-sales patterns for the dealer category. The probability of a sale for
this category, Panel A, is in the 60% to 70% range, significantly lower than it is for the fleet/lease
cars. This difference reflects the higher reservation prices used by dealers. The modest upward slope
of this probability fits with the fact that many of these cars are sold at auction by dealers who
specialize in new and late-model used cars. For cars with higher mileage, the outside option of these
dealers likely falls relative to that of the used-car dealers who are buying cars at auction.
         The volume pattern for the dealers is particularly interesting and shows consistent peaks
right before the 10,000-mile thresholds. This clearly suggests that these mileage thresholds influence
market behavior. Importantly, however, we find that once we control for the characteristics of the
car being sold, the pricing patterns by mileage are consistent with those of the fleet/lease category

14The spike around 48,000 miles likely reflects 4-year/48,000-mile leases whereas the smaller spike around 60,000 could
be driven in part by 5-year leases.


                                                          11
(where these volume spikes do not occur). This consistency fits with our theoretical discussion in
Section 2. In our model, the distribution of mileage across cars in the used-car market does not
affect the relative prices of cars with different mileage. Hence, although it is important to account
for selection on car-type that might be correlated with these volume spikes, these spikes that occur
before thresholds should not, and do not seem to, affect the estimated discontinuities.
         1,000-Mile Discontinuities. The pricing figures presented thus far allow us to investigate
whether discontinuities also occur at 1,000-mile thresholds. When looking at the residual price
figures, an interesting pattern emerges: dots in the figures tend to move in pairs. Each dot represents
a 500-mile mileage bin, and, therefore, pairs of dots represent cars within 1,000 miles. The fact that
dots move in pairs is evidence, then, of small price discontinuities at 1,000-mile thresholds. To
illustrate this in more detail, Figure 9 plots the average residual sale price of cars within 50-mile bins
for all of the cars in our dataset. Since the data can become noisy when looking within 50-mile bins,
we pool the data so that each dot represents the average residual for a bin that is a given distance
from the nearest threshold. For example, the first dot in the figure represents the average residual
value of all cars whose mileage falls between 10,000-10,050, 20,000-20,050, …, on through 110,000-
110,050. In this way, all of the data can be condensed into a 10,000-mile range. The figure clearly
demonstrates breaks that occur at several of the 1,000-mile thresholds. The two largest of these
breaks occur at the 5,000- and 9,000-mile marks. Regression analysis indicates that the value of a car
drops, on average, by approximately $20 as it passes over a 1,000-mile threshold.


4.2 Regression analysis
Having established the existence of consistent price discontinuities at 10,000-mile thresholds using
this largely non-parametric approach, we turn now to regression analysis to establish numerical
estimates of the price discontinuities. Throughout, we run our regressions separately for the
fleet/lease and dealer categories.15 Motivated by the literature on regression discontinuity designs
(see Lee and Lemieux, 2009 for an overview), we employ the following regression specification:
                                                                                                                  (4)




15While the graphical analysis used all of the data in our sample, our regression analyses only use a 20% random sample
of data from each year due to computing constraints.


                                                          12
The dependent variable in our primary regression is the sale price for cars that sold at an auction.16
The function f(milesi) is a flexible function of mileage intended to capture smooth patterns in how
cars depreciate with mileage. The regression also includes a series of indicator variables (expressed
with Ds in the equation above) for whether mileage has crossed a given threshold. We are interested
in the βj coefficients, which can be interpreted as the discontinuous changes in price (all else
constant) that occur as cars cross a particular 10,000-mile threshold. In this way, the specification
allows us to estimate the price discontinuities separately at each 10,000-mile threshold. Finally, Xi
includes characteristics of the particular car being sold (make, model, etc.).
         Table 2 presents the regression results for the fleet/lease cars. The first column controls only
        th
for a 7 -order polynomial in mileage and the mileage-threshold indicators and provides estimates of
the price discontinuities before any corrections for selection on observables. Given the size of our
dataset, the coefficients are generally highly statistically significant. The majority of the coefficient
estimates are negative, which is consistent with our theory of inattention. However, they vary
substantially, and a few (e.g., at 30,000 miles) are even significantly positive. Columns 2 through 7 in
the table add increasingly restrictive fixed effects to the model. Column 2 adds a control for the age
of the car and all but one of the coefficient estimates become negative. Columns 3, 4, and 5 report
estimates after adding make, model, and body of the car, respectively, to the fixed effects. Thus, by
Column 5, identification of the model is coming from observing different mileages of cars of the
same make, model, body style, and age. In fact, the regression in Column 5 estimates the threshold
discontinuities that we observed in Figure 5. Once these controls are included in the model, all of
the coefficient estimates are negative, and all but one is highly statistically significant. The
coefficients are similar across thresholds with an un-weighted average across thresholds of -$157.
         While the results in Column 5 control for both the type of car and the car‟s age, which likely
captures most of the selection that would affect market prices, we strengthen the controls further in
Column 6 by adding a control for auction location to the fixed effect and in Column 7 by adding a
control for seller identifier. Thus, the identification of the parameter estimates in Column 7 comes
from the same seller selling identical types of cars that differ in mileage at the same auction.17 These
controls do not change the coefficient estimates meaningfully, and the stability of the estimates from

16 We have also run regressions with log(price) as the dependent variable. While the results are all qualitatively similar,
the goodness of fit is somewhat worse with logs than with levels.
17 Of course, while the identification is driven by variation in mileage for a given car from a given seller, the size of the

discontinuities at different mileage thresholds will be affected by a different mix of cars. That is, since the variation in
mileage for a given car of a given age is sizeable but not huge, it is unlikely that any one car/seller combination could be
used to tightly identify threshold discontinuities across the entire range that we analyze.


                                                             13
Columns 4 through 7 suggests that controlling for the model and age of the car accounts for most of
the relevant selection.
        Table 3 presents the same analysis for the dealer category. In Column 1, before controls are
included, the estimates of price discontinuities at the 10,000-mile thresholds are all negative and
generally very large. Once controls are included, however, the estimated discontinuities for the
dealer cars are very close to those obtained for the fleet/lease cars. In fact, if we compare the un-
weighted average of discontinuity estimates in Column 5 for these categories, we see that it is $173
for dealer cars and $157 for fleet/lease cars. Increasing the controls by including auction location
and seller fixed effects does not meaningfully affect the results.


4.3 Robustness checks and alternative explanations
In this section, we address a number of alternative explanations and factors that might affect our
findings and that the econometric specification developed above would not fully control for.
        Differences across Time. The estimates presented in Tables 2 and 3 come from data
pooled across all of the years in our sample. We also ran regressions cutting the data by the different
years and present these results in Appendix Tables 1 and 2. Average discontinuities in each year
range from $134 to $170 for fleet/lease cars and from $160 to $180 for dealer cars. As a percentage
of the average price per year, the discontinuities are quite stable over time, ranging between 1.6%
and 1.2%, though this percentage is slightly lower in the last two years of the data.
        Heterogeneity across Car Models. We have also run regressions separately for the 8 most
popular cars in our data in terms of volume sold. Although there is heterogeneity in the average
discontinuity price across these car makes (which we discuss further below), we find large and
significant discontinuities for each of the car types. These results are available in Appendix Table 3.
        Selection on Unobservables. The regression analyses in Section 4.2 yield very stable
estimates of significant price discontinuities at the mileage thresholds that, we believe, account for
the impacts of selection on the size of discontinuities. Nonetheless, it is worth asking whether there
are sources of unobserved heterogeneity around the mileage thresholds that may cause bias. There
are a number of reasons to feel confident that this is not the case. First, selection on unobservables
may not be such a large concern in this setting since market prices can only be influenced by factors
that are observable to participants at the auctions, and our data capture most of the relevant
information. Second, the similarity of the estimates obtained for the two different seller categories
gives us confidence in the estimates. This is especially convincing given that at many of the 10,000-


                                                   14
mile thresholds there is no apparent selection for the fleet/lease vehicles. Third, one of the reasons
we are concerned about selection is that we observe volume spikes for the dealer cars around the
thresholds. However, notice that, although volume spikes and dives right before and after the
thresholds, it is relatively stable elsewhere. This might make us worry that selection is heavily
influencing average prices right around the thresholds. Yet in Figures 4, 5, and 7, we see that the
discontinuities are not driven solely by points right around the thresholds; the entire price schedule
shifts down after each threshold. Finally, it is worth considering the nature of the selection effects
that are revealed through our regression analysis. In the dealer category, the effects of selection seem
to bias the estimates in a uniform way; all of the coefficients in the first column are strongly negative
and become smaller, in absolute value, once selection is accounted for. Despite the stability of the
estimates across increasing controls, one might be concerned that some bias still exists. However,
for the fleet/lease category, the changes in the coefficient estimates as we add controls do not
change in a systematic direction. Some of the estimated discontinuities become less negative, but
others started out positive and then became negative in other specifications. These patterns, when
coupled with the consistency of the estimates across the seller categories, give us confidence in the
discontinuity estimates.
        Warranties. Another important concern on our findings is the possibility that expiring new-
car warranties may produce price discontinuities at 10,000-mile thresholds. It is first worth noting
that warranties would not necessarily cause a discontinuous drop in price. The value of a warranty
likely diminishes at a smooth rate as a car approaches the warranty threshold. However, it is possible
that, when adverse selection is a concern, having a warranty with even just a few hundred miles left
could give a discontinuous increase to the value of a car because it could defray the possible cost of
purchasing a car that is soon revealed to be a lemon. We gathered information about warranties
during our sample period for the largest car brands (Chevrolet, Ford, Toyota, Nissan, and Honda).
Across these makes, some type of warranty existed at the 36k, 50k, 60k, and 100k mile marks.
Importantly, there were no warranties at the 10k, 20k, 30k, 40k, 70k, 80k, 90k, and 120k mile marks,
where we find significant discontinuities. This and the fact that we do not observe a significant
discontinuity at 36,000 miles suggest that our results are not being driven by warranties. Further,
warranties clearly cannot explain discontinuities at 1,000-mile marks.
        Published Price Information. In the U.S., there are a number of sources of information
that potential customers could investigate in order to form their expectations of the price of a used
car. The leading providers of such information are Kelly Blue Book and Edmunds.com, which both


                                                   15
offer information on average retail-level, used-car sale prices. If the data that these firms provide
strongly influences purchasing behavior, then how they present information could conceivably
influence market prices. We collected data on a number of cars from both the Kelley Blue Book and
Edmunds websites for a range of mileage. Some discontinuities are present in the price data from
the Kelley Blue Book, but they do not occur consistently at the 10,000 mile marks. In the case of
Edmunds.com, a smoothing algorithm is used that would lead consumers to expect price schedules
that have no discontinuities by mileage at all.
        Odometer Tampering. The actual mileage on a car may be different than the mileage
indicated by the odometer if cheating is occurring in the market. For example, some sellers might
anticipate 10,000-mile discontinuities and manipulate the odometer so as to report a mileage below a
threshold. Though we find no evidence of odometer tampering in our data – for example, cars right
before 10,000-mile thresholds are not older than expected – this phenomenon could potentially
explain some of the volume patterns observed in the data. Notice, however, that odometer
tampering would likely bias down the estimates that we find if buyers were aware that some cars
before a threshold had more miles on them than the odometers indicated.
        Canadian Data. According to our framework, price discontinuities are a result of consumer
inattention when processing numbers. Therefore, none of the results should depend on the unit of
measure in which the numbers are reported. We have a smaller set of data for auctions that the
company ran in Canada (N=289,055), where odometers report kilometers rather than miles,
between 2002 and 2005. In regressions analyses, 8 out of 12 of the coefficients on the 10,000-
kilometer dummy variables are negative and statistically significant. The average size of the
discontinuities is -CAN$184, which is comparable to results with U.S. data.18


5. Estimating the Inattention Parameter
In this section we generate estimates of the inattention parameter () from our model in Section 2.
To clarify the logic of this estimation, we first present linear approximations (Section 5.1) and then
turn to the structural estimates (Section 5.2).




18As a placebo test, we also include dummy variables for 10,000-mile thresholds (by converting kilometer values to
miles) in the regressions. None of the 10,000-mile threshold dummies are significant at conventional levels. Further
details and figures from this additional analysis are available in the online appendix.


                                                        16
5.1 Linear approximations
Recall from Section 2 (and Figure 1) that, for the simple linear case, the size of the estimated price
discontinuity at a 10,000-mile threshold should be approximately equal to                 , where    is the
slope of the value function with respect to actual miles (true depreciation). This slope ( ) can be
observed by drawing a line through the value function at the 10,000-mile thresholds. In the residual
graphs in Figures 5 and 7, one can obtain an estimate of            by drawing lines between the dots
centered on the threshold points. For the fleet/lease category, the average slope across these points
is -0.047 and for the dealer cars it is -0.060. Using the average discontinuity estimates discussed

above yields an estimate of θ equal to                              for the fleet/lease estimation and

                        for the dealer estimation.

        For the linear case, the inattention parameter has a natural interpretation in our setting.
From Equations (1) and (2), the overall decrease in a car‟s value between any two given 10,000-mile
intervals is given by              The discontinuity at a 10,000-mile mark is              Therefore, the
value of θ gives the fraction of the reduction of value across mileage that occurs at 10,000-mile
thresholds. As such, the results here suggest that approximately 30% of the depreciation that a car
experiences due to mileage increases occurs discontinuously at 10,000-mile thresholds.
        In Section 4.3, we mentioned that there is heterogeneity in the size of the price
discontinuities across car types. Our model of inattention predicts this heterogeneity. As noted in
Section 2, under a constant level of inattention, cars that depreciate at a faster rate (i.e., have a large
 ) should have larger discontinuities. The intuition is as follows. Imagine an extreme case of a car
type that depreciates by almost nothing between 20,000 and 30,000 miles. The perceived value that
an inattentive buyer will place on this car type when it has 29,999 miles will not be very different
than at 30,000 miles. By contrast, a car that depreciates very steeply will result in an inattentive buyer
placing very large differences in value around a 10,000-mile threshold. To test this prediction, we
estimate the average 10,000-mile price discontinuity for each of the 250 most popular (highest
volume sold) car models in our dataset. We also estimate the linear             parameter of depreciation
separately for each of these models. We find significant heterogeneity in depreciation rates across car
types. For example, the cars that depreciated fastest included BMW series, Mercedes Benz classes,
Chevy Corvette, Jaguar, and the Hummer H2, as opposed to such vehicles as Honda Accord, Ford
Escort, and Hyundai Accent that had lower depreciation rates. Figure 10 reports a scatter plot of the
depreciation rate ( ) and the average 10,000-mile discontinuity for the 250 car types. We find a


                                                     17
significant positive correlation between depreciation rate and threshold discontinuities (p <.001).
This graph also provides a second way of estimating the size of the inattention parameter θ. The
model predicts that the points in this scatter plot should lie along a ray from the origin with a slope
equal to θ. The linear fit through this scatter plot has an intercept that is not statistically different
from zero and an estimate of θ (the slope) of 0.3, which is nearly identical to the estimates above.19


5.2 Structural estimation of the inattention parameter
We now turn to a direct estimation of the inattention parameter based on the structural specification
of our model, as from Equation 2 in Section 2. Again we allow for non-linear depreciation in
mileage by having a car‟s value depend on a 7th-order polynomial in perceived mileage (                     :
                                                                                                                 (5)
The perceived mileage can be rewritten as (                             , where again  is the inattention parameter, m
is the car‟s true mileage and mr is the “mileage remainder” after subtracting off the mileage based on
the left-most digit. For example, for m = 12,345, this mileage remainder would be 2,345. Therefore
Equation (5) can be rewritten as:
                                                                                                                  (6)
We use non-linear least squares estimation to obtain estimates of the parameters in Equation 6.
Because it is difficult to account for car-specific factors using fixed effects in non-linear least-squares
estimation, we use a two step procedure to obtain these estimates. First, we obtain estimates for the
car-specific valuations (K) for each car by running regression specifications as in Section 4, where the
estimates of K come from the fixed effects. We subtract these estimates of K from the sale price to
form a residual that nets out the car-specific valuation, just as in Figures 4, 5 and 7. We then
perform non-linear least squares regressions of that residual on the 7th-order polynomial of (
          , which give us estimates of the seven  parameters and of . As the discussion of the model
in Section 2 and Section 5.1 both highlight,  is identified by the discontinuities in prices around
mileage thresholds and their interaction with the depreciation ( parameters) at that point.
            For the full sample of cars (both fleet/lease and dealer categories) using fixed effects that are
a combination of make, model, body-style and age (as in Column 5 of Tables 2 and 3), we estimate 
to be 0.31 with a standard error of 0.01. This corresponds almost exactly to the linear
approximations above. For each of the regression specifications reported in Tables 2 and 3, we

19   This estimate is robust to the exclusion of outliers in the scatter plot.


                                                                 18
include the estimated  value and standard error corresponding to that specification. These estimates
for the fleet/lease category in Table 2 show an estimated  ranging from 0.20 to 0.25 across
different specifications, with a value of 0.24 to 0.25 in the benchmark specifications in Column 5
and 6. We estimate a greater degree of inattention for cars in the dealer category, with estimates of
0.37 and 0.32 in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3, respectively.
         Comparing the inattention estimates for fleet/lease versus dealer cars more closely reveals
that there is a relationship between mileage and inattention in the used-car market. Recall that the
estimates in Column 6 of Tables 2 and 3 show essentially the same un-weighted average
discontinuity at 10,000 mile marks for the dealer and fleet/lease categories. That would suggest very
similar patterns of inattention for both groups.20 Yet, the inattention parameter is higher for dealer
cars than for fleet/lease cars. The reason for this is that the dealer cars have higher mileage than the
fleet/lease cars and it turns out that inattention is higher for higher mileage cars. The  estimates are
based on the range of cars for each sample and the higher estimate for the dealer cars reflects that
the  for that category is identified off of transactions of more high mileage cars. If we split the
samples of both categories at the 50,000-mile mark we find that above 50,000 miles the estimate for
 is 0.33 for fleet/lease cars and 0.39 for dealer cars and below 50,000 miles it is 0.19 for fleet/lease
and 0.24 for dealer cars. We return to this relationship between mileage and inattention in the
discussion of rational inattention in our concluding section.
         We can also explore the extent to which people display increasing inattention to digits
further to the right. Equation 3 in Section 2 showed that this could be captured with separate
inattention parameters for each digit to the right of the left-most. For example, with inattention to
the second digit (1) and further inattention beyond the second digit (2), mileage of 49,999 would
be perceived as                                                                               If 2 = 0, the person
shows the same level of partial attention to all digits past the first; as 2 approaches 1, the person
comes closer to completely ignoring further digits. The discontinuities at 1,000-mile marks allow us
to identify 2. In the linear case, the 1,000-mile discontinuities are equal to 2(1-1)1,000, so there
will only be 1,000-mile-mark discontinuities if 2  0. We include the specification for perceived
mileage with 2 into our non-linear least squares estimation. This estimation over the entire sample
(pooling fleet/lease and dealer categories) yields an estimate of 1 = 0.31 (s.e.=0.01) and 2 = 0.43

  In fact, the linear approximation, based on this unweighted average, finds very similar  values that are slightly higher
20

for the fleet/lease category.


                                                            19
(s.e.=0.04). With a linear depreciation rate () of 0.05, these estimates predict 1,000-mile
discontinuities of approximately $15, which is in line with the averages reported above. These
estimates suggest that attention continues to decrease after the second digit.


6. Understanding the incidence of the bias
Because our data come from the wholesale market, a natural question is: Who is inattentive? Do the
observed patterns reflect inattention on the part of final customers or rather the inattention of the
dealers themselves? Like our theoretical framework in Section 2, most work in “behavioral industrial
organization” starts from the premise that rational firms operate with an awareness of (and
sometimes the ability to exploit) the biases of customers. Part of the motivation for that benchmark
is that previous studies have shown that biases may be attenuated when agents accumulate market
experience (List, 2003). On the other hand, there is evidence that auction settings may exacerbate
biases, since it will often be the most biased agents who win auctions (Lee and Malmendier,
forthcoming; Malmendier and Szeidl, 2008). This raises the possibility that the inattention to mileage
in this market could stem from the professional dealers purchasing at auction. Parsing out the
incidence of bias in this market is challenging because if the end customers display inattention, it will
be difficult to distinguish between a savvy used-car dealer who purchases cars with an awareness of
this bias and an un-savvy used-car dealer who happens to share the same bias as his end customers.
In this section we present a range of cuts designed to investigate whether the price discontinuities
seem to be driven primarily by used-car dealers or final customers.
            A starting point for this analysis is to look for evidence of these types of discontinuity
patterns in the car market outside of wholesale auctions. We collected limited volume data from
Cars.com, a leading automotive-classifieds website targeted to final customers.21 These data reveal
the presence of similar volume spikes at mileages just before the 10,000-mile thresholds. While these
date lack information on ultimate sale prices, these patterns are at least suggestive that the
inattention effects we observe in our data are not simply a wholesale-auction phenomenon.
            Within our data, one approach to investigating the incidence of bias is to exploit the
variation in auction experience of the used-car dealers at the auction. Consider the possibility that
the used-car dealers, but not the final customers, are inattentive. This would imply that cars with
mileage just below a threshold are overpriced at the auction relative to what they can be sold for in


21   Further details are available in the online appendix.


                                                             20
the retail market. In this case, we might expect that more experienced dealers would have learned to
avoid the costly bias and would be more likely to purchase cars just above 10,000-mile thresholds.
Hence, we would expect the fraction of cars purchased by experienced buyers to jump up at the
10,000-mile thresholds. On the other hand, assume that the bias is driven by the final customers. If
some of the inexperienced car dealers are unaware of inattention effects, they will wrongly believe
that prices will be smooth across mileage thresholds. In this case, they will perceive cars before
thresholds to be overpriced relative to those past the thresholds and could be expected to cluster
more on the post-threshold cars. Hence, we would expect the share of cars purchased by
experienced dealers to fall at the thresholds.
         We investigate these experience patterns in Figure 11. For each 500-mile bin, we report the
average “experience level” of the buyers of cars in that bin. For each year of our data, we obtain an
experience measure by calculating the total number of cars each dealer in our data purchased at the
auctions in that year.22 We then give each dealer an experience-percentile rating, which is 0 for the
least experienced and 100 for the most experienced buyers, in the data. Figure 11 illustrates that
crossing a 10,000-mile threshold leads to a small discontinuous drop in the average experience level
of car buyers. The experienced buyers at the auction are more likely to purchase the higher-priced
cars with mileage just before a salient threshold. This evidence, then, supports the idea that the price
discontinuities are primarily driven by inattention of final customers and that inexperienced used-car
dealers may be somewhat less aware of this bias.
         A second approach using our data is given by two empirical tests related to the potential
presence of some used-car dealers who are unaware of the extent of the left-digit bias. First, if this is
true, then observed auction prices will slightly understate the degree of inattention by final
customers and we should observe smaller average price discontinuities at 10,000-mile marks at
auctions where there are fewer experienced dealers. We repeated our primary regression analysis
splitting the sample into quartiles based on average dealer experience (measured as in Figure 11) at
the auction. We find that the size of the discontinuities is positively related to the average experience
of the buyers at the auction.23 Further, if it is a subset of biased car dealers purchasing at auction
who drive the inattention results and not the final customers, then we would expect that, because
this auction setting is strategically equivalent to a second-price auction, there is more likely to be one


22
  This result is robust to other measures of experience.
23
  The un-weighted average discontinuity for the lowest (highest) quartile of experience is $135 ($190) for dealer cars and
$143 ($173) for fleet/lease cars. These results are available from the authors on request.


                                                           21
of these biased agents bidding on a car when the market is “thicker”, and price discontinuities
should be larger.24 To investigate this issue, we replicated our regression analysis splitting the sample
into the top and bottom quartile of auction “thickness” defined as the number of cars auctioned that
day, the number of unique buyers at the auction, and the ratio of unique buyers to cars. 25 The first
two measures are highly correlated and both cuts reveal slightly higher average discontinuities on
busy auction days. However, the differences are small and we find no gradient when we cut by
quartiles of thickness as defined as the ratio of unique buyers to cars.26
         Another approach to identifying the incidence of the bias is to look at cars that are very close
to passing over a threshold. Since the used-car dealer often drives the car back to his/her lot after
the auction and since customers can test drive a vehicle, a car that is within a few miles of a 10,000-
mile threshold may pass over the threshold prior to being sold to a final customer.27 Thus, if dealers
are savvy, we would expect car values to drop several miles before a 10,000-mile threshold rather
than dropping precipitously at the exact 10,000-mile marks. Figure 9 provides evidence that car
values do drop significantly prior to reaching a 10,000-mile threshold. The last dot in Figure 9 is the
value of cars that are within 50 miles of a 10,000-mile threshold. This dot illustrates that the average
value of a car that is within 50 miles of a threshold drops by ~$60. Although not conclusive, this is
again suggestive evidence that dealers are somewhat savvy and that it is the final customers who are
inattentive to mileage. Note, however, that prices do not fully drop before the threshold, which
leaves open the possibility of some degree of inattention by buyers at the auction.
         A final question is whether sellers at the auctions appear to be aware of these inattention
effects. There is little evidence that the fleet/lease sellers adjust their behavior to these threshold
effects because they uniformly set low reserve prices and do not show systematic volume spikes
around the thresholds. The volume patterns for dealer cars, however, clearly suggest that some of
these sellers are aware of the threshold effects. Since many of the cars that dealers sell at auctions
come from trade-ins on their lots, these volume patterns could, however, be driven by individuals
who decide to trade in their cars (perhaps quite rationally) before the thresholds. The probability
graphs for the different seller types, however, also provide some hints that some of the dealers who
sell cars at the auctions may be unaware of the threshold effects. Recall that the probability graphs

24 This test was suggested by the work of Malmendier and Szeidl (2008), who discuss the possibility that auction settings
are a place for sellers to “fish for fools”.
25 This analysis was done splitting by quartiles within auction location.
26 These results are available from the authors on request.
27 Our discussions with used-car dealers suggest they are aware of these discontinuities. One dealer explained that while

salespeople can drive cars from the lot, everyone is instructed to avoid driving a car over a 10,000-mile threshold.


                                                           22
for the fleet/lease cars are uniformly high and smooth through the thresholds, revealing that there is
no systematic drop in demand for cars at the thresholds in the auctions. Yet a close look at the
probability graphs for the dealer category shows that there seem to be slight drops in the probability
of dealer cars selling at the thresholds. This could be consistent with some dealer sellers being
unaware of the inattention of final used-car customers. Since the dealers set reservation prices that
are at times binding, if some fraction of these sellers are unaware of threshold effects, they may fail
to adjust their reserve prices downward enough at thresholds. This in turn could lead to drops in the
probability of sales for these dealers at the thresholds. We have run regression results on the
probability of sale using the above-mentioned framework and find some suggestive evidence of
drops in probability of sale at 10,000-mile marks for the dealer sellers.28 However, the results are
weak at many thresholds and are suggestive at best.
            Taken together, these results are consistent with a view that the incidence of bias in this
market likely rests primarily with the final customers, but that there may also be some degree of
heterogeneity in the awareness of that bias on the part of the professional suppliers in the market.


7. Discussion
We find strong evidence for the hypothesis that partial inattention to mileage has a significant
impact on the used-car market. Without a model of inattention, it would be difficult to even
understand some of the basic descriptive statistics regarding the prices and quantities of cars sold.
Because of the size of the car market, this simple heuristic leads to a large amount of mispricing.
Our estimates of the difference between observed selling prices and the prices that we would expect
under full attention suggest that there was approximately $2.4 billion worth of mispricing due to
inattention in our full dataset. Additionally, the supply decisions of hundreds of thousands of cars
were affected by this heuristic (e.g., sold right before a 10,000-mile threshold). Although it is likely
that these distortions largely result in transfers between market participants rather than large
economic inefficiencies, it is striking that this simple heuristic can so profoundly shape the nature of
a reasonably competitive, high-value durable-goods market.
            We anticipate that the left-digit bias could be widespread. More generally, heuristic numeric
processing might impact a range of other settings, in particular environments where inferences are
made based on continuous quality metrics. Examples include hiring or admissions decisions based


28   The results of these regressions are available upon request.


                                                               23
on GPAs and test scores, the evaluation of companies based on financial reports (e.g., revenues), the
treatment of medical test results, and how the public reacts to government spending programs.
        There remains a question of whether this inattention should be thought of as an irrational
bias or a (boundedly) rational calculation in the face of mental processing constraints. The answer
likely depends on how broadly one considers the question of the appropriateness of the heuristic. In
general the left-digit bias is likely a reasonable heuristic in the face of cognitive processing
constraints. However, in this setting the ex-ante costs of inattention relative to a full-attention
benchmark are on the order of $75 and anyone purchasing a car near a threshold will very quickly
see a drop in value of approximately $150. Given that mileage information is easy to obtain, it seems
unlikely, then, that the heuristic corresponds with a rational expected cost-benefit analysis narrowly
within this market. Perhaps a more relevant question than whether heuristics are boundedly rational
in absolute terms is whether people employ heuristics more when they are more appropriate. Our
evidence on that issue is somewhat mixed. On one hand, we observe that the estimates of the
inattention parameter are higher for higher mileage cars. Given that marginal mileage is more
important for low-mileage cars than for high-mileage cars, this result would be consistent with a
bounded-rationality interpretation that buyers rely more on the left-digit heuristics in settings where
it is less costly to do so. On the other hand, when we look across car types, comparing those that
depreciate more quickly versus those that depreciate more slowly, we find relatively similar levels of
attention, which would suggest that the heuristic is not being deployed “optimally”. Englmaier and
Schmoller (2008) explore closely related issues of inattention in an online gaming market and find
that even when relevant information becomes more salient and available, participants still do not pay
full attention to it, which also suggests that the application of information processing heuristics do
not always respond strongly to the environment. Ultimately, it seems to us that the use of limited
attention heuristics, such as the left-digit bias, is a generally sensible human tendency, but one that
does not always fit with modern economic settings. One direction for future research, then, is to
explore what types of situations and cues cause people to modify their use of these heuristics.




References
Basu, K., 1997: “Why Are So Many Goods Priced to End in Nine? And Why This Practice Hurts
   Producers?,” Economics Letters, 53, 41-4.
Basu, K., 2006: “Consumer Cognition and Pricing in the Nines in Oligopolistic Markets,” Journal of Economics
   and Management Strategy, 15, 1, 125-41.


                                                    24
Bradley, D.J., Cooney, J.W., Jordan, B.D. and Singh, A.K., 2004: "Negotiation and the IPO Offer Price: A
     Comparison of Integer vs. Non-Integer IPOs," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39, 3, 517-40.
Chetty, R., Looney, A. and Kroft, K., 2009: “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic
     Review, 99, 4, 1145-77.
Cohen, L. and Frazzini, A., 2008: “Economic Links and Predictable Returns,” Journal of Finance, 63, 4, 1977-
     2011.
DellaVigna, S., 2009: “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47,
     2, 315-72.
DellaVigna, S. and Pollet, J.M., 2007: “Demographics and Industry Returns,” American Economic Review, 97,
     1167-702.
DellaVigna, S. and Pollet., J.M., 2009: “Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings Announcements,” Journal of
     Finance, 64, 2, 709-749.
Englmaier, F. and Schmoller, A., 2008: “Does Bidding for Complex Goods Reflect All Relevant Information?
     Field Evidence from Online Gaming,” University of Munich, Working Paper.
Englmaier, F. and Schmoller, A., 2009: “The Evaluation of Complex Goods: Evidence from Online Car
     Sales,” University of Munich, Working Paper.
Finkelstein, A., 2009: “EZ-Tax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 3, 969-1010.
Gabaix, X. and Laibson, D., 2006: “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in
     Competitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 2, 505-40.
Gilovich, T., Griffin, D. and D. Kahneman, editors, 2002: Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
     Judgement, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ginzberg, E., 1936: “Customary Prices,” American Economic Review, 26, 2, 296.
Hirshleifer, D., Lim, S.S. and Teoh, S.H., forthcoming: “Driven to Distraction: Extraneous Events and
     Underreaction to Earning News,” Journal of Finance, 63, 5, 2287-2323.
Hossain, T. and Morgan, J., 2006: “…Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non) Equivalence in Field
     Experiments on eBay,” B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy: Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy,
     6, 2, 1-27.
Kahn, C., Pennacchi, G. and Sopranzetti, B., 1999:“Bank Deposit Rate Clustering: Theory and Empirical
     Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 54, 6, 2185-214.
Kandel, S., Sarig, O. and Wahl, A., 2001: "Do Investors Prefer Round Stock Prices? Evidence from Israeli
     IPO Auctions," Journal of Banking and Finance, 25, 1543-51.
Korvost, M. and Damian, M.F., 2008: “The Differential Influence of Decades and Units on Multidigit
Comparison,” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 8, 1250-64.
Lee, D. and Lemieux, T., 2009: “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” NBER Working Paper
     14723.
Lee, Y.H. and Malmendier, U., forthcoming: “The Bidder‟s Curse,” American Economic Review.
List, J.A., 2003: “Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 118,
     1, 41-71.
Malmendier, U. and Szeidl, A., 2008: “Fishing for Fools,” working paper, UC-Berkeley.
Mullainathan, S., Schwartzstein, J. and and Shleifer, A., 2008: “Coarse Thinking and Persuasion,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 123, 2, 577-619.
Poltrock, S.E. and Schwartz, D.R., 1984: “Comparative Judgments of Multidigit Numbers,” Journal of
     Experimental Psychology, 10, 1, 32-45.
Pope, D.G., 2009: “Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from „America‟s Best Hospitals‟,” Journal of Health
     Economics, 28, 1154-65.
Simon, H.A., 1955: “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 1, 99-118.




                                                        25
Figure 1. Example Value Function

This figure provides an example of how the consumer’s value function from Eq 2 in Section 2 would look
with a positive value of θ.




                             Slope = -α    Slope = -α(1-θ)        Discontinuity = αθ10,000
      Value




                 60,000         70,000          80,000       90,000          100,000         m
Figure 2 - Raw Price. This figure plots the raw average sales price within 500-mile bins for the more than 22 million auctioned cars in our
dataset.



                        17000




                        15000




                        13000
  Average Sales Price




                        11000




                         9000




                         7000




                         5000




                         3000
                                0   20000           40000               60000               80000              100000              120000

                                                    Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 3 - Volume. This figure plots the raw counts within 500-mile bins for the more than 22 million auctioned cars in our dataset.
                          200000



                          180000



                          160000



                          140000
  # of Cars in Each Bin




                          120000



                          100000



                           80000



                           60000



                           40000



                           20000
                                   0   20000         40000               60000               80000               100000                120000

                                                     Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 4 - Price Residuals. This figure plots the average residual sales price within 500-mile bins for the more than 22 million auctioned cars in our
dataset. The residual is obtained by removing make-model-model year-body effects from the sales price.
                                  14000




                                  13000




                                  12000
   Average Residual Sales Price




                                  11000




                                  10000




                                   9000




                                   8000




                                   7000
                                          0   20000   40000               60000                80000               100000              120000

                                                      Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 5 - Fleet/Lease Price Residuals. This figure plots the average residual sales price within 500-mile bins for the cars in our dataset sold by
Fleet/Lease companies. The residual is obtained by removing make-model-model year-body effects from the sales price.
                                  14000




                                  13000




                                  12000
   Average Residual Sales Price




                                  11000




                                  10000




                                   9000




                                   8000




                                   7000
                                          0   20000   40000                60000               80000                100000              120000

                                                      Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 6 - Fleet/Lease Fraction Sold and Volume. Panel A plots the fraction of fleet/lease cars within
500-mile bins that sold. Panel B plots the raw counts within 500 mile bins for the fleet/lease cars in
our dataset.
Panel A - Fraction Sold

                                  1

                         0.9

                         0.8

                         0.7
 Fraction of Cars Sold




                         0.6

                         0.5

                         0.4

                         0.3

                         0.2

                         0.1

                                  0
                                          0            20000           40000       60000      80000    100000   120000
                                                               Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Panel B - Volume


                                          120000


                                          100000
                  # of Cars in Each Bin




                                          80000


                                          60000


                                          40000


                                          20000


                                               0
                                                   0           20000       40000      60000    80000   100000   120000

                                                                  Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 7 - Dealer Price Residuals. This figure plots the average residual sales price within 500-mile bins for the cars in our dataset sold by Dealers.
The residual is obtained by removing make-model-model year-body effects from the sales price.
                                  14000




                                  13000




                                  12000
   Average Residual Sales Price




                                  11000




                                  10000




                                   9000




                                   8000




                                   7000
                                          0   20000   40000                60000                80000               100000               120000

                                                      Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 8 - Dealer Fraction Sold and Volume. Panel A plots the fraction of dealer cars within 500-mile
bins that sold. Panel B plots the raw counts within 500 mile bins for the dealer cars in our dataset.
Panel A - Fraction Sold
                                   1

                        0.9

                        0.8

                        0.7
Fraction of Cars Sold




                        0.6

                        0.5

                        0.4

                        0.3

                        0.2

                        0.1

                                   0
                                         0           20000        40000       60000      80000       100000   120000
                                                             Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Panel B - Volume
                                         60000


                                         50000
                 # of Cars in Each Bin




                                         40000


                                         30000


                                         20000


                                         10000


                                             0
                                                 0       20000       40000      60000      80000     100000   120000

                                                               Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
Figure 9 - 1,000-Mile Discontinuities. This figure plots the average residual sales price within 50-mile bins for all cars in our dataset. To
decrease noise, the data were stacked so that each dot is the average residual for cars in the same bin relative to a 10,000-mile threshold. For
example, the very first dot represents the average residual value of all cars whose mileage falls between 10,000-10,050, 20,000-20,050, 30,000-
30,050, ..., or 110,000-110,050.

                                 10700


                                 10650


                                 10600
  Average Residual Sales Price




                                 10550


                                 10500


                                 10450


                                 10400


                                 10350


                                 10300


                                 10250
                                         0   1000      2000       3000      4000       5000       6000      7000       8000       9000   10000

                                                    Miles on Car Relative to 10,000-Mile Threshold (Rounded Down to Nearest 50)
Figure 10 - Depreciation and Discontinuity Correlation. This figure plots the depreciation rate (alpha) and the average 10,000-mile price
discontinuity for the 250 most popular cars in our data. A linear fitted line is included.

                                                      1,500.00



                                                      1,300.00



                                                      1,100.00
   Average Discontinuity for 10,000-Mile Thresholds




                                                       900.00



                                                       700.00



                                                       500.00



                                                       300.00



                                                       100.00



                                                       -100.00 0   0.02   0.04     0.06        0.08         0.1        0.12      0.14   0.16   0.18



                                                       -300.00



                                                       -500.00
                                                                                 Rate of Car Depreciation across Miles (Alpha)
Figure 11 - Experience Percentile. Each buyer in the dataset is given a experience percentile rating based on total volume of purchases (the 1% of
buyers with the highest volume receive a percentile score of 99%). This figure plots the average buyer experience percentile for each 500-mile bin.
                                          60




                                          55
    Average Buyer Experience Percentile




                                          50




                                          45




                                          40




                                          35




                                          30
                                               0   20000   40000           60000            80000             100000              120000

                                                           Miles on Car (Rounded Down to Nearest 500)
                                                    Table 1. Summary Statistics


                              2002        2003           2004        2005         2006       2007        2008       All Years
All Cars
  Cars brought to auction   4,201,337   3,946,544      4,013,990   3,922,811   3,857,324   3,956,676   3,103,236   27,001,918
  Cars sold at auction      3,465,958   3,324,874      3,276,768   3,226,587   3,132,033   3,238,287   2,531,154   22,195,661
     Price Sold              $9,861      $9,396         $9,862     $10,421     $10,789     $11,141     $10,832      $10,301
     Mileage                 54,634      56,528         58,028      58,764      57,926      57,384      55,620       56,997
     Model Year              1998.1      1999.0         1999.9      2000.8      2001.9      2002.9      2003.9       2000.8
Dealer Cars
  Cars brought to auction   2,010,481   2,060,560      2,318,420   2,406,979   2,384,672   2,313,739   1,604,615   15,099,466
  Cars sold at auction      1,357,210   1,449,774      1,639,840   1,773,045   1,738,082   1,686,121   1,132,102   10,776,174
     Price Sold              $8,493      $8,543         $9,144      $9,712      $9,867     $10,046      $9,270       $9,346
     Mileage                 65,269      65,473         65,327      65,710      66,242      67,582      68,128       66,197
     Model Year              1996.8      1997.9         1999.0      2000.0      2000.9      2001.8      2002.6       1999.9
Fleet/Lease Cars
  Cars brought to auction   2,190,856   1,885,984      1,695,570   1,515,832   1,472,652   1,642,937   1,498,621   11,902,452
  Cars sold at auction      2,108,748   1,875,100      1,636,928   1,453,542   1,393,951   1,552,166   1,399,052   11,419,487
     Price Sold             $10,742     $10,055        $10,582     $11,287     $11,938     $12,329     $12,096      $11,203
     Mileage                 47,789      49,611         50,716      50,291      47,557      46,306      45,499       48,316
     Model Year              1999.0      1999.9         2000.8      2001.9      2003.0      2004.2      2005.1       2001.7
                  Table 2. The Impact of 10,000-Miles-Driven Discontinuities on Price - Fleet/Lease Only
                                                    Dependent Variable: Auction Price for Car Sale
                              (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)
Avg. Discontinuity Size     -131.8       -164.1        -141.9          -154.5          -156.8           -161.6        -168.8
Estimated Theta              0.22         0.22          0.20            0.24            0.25             0.24          0.22
                             [.01]        [.01]         [.01]           [.01]           [.01]            [.01]         [.01]
MT 10k miles                 -22.2         -81.6      -151.2***         -45.9*          -56.1**          -41.1*       -56.6**
                             [73.8]        [73.1]       [52.6]           [27.3]          [22.4]          [23.1]        [26.9]
MT 20k miles              -191.2***     -190.2***     -113.4***       -149.6***       -157.8***        -158.5***     -135.8***
                             [40.1]        [39.7]       [28.0]           [14.1]          [11.6]          [12.1]        [14.1]
MT 30k miles              218.2***        63.1**        45.5**         -94.5***        -84.7***        -101.7***     -101.0***
                             [26.1]        [25.8]       [17.9]            [9.3]           [7.8]           [8.2]        [10.0]
MT 40k miles               -87.4***      -83.7***     -122.9***       -160.7***       -181.9***        -175.8***     -181.1***
                             [29.3]        [28.9]       [19.6]           [10.2]           [8.7]           [9.1]        [11.2]
MT 50k miles              -653.2***     -574.8***     -312.5***       -268.9***       -289.3***        -305.6***     -317.9***
                             [29.9]        [29.1]       [20.0]           [10.9]           [9.4]          [10.0]        [13.3]
MT 60k miles              -416.8***     -450.2***     -291.6***       -226.0***       -207.0***        -211.3***     -201.3***
                             [31.6]        [30.6]       [21.8]           [12.4]          [11.0]          [11.5]        [16.1]
MT 70k miles              111.4***          27.4      -125.6***       -212.6***       -215.6***        -214.0***     -213.6***
                             [31.5]        [30.2]       [22.3]           [13.2]          [11.8]          [12.4]        [18.6]
MT 80k miles                  -4.3         -19.6      -133.6***       -213.7***       -216.6***        -216.0***     -210.8***
                             [31.5]        [29.7]       [23.0]           [14.4]          [13.1]          [14.2]        [22.9]
MT 90k miles              -284.7***     -245.8***     -205.2***       -185.4***       -185.8***        -211.8***     -241.9***
                             [34.7]        [32.4]       [25.5]           [16.2]          [14.8]          [16.3]        [27.0]
MT 100k miles             -305.9***     -347.8***     -266.7***       -167.2***       -154.0***        -160.5***     -174.2***
                             [34.1]        [31.3]       [25.7]           [17.3]          [16.1]          [18.5]        [32.1]
MT 110k miles             153.5***         67.2*          6.8             -5.2             -3             11.1          15.2
                             [40.9]        [37.8]       [30.9]           [20.2]          [18.6]          [22.8]        [40.6]
MT 120k miles               -98.4*      -133.7***        -32.3        -123.9***       -129.5***        -153.6***     -206.6***
                             [54.3]        [48.9]       [40.9]           [28.1]          [26.3]          [34.3]        [63.5]
7th-Order Miles Poly          X            X              X               X               X               X             X
Fixed Effects                                                                                         Age*Make* Age*Make*Mod
                                                                     Age*Make*      Age*Make*
                            None          Age        Age*Make                                        Model*Body*A el*Body*Auctio
                                                                       Model        Model*Body
                                                                                                        uction      n*Seller_ID
R-Squared                   0.224         0.257         0.632           0.895           0.926            0.960         0.974
Observations              2,337,851     2,337,851     2,337,851       2,337,851       2,337,851        2,337,851     2,337,851
** p < .05; *** p < .01
                          Table 3. The Impact of 10,000-Mile Thresholds on Prices - Dealer Only
                                                    Dependent Variable: Auction Price for Car Sale
                              (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)
Avg. Discontinuity Size     -446.0       -376.3        -264.0          -180.5          -173.2           -167.3        -146.4
Estimated Theta              0.33         0.39          0.40            0.37            0.37             0.32          0.24
                             [.01]        [.01]         [.01]           [.01]           [.01]            [.01]         [.01]
MT 10k miles               -801.7***    -691.6***     -350.9***       -184.0***       -179.4***        -184.6***        -186.4
                             [112.0]      [104.4]        [72.1]          [31.6]          [22.8]           [29.5]       [125.4]
MT 20k miles               -379.7***    -345.8***     -171.7***       -179.6***       -156.8***        -152.5***       -124.7*
                              [65.1]       [61.7]        [43.1]          [19.0]          [14.2]           [17.5]        [70.7]
MT 30k miles               -339.9***    -209.2***     -204.1***       -122.3***       -127.8***        -126.0***         -64.7
                              [45.2]       [42.9]        [30.5]          [13.9]          [10.9]           [13.3]        [58.3]
MT 40k miles               -564.7***    -509.9***     -341.0***       -231.1***       -226.1***        -201.4***      -156.0**
                              [42.9]       [40.0]        [28.5]          [13.3]          [10.7]           [13.3]        [64.4]
MT 50k miles              -1,094.9***   -901.0***     -504.1***       -280.2***       -264.5***        -249.2***     -224.0***
                              [37.2]       [33.8]        [24.4]          [11.8]           [9.7]           [12.2]        [68.2]
MT 60k miles               -610.4***    -499.1***     -346.8***       -212.0***       -199.3***        -187.7***      -163.4**
                              [32.6]       [28.9]        [21.4]          [10.9]           [9.2]           [11.8]        [69.4]
MT 70k miles               -381.6***    -284.1***     -310.9***       -243.7***       -235.5***        -212.4***     -184.6***
                              [29.7]       [26.2]        [19.7]          [10.1]           [8.6]           [11.0]        [67.3]
MT 80k miles               -315.5***    -220.0***     -224.2***       -182.6***       -171.6***        -163.7***        -103.8
                              [24.0]       [20.8]        [16.1]           [8.7]           [7.7]            [9.9]        [63.4]
MT 90k miles               -337.2***    -311.1***     -239.5***       -189.5***       -186.5***        -183.7***     -176.7***
                              [23.9]       [20.6]        [16.1]           [8.9]           [7.8]           [10.2]        [65.9]
MT 100k miles              -402.2***    -412.9***     -331.6***       -226.7***       -212.3***        -212.3***     -177.8***
                              [21.8]       [18.6]        [15.0]           [8.6]           [7.8]           [10.3]        [67.6]
MT 110k miles                  12.7         -4.7       -61.2***        -39.2***        -37.1***         -47.0***         -64.5
                              [24.3]       [20.8]        [17.0]           [9.9]           [8.9]           [11.9]        [80.0]
MT 120k miles              -136.5***    -126.3***      -82.4***        -75.6***        -81.0***         -87.6***        -130.6
                              [28.6]       [24.3]        [20.2]          [12.5]          [11.6]           [15.7]       [111.8]
7th-Order Miles Poly          X            X              X               X               X               X             X
Fixed Effects                                                                                         Age*Make* Age*Make*Mod
                                                                     Age*Make*      Age*Make*
                             None         Age        Age*Make                                        Model*Body*A el*Body*Auctio
                                                                       Model        Model*Body
                                                                                                        uction      n*Seller_ID
R-Squared                   0.335         0.443         0.708           0.933           0.957           0.980          0.998
Observations               2,299,007    2,299,007     2,299,007       2,299,007       2,299,007        2,299,007     2,299,007
** p < .05; *** p < .01
