                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INFLATION DYNAMICS AND THE GREAT RECESSION

                                          Laurence M. Ball
                                         Sandeep Mazumder

                                        Working Paper 17044
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17044


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




This is a revised version of a paper that was prepared for the March 2011 Brookings Panel on Economic
Activity. We are grateful for excellent research assistance from Indra Astrayuda, Kue Peng Chuah,
Xu Lu, Prathi Seneviratne, and Hou Wang, and for suggestions from the editors, Karen Dynan, Jon
Faust, Robert Gordon, Jeremy Rudd, James Stock, Eric Swanson, Jonathan Wright, and participants
at the Brookings Panel. We are also very grateful to Brent Meyer for assistance with the Cleveland
Fed's data on inflation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Laurence M. Ball and Sandeep Mazumder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession
Laurence M. Ball and Sandeep Mazumder
NBER Working Paper No. 17044
May 2011
JEL No. E31

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines inflation dynamics in the UniteG States since 1960, with a particular focus on
the Great Recession. A puzzle emerges when Phillips curves estimated over 1960-2007 are used to
predict inflation over 2008-2010: inflation should have fallen by more than it did. We resolve this
puzzle with two modifications of the Phillips curve, both suggested by theories of costly price adjustment:
we measure core inflation with the median CPI inflation rate, and we allow the slope of the Phillips
curve to change with the level and variance of inflation. We then examine the hypothesis of anchored
inflation expectations. We find that expectations have been fully "shock-anchored" since the 1980s,
while "level anchoring" has been gradual and partial, but significant. It is not clear whether expectations
are sufficiently anchored to prevent deflation over the next few years. Finally, we show that the Great
Recession provides fresh evidence against the New Keynesian Phillips curve with rational expectations.


Laurence M. Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu

Sandeep Mazumder
Department of Economics
Wake Forest University
Winston-Salem, NC 27109
mazumds@wfu.edu
1    Introduction

In his Presidential Address, Friedman (1968) presented a theory of the short run behavior of

inflation. In Friedman’s theory, inflation depends on expected inflation and the gap between

unemployment and its natural rate. Friedman also suggested that “unanticipated inflation

generally means a rising rate of inflation”–in other words, that expected inflation is well-proxied

by past inflation. These assumptions imply an accelerationist Phillips curve that relates the

change in inflation to the unemployment gap.

    In the decades since Friedman’s work, his model has been a workhorse of macroeconomics.

Researchers have refined the model extensively; two of the numerous examples are Gordon

(1982, 1990)’s introduction of supply shocks and Staiger et al. (1997)’s modeling of a time-

varying natural rate. Economists have debated how well the accelerationist Phillips curve fits

the data, some declaring the equation’s demise and others reporting that “The Phillips Curve

Is Alive and Well” (Fuhrer, 1995).

    Debate over the Phillips curve has gained momentum during the U.S. economic slump that

began in 2007. Some economists see a puzzle: inflation has not fallen as much as a traditional

Phillips curve predicts, given the high level of unemployment. For example, in September 2010,

John Williams (now president of the San Francisco Fed) said:



“The surprise [about inflation] is that it’s fallen so little, given the depth and duration of the

recent downturn. Based on the experience of past severe recessions, I would have expected infla-

tion to fall by twice as much as it has.”



In addition to analyzing the recent behavior of inflation, economists are debating its likely

path in the future. If the accelerationist Phillips curve is accurate, then high unemployment

implies a substantial risk that inflation will fall below zero. Yet many economists argue that

deflation is unlikely, primarily because the Federal Reserve’s commitment to a low but positive

inflation rate has “anchored” inflation expectations. According to Bernanke (2010),




                                                2
“Falling into deflation is not a significant risk for the United States at this time, but that is

true in part because the public understands that the Federal Reserve will be vigilant and proac-

tive in addressing significant further disinflation.”



This paper contributes to the debate over past and prospective inflation in several steps. We first

show why it is easy to view recent inflation behavior as puzzling. We estimate accelerationist

Phillips curves with quarterly data for the period 1960-2007, measuring inflation with either

the CPI or the CPI less food and energy (XFE), the standard measure of “core” inflation. We

use the estimated equation and the path of unemployment over 2008-2010 to produce dynamic

forecasts of inflation. In these forecasts, a four-quarter moving average of core inflation falls to

-4.3% in 2010Q4. In reality, four-quarter core inflation was 0.6% in 2010Q4. A simple Phillips

curve predicts a deflation that did not occur.

   We show, however, that two simple modifications of the Phillips curve eliminate this puzzle.

They produce a specification that fits the entire period since 1960, including the Great Reces-

sion. Both modifications are suggested by theory, specifically, models of costly nominal price

adjustment from the 1980s and 1990s.

   First, following Bryan and Cecchetti (1994), we measure core inflation with a weighted

median of price changes across industries. This approach is motivated by price-adjustment

models in which unusually large relative-price changes cause movements in aggregate inflation.

Median inflation fell by more than XFE inflation from 2007 to 2010, reflecting a higher initial

level (in 2007, median inflation was about 3% and XFE inflation was 2%). The relatively large

fall in median inflation reduces the gap between forecasted and actual inflation.

   Second, following Ball, Mankiw, and Romer (1988), we allow the slope of the Phillips curve–

the coefficient on unemployment–to vary over time. In the Ball-Mankiw-Romer theory, the

Phillips curve steepens if inflation is high and/or variable, because these conditions reduce nom-

inal price stickiness. U.S. time series evidence strongly supports this prediction; in particular,

the Phillips curve has been relatively flat in the low-inflation period since the mid-1980s. A

flatter Phillips curve reduces the forecasted fall in inflation over 2008-2010. When we account

for this effect and measure core inflation with the median price change, forecasted four-quarter


                                                 3
inflation in 2010Q4 is 0.3%, close to the actual level of 0.5%.

   After presenting these results, we turn to the idea of anchored expectations. We distinguish

between “shock anchoring,” which means that expectations do not respond to supply shocks,

and “level anchoring,” which means that expectations stay fixed at a certain level regardless of

any movements in actual inflation. We assume this level is 2.5% for core CPI inflation (which

corresponds to about 2% for core PCE inflation). Based on the behavior of actual inflation and of

expectations (as measured by the Survey of Professional Forecasters), we find that expectations

have been fully shock-anchored since the 1980s. Level anchoring has been gradual and partial,

but significant. According to our estimates, the fraction of a change in core inflation that is

passed into expectations fell from roughly one in 1985 to between 0.4 and 0.7 in 2010.

   Following our analysis of recent inflation, we forecast inflation over 2011-2013, using our

estimates of the Phillips curve through 2010 and CBO forecasts of unemployment and output

over the forecast period. Here, the results depend crucially on whether we incorporate anchored

expectations into our equation. Our basic accelerationist specification, while explaining why

inflation is currently positive, predicts that deflation is on the way. In contrast, the degree of

expectation anchoring estimated for 2010 is high enough to keep inflation positive. We are not

confident in this forecast, however, because it assumes that expectations will stay anchored at

2.5% for several years when actual inflation is less than 1%.

   Most of this paper examines Phillips curves in which expected inflation depends on past

inflation and possibly the Federal Reserve’s target. A large literature since the 1990s studies an

alternative, the “New Keynesian” Phillips curve based on rational expectations and the Calvo

(1983) model of staggered price adjustment. The last part of this paper asks whether the New

Keynesian Phillips curve helps explain recent inflation behavior; the answer is no. Indeed, the

last few years provide fresh evidence of the poor empirical performance of the model, especially

the Gali and Gertler (1999) version in which marginal cost is measured with labor’s share of

income. This specification produces the counterfactual prediction of rising inflation over 2008-

2010.

   Parts of our analysis overlap with other recent research on the Phillips curve, such as Fuhrer

et al. (2009), Fuhrer and Olivei (2010), and Stock and Watson (2008, 2010). We compare our


                                                4
results to previous work throughout the paper. One difference from Stock and Watson’s work is

that they focus on forecasting inflation in real time. In seeking to understand inflation behavior,

we freely use information that is not available in real time, such as the 2011 CBO series for the

natural rate of unemployment.



2        A Simple Phillips Curve and a Puzzle

We first introduce a conventional Phillips curve, then show that it predicts a large deflation over

2008-2010.


2.1       The Phillips Curve

Milton Friedman’s Phillips curve can be expressed as


                                          πt = πte + α(u − u∗ )t + ǫt                                          (1)


where π is annualized quarterly inflation, π e is expected inflation, u is unemployment, u∗ is the

natural rate, and ǫ is an error term that we assume is uncorrelated with u − u∗ . A common

variant of this equation replaces u − u∗ with the gap between actual and potential output. Since

Friedman wrote, theorists have derived equations that are broadly similar to (1) from models in

which price setters have incomplete information (e.g. Lucas, 1973; Mankiw and Reis, 2002) or

nominal prices are sticky (e.g. Roberts, 1995).1

        We follow a long tradition in applied work that assumes backward-looking expectations:

expected inflation is determined by past inflation. Specifically, we assume that expected inflation
    1
    The assumption that u − u∗ is uncorrelated with the error in the Phillips curve, implying that OLS estimates
of the equation are unbiased, is standard in the literature but rarely examined. We interpret the error term as
summarizing the effects of relative price changes, which influence inflation when some nominal prices are sticky
(see Section 3). We assume that these relative-price effects are uncorrelated with the aggregate variable u − u∗ .
We maintain this assumption when π is a measure of core inflation, which strips away effects of relative price
changes but does so imperfectly. In this case, the error summarizes the relative-price effects that are not removed
from core inflation.
   This approach to identification ignores the problem of measurement error. The variable u is an imperfect
measure of the activity variable in the Phillips curve, and u∗ is an imperfect measure of the natural rate. These
problems bias our estimates of the coefficient α toward zero. Future work should investigate the size of this bias
and more generally the identification problem for the Phillips curve.




                                                        5
is the average of inflation in the past four quarters. In this case, equation (1) becomes

                                 1
                          πt =     (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(u − u∗ )t + ǫt                             (2)
                                 4

This equation is a special case of Phillips curves estimated by Gordon and Stock-Watson, which

generally include lags of unemployment and lags of inflation with unrestricted coefficients (except

for the accelerationist assumption that the coefficients sum to one). We keep our specification

parsimonious along this dimension to enrich it more easily along others (for example, by allow-

ing time-variation in the coefficient α). We examine versions of equation (2) with richer lag

structures as part of our robustness checks.

       The structure of inflation lags in equation (2) implies that a one-percentage-point increase

in unemployment for one quarter changes inflation in the long run by 0.4 times the coefficient

α. The long run effect of one point of unemployment sustained for a year is 1.6 times α.

       The structure of inflation lags in equation (2) implies that a one-percentage-point increase

in unemployment for one quarter changes inflation in the long run by 0.4 times the coefficient

α. The long run effect of one point of unemployment sustained for a year is 1.6 times α.2

       Our empirical work requires a series for the natural rate of unemployment or for potential

output. For most of our analysis, we use estimates of these variables from the Congressional

Budget Office; as a robustness check, we estimate a path for the natural rate using a technique

from Staiger et al. (1997). The CBO natural-rate series is similar to estimates from other sources:

the natural rate rises modestly in the 1960s and 1970s, from about 5.5% to 6.3%, then falls to

5.0% in the 1990s. It remains at 5.0% through 2007, then rises slightly to 5.2% in 2010.

       Since Gordon (1982), many empirical researchers add “supply shocks” to the Phillips curve.

Others seek to filter supply shocks out of the dependent variable with measures of core inflation.

The most common supply shocks are changes in the relative prices of food and energy, and the

standard core-inflation measure is inflation less food and energy. Most of this paper examines

core inflation, but we experiment with alternative measures of this variable.
   2
   The easiest way to derive this result is to numerically calculate the path of inflation following an increase in
unemployment.




                                                        6
2.2   The Puzzle

We now take our first pass at estimating the Phillips curve. We want to know whether equation

(2) fits inflation behavior since 1960, and especially whether anything has changed during the

Great Recession. The starting date of 1960 is based on Barsky (1987), who finds a regime change

in the univariate behavior of inflation at that point, from a stationary process to an IMA(1,1)

(a process that still captures inflation behavior, albeit with time-varying parameters, according

to Stock and Watson, 2010).

   We estimate equation (2) for the period 1960-2007, ending the sample at the start of the Great

Recession. We examine two measures of inflation, one derived from the CPI (total inflation) and

one from the CPI excluding food and energy (XFE inflation). In each case we average monthly

data on the price level to create quarterly price levels, then compute annualized percentage

changes from quarter to quarter. For each inflation variable, we estimate a Phillips curve that

includes the unemployment gap and one that includes the output gap.

   Table 1 presents our regression results. For both measures of inflation, the coefficients

on unemployment are about -0.5 and are highly significant statistically (t > 5). The output

coefficients are around 0.25, which accords with the unemployment coefficients and Okun’s Law.

   Recall that one point-year of unemployment or output changes long-run inflation by 1.6

times the variable’s coefficient. For example, in the equation with XFE inflation and output,

the estimated coefficient implies an effect of approximately (1.6)(0.25) = 0.4 percentage points.
                                                               1
Equivalently, the sacrifice ratio for reducing inflation is   0.4   = 2.5. This result is in the ballpark

of previous estimates of U.S. sacrifice ratios (e.g., Ball, 1994).

   Next, we perform dynamic forecasts of inflation over 2008-2010. We start with actual infla-

tion through 2007 and feed the path of unemployment over 2008-2010 into the estimated Phillips

curves in Table 1. Figure 1 compares the forecasted and actual levels of total inflation (Panel A)

and XFE inflation (Panel B). We present four-quarter moving averages so we can ignore some

of the transitory fluctuations in quarterly data.

   Figure 1 illustrates why some economists think the Phillips curve has broken down recently.

Actual XFE inflation, for example, fell from 2.6% in 2007Q4 to 0.4% in 2010Q4. In the dynamic

forecasts, XFE inflation falls to -5.5% for the unemployment equation and -4.1% for the output

                                                  7
equation. The pre-2008 Phillips curve predicts a deflation that didn’t occur.



3        Measuring Core Inflation

Here we compare alternative measures of core inflation. We start by discussing supply shocks,

the fluctuations in inflation that core measures are meant to filter out.


3.1      Measuring Supply Shocks

The Phillips curve in much applied work is Gordon’s “triangle model.” It explains total inflation

with three factors: expected inflation, aggregate activity, and supply shocks. The most common

measures of supply shocks are changes in the relative prices of food and energy. Since the 1970s,
                                             2
these variables have added greatly to the R s of estimated Phillips curves.

    Yet, theoretically, it is not obvious why certain relative prices should influence inflation–why

it depends on food and energy prices rather than, say, the prices of clothing and home appliances.

As Friedman (1975) asked, “Why should the average level of prices be affected significantly by

changes in the price of some things relative to others?”

    A number of economists answer this question with models of nominal price stickiness. Many,

ranging from the Dornbusch and Fischer (1990) text to Blanchard and Gali (2008), assume that

food and energy prices are flexible and other prices are sticky. In this setting, a shock that

raises the relative prices of food and energy does so by increasing their nominal prices while

other prices stay constant. This pattern of adjustment implies an increase in the aggregate price

level.

    Ball and Mankiw (1995) present a theory of supply shocks based on a different sticky-price

model. Rather than assume certain industries have sticky or flexible prices, Ball and Mankiw

make price adjustment endogenous. Firms receive shocks to their equilibrium relative prices and

choose whether to pay a menu cost and adjust prices. In each period, the firms that receive the

largest shocks are most likely to adjust.

    The upshot is that inflation depends on the distribution of price changes across industries.

If the distribution is skewed to the right, for example, that means many firms have desired



                                                 8
price increases that are large enough to trigger adjustment, and relatively few have large enough

negative shocks to adjust. As a result, the aggregate price level rises. Based on this result,

Ball and Mankiw measure supply shocks with the skewness of relative price changes and other

measures of asymmetry.

   In practice, the competing measures of supply shocks–food and energy prices and asymme-

tries in price distributions–are positively correlated. The reason is that, in many periods, large

changes in food and energy prices create large tails in price distributions. Yet there is enough

independent variation in supply-shock measures to see which are most closely related to infla-

tion. For the period 1949 to 1989, Ball and Mankiw show that only price-change asymmetries,

not changes in food and energy prices, are significant when both are included in a Phillips curve.


3.2    From Supply Shocks to Core Inflation

We define core inflation as the part of inflation not explained by supply shocks, but rather

by expected inflation and economic activity–the two other parts of the triangle. With this

definition, one can measure core inflation by removing the effects of supply shocks from total

inflation. This approach follows common practice. When researchers measure supply shocks

with changes in food and energy prices, they measure core inflation with XFE inflation, which

strips away the direct effects of food and energy.

   If supply shocks are asymmetries in the distribution of price changes, then a measure of

core inflation should eliminate the effects of these asymmetries. A simple measure, proposed by

Bryan and Cecchetti (1994), is the weighted median of price changes across industries (median

inflation).

   Researchers sometimes evaluate core inflation measures by their ability to forecast future

inflation. In theory, core inflation as we define it might not be a good forecaster. A rise in total

inflation caused by a supply shock might raise expected inflation, which in turn raises future

inflation; in that case, total inflation would be a better forecaster than core inflation. In practice,

however, papers such as Sommer (2004) and Hooker (2002) find that, since the 1980s, supply

shocks have not fed strongly into future inflation; thus, core inflation is a good forecaster. We

return to this point when we discuss the anchoring of inflation expectations.


                                                  9
       Smith (2004) compares median inflation and XFE inflation as forecasters of total inflation

over 1984-1997. She finds that forecasts based on median inflation are more accurate.


3.3      Measuring Median Inflation

The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland maintains a monthly series for median inflation that

begins in 1968. The economy is disaggregated into about forty industries (the number rises

from 36 to 45 over time), and core inflation is measured by the weighted median of industry

inflation rates, using the industries’ weights in the CPI.

       The data include an “original” weighted median for 1968-2007 and a “revised” median for

1983 to the present. The main difference is that the original data include owner’s equivalent

rent (OER) as the price for one large industry, while the revised data include OER for four

geographic regions. This revision makes some difference because the change in OER (in the

original data) or one of the regional changes (in the revised data) is the median price change

for around half of the observations. For the period when the two median series overlap, the

differences are modest, although the original series shows somewhat greater monthly volatility.

For more documentation of the Cleveland Fed data, see Bryan and Pike (1991) and Bryan et al.

(1997).3

       We compute quarterly data for median inflation that matches the timing of our quarterly

series for total and XFE inflation. We first use the monthly median inflation rates from the

Cleveland Fed to construct a monthly series for price levels. Then we average three months to

get a quarterly price level, and compute annualized percentage changes in that variable.4

       The time-aggregation of median inflation is not straightforward. Instead of our approach, one

could measure the median of quarterly price changes across industries; in principle, this median
   3
      Some economists (including one of our discussants) question median CPI as an inflation measure because the
median price change in the Cleveland Fed data is often one of the regional OERs. It is not clear to us why the
validity of the Cleveland Fed’s approach depends on which industry is the median. Nonetheless, as a robustness
check, we have constructed median non-housing inflation by discarding the regional OERs and computing the
median price change for all other industries. A four-quarter average of this series falls by 2.1 percentage points
between 2007Q4 and 2010Q4 (from 3.1% to 1.0%); the fall in the Cleveland Fed’s median, 2.6 percentage points,
is somewhat larger. Yet housing prices have a greater effect on the other leading measure of core inflation, XFE.
This variable falls by 1.7 percentage points between 2007Q4 and 2010Q4; if the OERs are removed along with
food and energy, the resulting inflation measure falls by only 0.9 percentage points.
    4
      The Cleveland Fed website provides a different measure of quarterly inflation: the average of median inflation
over the three months of the quarter.



                                                        10
might differ greatly from the quarterly variable that we construct from monthly medians. This

non-robustness arises because the median is not a linear function of industry price changes.

Future research might compare measures of median inflation based on different frequencies for

industry-level data.


3.4   Some New Evidence

We present one new piece of evidence on the measurement of core inflation. Both expected

inflation and the activity gap are persistent series, and hence the part of inflation they determine–

core inflation–is persistent. One should not expect significant transitory movements in quarterly

core inflation. Therefore, one criterion for judging core inflation measures is the extent that their

movements are permanent or transitory.

   We implement this idea with Stock and Watson (2007)’s procedure for decomposing inflation

into permanent and transitory components. Stock and Watson assume that inflation is the

sum of a permanent, random-walk component and a transitory, white-noise component. This

specification implies that aggregate inflation follows an IMA(1,1) process. Stock and Watson

allow the variances of the permanent and transitory shocks to change over time. They estimate

series for the permanent component of inflation and the variances of the two shocks.

   We apply the Stock-Watson procedure to the two competing measures of core inflation,

XFE inflation and median inflation. Figure 2 shows the quarterly series for these two variables

and their estimated permanent components. The sample starts in 1983Q2, when the “revised”

median data begin. The divergences between total and permanent inflation–the transitory

shocks–are smaller when inflation is measured by median inflation. This difference is especially

pronounced in the 2000s, when median inflation appears to have almost no transitory component.

These results bolster the case for measuring core inflation with the median.

   The two core measures behave differently because price changes that are large relative to

aggregate inflation–annualized monthly changes of 20% or more–occur frequently in industries

besides food and energy. Some of these industries, such as used cars and lodging away from

home, may be affected indirectly by energy prices. Women’s apparel is an example of a non-

energy-related industry with volatile prices. Large price changes in all these industries cause


                                                 11
transitory movements in XFE inflation, but their effects are filtered out by the Cleveland Fed

median.


3.5   Median Inflation During the Great Recession

An important fact for our purposes is that median inflation has fallen somewhat more than

XFE inflation during the Great Recession. Over the period from 2007Q4 to 2010Q4, the four-

quarter moving average of median inflation fell from 3.1% to 0.5%, while the four-quarter moving

average of XFE inflation fell from 2.3% to 0.6%. Median inflation fell by more primarily because

it started at a higher level.

    Median inflation was relatively high in 2007 because the distribution of price changes was

left-skewed during many months of the year. Left-skewness resulted from large price decreases

in various industries. In March 2007, for example, the prices of jewelry and watches fell at an

annualized rate of 30%, car and truck rental fell 22%, and lodging away from home fell 13%.

These price decreases reduced XFE inflation but not median inflation.

    The relatively large fall in the median goes in the right direction for reducing the divergence

between actual and forecasted inflation over 2008-2010. Yet changing the definition of core

inflation is far from enough to resolve the puzzle in Figure 1. We also need another modification

of the Phillips curve, which we turn to next.



4     A Phillips Curve With a Time-Varying Slope

As we have discussed, models of costly price adjustment provide a rationale for measuring core

inflation with median inflation. These models also imply time variation in the slope of the

Phillips curve. As shown by Ball, Mankiw, and Romer (1988), if nominal price adjustment

is costly, firms choose to adjust more frequently when the level of inflation is higher and the

variance of inflation is higher. More frequent nominal adjustment makes the aggregate price level

more flexible, steepening the Phillips curve. That is, the unemployment coefficient α increases

in absolute value with the level and variance of inflation.

    Ball, Mankiw, and Romer present international evidence supporting their model. In a cross-



                                                12
country regression for 43 countries, the average level of inflation has a strong effect on the

Phillips-curve slope. DeFina (1991) finds a similar effect in U.S. time series data.

       Here we document time-variation in the Phillips curve slope from 1960 through 2010. We

then show that this variation is tied closely to the level and variance of inflation, as predicted

by theory. Finally, we explore the implications for inflation during the Great Recession and in

the future.


4.1      Estimates of a Time-Varying Slope

We generalize the basic Phillips curve, equation (2), as follows:

                                 1
                       πt =        (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + αt (u − u∗ )t + ǫt                        (3)
                                 4
                       αt = αt−1 + ηt


where ǫt and ηt are white noise errors with variances V and W respectively. This specification

allows the coefficient α to vary over time; specifically, it follows a random walk.

       Equation (3) is a standard regression equation with a time-varying coefficient. We estimate

two versions of this specification. In the first, we assume a value for the ratio of the two shock

variances, V and W . With this restriction, we can estimate the path of αt with the Kalman

smoother. We choose V /W to create a degree of smoothness in αt that appears plausible. Our

intuition is that firms’ price-setting policies, which determine the Phillips curve slope, do not

vary greatly from quarter to quarter. DeVeirman (2007) uses a similar approach to estimate a

time-varying Phillips curve slope for Japan.

       In the second version of our procedure, we estimate the shock variances V and W along

with the path of αt . As suggested by Harvey (1989, Ch. 3) and Wright (2010), we choose the

two variances to maximize the likelihood produced by the Kalman smoother. This method is

roughly equivalent to choosing the variances to minimize one-step-ahead forecast errors from

the model.5

       We estimate equation (3) for the period 1960-2010. For observations over 1984Q2-2010Q4,
   5
     As a robustness check, we also estimate a time-varying α with a simpler technique: rolling regressions with
five-year windows. The qualitative results are the same.


                                                      13
we measure inflation with the Cleveland Fed’s revised median. For 1968Q2-1984Q1, we use the

original median. For 1960Q1-1968Q1, when the median is not available, we use XFE inflation.

We obtain similar results when we use XFE inflation for the entire sample; the measurement of

core inflation is not critical for our results about the Phillips curve slope.

   Figure 3 presents estimates of the path of αt , along with two-standard-error bands. Panel

A shows the results when the two shock variances are estimated freely, and Panel B imposes

the restriction that V /W , the ratio of the variances of ǫ and η, is 100. (Higher values of V /W

produce smoother series for α, and lower values produce more variable series.)

   The two panels show the same broad trends in α: the estimated parameter falls from near

zero in 1960 to around -1 in the early 1970s, fluctuates around this level until 1980, then rises

sharply and levels off in the neighborhood of -0.2. In the period since the mid-1980s–the second

half of the sample–the estimated α is quite stable. Given the standard errors, there is no evidence

against a constant α over 1985-2010.


4.2    Determinants of the Slope

Theory predicts that α is determined by the level and variance of inflation. Figure 4 tests this

idea by comparing the estimated path of α (smoothed with V /W = 100, and presented on

an inverted scale) to two series generated by the Stock-Watson IMA(1,1) model: the level of

permanent inflation, and the standard deviation of the sum of permanent and transitory shocks.

   The results in Figure 4 are striking: the measures of the level and variability of inflation

move together, and the estimated path of α follows them closely. These results strongly confirm

the predictions of sticky-price models about time-variation in α. In particular, the high and

variable inflation of the 1970s and early 80s created a steep Phillips curve; the curve was flatter

before 1973 and after the Volcker disinflation, when inflation was relatively low and stable.

   We can also capture these ideas with a regression. We assume that the coefficient α is a

linear function of the other two series in Figure 4: αt = (a0 + a1 π̄t + a2 σt ), where π̄ and σ are the

level of permanent inflation and the standard deviation of shocks . Substituting this assumption




                                                  14
into equation (3) yields

          1
      πt = (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + a0 (u − u∗ )t + a1 π̄t (u − u∗ )t + a2 σt (u − u∗ )t + ǫt   (4)
          4

   Table 2 presents estimates of this equation for 1960-2010 and compares them to an equation

with a constant α. We measure π̄t and σt in two different ways: with the quarterly series for these

parameters and with four-quarter moving averages. In both cases, the joint significance of the π̄

and σ terms is high (p < 0.01). Unfortunately, the collinearity between the two variables makes

it difficult to distinguish their individual roles: only π̄ is significant in one of our specifications,

and only σ is significant in the other.

   Many other authors present evidence that the Phillips-curve slope has changed over time;

examples include Roberts (2006) and Mishkin (2007). These authors focus on the decline in the

unemployment coefficient since the 1980s, and generally give a different explanation from ours:

they suggest that a flatter Phillips curve reflects an anchoring of inflation expectations. We

question this view on two grounds. First, the theory is weak. When the Phillips curve is derived

from microeconomic foundations, the unemployment coefficient is determined by the slope of

marginal cost and the frequency of price adjustment (Roberts, 1995). Anchoring influences

the expected-inflation term in the equation–an effect we examine in Section 5–but not the

unemployment coefficient. Second, the common explanation for anchoring is that Fed policy has

become more credible since the Volcker disinflation. This story does not explain why the Phillips

curve was flat in the 1960s as well as the post-Volcker era, a result that the Ball-Mankiw-Romer

model does explain.


4.3     Estimating Constant Slopes for Subsamples

As noted above, the data suggest that α has been close to a constant since the early 1980s,

when inflation stabilized at a low level. Assuming a constant α will make it more tractable to

enrich the model along other dimensions. Therefore, we assume a constant α starting in 1985Q1,

roughly the end of the disinflation and high unemployment of the early 80s. We examine periods




                                                    15
ending in 2007Q4 and 2010Q4 to check for effects of the Great Recession.6

    For comparison, we also estimate a constant α for the periods 1960-1972 and 1973-1984.

Figure 4 suggests some variation in α within these periods, but the statistical significance of

this variation is borderline. α is generally low in absolute value during the first period and high

during the second.

    Table 3 presents estimates of α for each of the periods. We estimate equations with the output

gap as well as the unemployment gap, and with XFE inflation as well as median inflation. For

the first period, 1960-1972, we only examine XFE inflation, because median inflation is not

available for most of the period. We measure median inflation with the original Cleveland Fed

series for 1973-84 and with the revised series for the periods beginning in 1985.7

    For the first three time periods in the table–covering the years from 1960 to the eve of the

financial crisis–the estimated coefficients are similar for the two inflation measures. The unem-

ployment coefficient is around -0.2 or -0.25 for both 1960-1972 and 1985-2007. The coefficient

is around -0.7 for the 1973-1984 period of high and volatile inflation. The coefficients on output

are about -0.5 times the unemployment coefficients, as suggested by Okun’s Law.

    As before, multiplying the output coefficient by 1.6 yields the long-run effect on inflation of

a one percent output gap for a year. For 1985-2007, with inflation measured by the median, this

effect is (1.6)(0.11) = 1.76. The sacrifice ratio is 1/(0.176), or about 6.

    Extending the final sample from 2007 to 2010 has different effects for the different core

inflation measures. For XFE inflation, the coefficients decline substantially in absolute value;

for median inflation, the coefficients fall by less (when activity is measured by the unemployment

gap) or not at all (for the output gap). This difference suggests greater stability in the Phillips

curve when inflation is measured by the median, a result we will confirm with dynamic forecasts.
    6
      The results do not change significantly if start the sample a year or two later. They are less robust when we
move the start date earlier, with observations before 1985 proving influential.
    7
      Note that, in these regressions, we use the original median through 1985 even though the revised median
is available starting in 1983Q2. This choice ensures that our measure of median inflation is consistent over the
1973-1984 subsample.




                                                        16
4.4   The Great Recession and the Risk of Deflation

We now revisit the puzzle of inflation over 2008-2010. Figures 5 and 6 present dynamic fore-

casts of quarterly inflation based on the unemployment and output gaps over that period and

estimated Phillips curves for 1985-2007. Inflation is measured by the median in Figure 5 and by

XFE in Figure 6. Figures 7 and 8 show four-quarter averages of actual and forecasted inflation.

   Figures 5 and 7 show that the forecasts for median inflation are close to actual inflation over

2008-2010–in contrast to Figure 2, there is no missing deflation. The most important reason

for this change in results is our allowance for time-variation in the Phillips curve slope. The

output and unemployment coefficients for 1985-2007 are less than half as large as estimates for

the entire 1960-2007 period, which includes the high and unstable inflation of 1973-84. Smaller

coefficients mean a smaller predicted fall in inflation.

   The measurement of core inflation is also important. The forecasts of XFE inflation in

Figures 6 and 8 fall to around -1% at the end of 2010, significantly below actual inflation.

Forecasted XFE inflation falls farther than forecasted median inflation because XFE inflation

starts at a lower level in 2007. In addition, the estimated coefficients on unemployment and

output are somewhat larger for XFE over 1985-2007.

   If our Phillips curve for median inflation fits recent history, what does it imply for future

inflation? We address this question with new dynamic forecasts based on estimates of the

equation from 1985 through 2010. In this exercise, we assume that unemployment and the

natural rate follow the paths forecast by the CBO for 2011-2013: unemployment is 9.4% in

2011, 8.4% in 2012, and 7.6% in 2013, and the natural rate is constant at 5.2%. We also

compute dynamic forecasts based on CBO forecasts of the output gap over 2011-2013.

   Figure 9 shows four-quarter averages of the resulting forecasts. Because unemployment

remains above the natural rate and output is below potential, inflation falls steadily. It becomes

negative at the end of 2011, and at the end of 2013 it reaches -1.9% (based on unemployment

forecasts) or -1.3% (based on output forecasts). Thus our Phillips curve, which explains why

deflation hasn’t occurred yet, also predicts that deflation will arrive soon.




                                                 17
4.5    Robustness

We have checked the robustness of our results along several dimensions. Specifically, we

    • Add lags of unemployment and longer lags of inflation to the Phillips curve, as suggested

      by Gordon (2011).

    • Try Stock and Watson (2010)’s unemployment-gap variable (the difference between current

      unemployment and minimum unemployment over the current and previous eleven quarters)

      as an activity measure.

    • Try Debelle and Laxton (1997)’s nonlinear transformation of unemployment as our activity

      variable.

    • Add Ball and Moffitt (2001)’s measure of the acceleration of productivity growth to the

      Phillips curve.

    • Estimate a path of the natural rate u∗ jointly with the coefficient in the Phillips curve,

      rather than relying on CBO estimates of u∗ .

    • Estimate an equation for total inflation that includes a measure of supply shocks (the

      difference between total inflation and median inflation), rather than estimating an equation

      for core inflation.

None of these extensions has a significant impact on our conclusions. The Appendix to this

paper provides details.



5     Anchored Expectations?

So far we have estimated Phillips curves based on the assumption that expected inflation equals

past inflation. A growing number of economists, including Mishkin (2007), Bernanke (2010),

and Kohn (2010), argue that this assumption, while once acceptable, has become untenable.

In their view, expectations have become “anchored” and therefore do not respond strongly to

past inflation. Anchoring has resulted from the public’s growing understanding that the Federal

Reserve is committed to low and stable inflation.

                                               18
      Here we review past evidence on the anchoring of expectations and present new evidence.

We also examine the importance of anchoring for explaining inflation during the Great Recession

and for forecasting future inflation.

      We distinguish between two kinds of anchoring, “shock anchoring” and “level anchoring.”

The first means that transitory shocks to inflation are not passed into expectations or into future

inflation. The second means that expectations are tied to a particular level of inflation, such as

two percent. We find strong evidence for shock anchoring since the early 1980s. Level anchoring

has occurred gradually and is incomplete, yet it may strongly influence future inflation.


5.1      Shock Anchoring

A consensus holds that the U.S. experienced a shift in monetary regime under Paul Volcker (e.g.,

Taylor, 1999; Clarida et al., 2000). Before Volcker, the Fed accommodated supply shocks and

price setters recognized this behavior. A shock that raised inflation raised expected inflation,

which fed into future inflation, and the Fed did not systematically oppose this process. Since

Volcker, however, the Fed has been committed to stable inflation. As a result, supply shocks do

not strongly affect expectations or future inflation. Expectations have become shock-anchored.8

      Previous empirical work presents evidence of shock anchoring. Sommer (2004), for example,

finds that supply shocks–measured either by changes in food and energy prices or by asymmetries

in price distributions–have strong effects on inflation and on survey expectations of inflation

before 1979, but little effect afterwards. Authors such as Hooker (2002) and Fuhrer et al. (2009)

report similar results.

      We confirm these findings with the exercise in Table 4. We estimate Phillips curves in which

core inflation depends on the unemployment gap and lagged inflation, but compare two versions

of lagged inflation: lagged core inflation and lagged total inflation. We interpret total inflation

as the sum of core and supply shocks. We measure core inflation with median inflation for the

periods 1973-1984 and 1985-2010, and with XFE inflation for 1960-1972.
                                                                            2
      The results are stark. For 1960-1972 and 1973-1984, the R of the Phillips curve is higher

when it includes lagged total inflation. When both lagged total and lagged core are included, the
  8
      Christiano and Gust (2000) formalize these ideas with a model of the “high inflation trap.”



                                                        19
weight on lagged core is insignificant. For 1985-2010, these results are reversed. The estimated

weight on lagged core is 0.89.

   For 1985-2010, we also examine the behavior of expected inflation as measured by one-year

forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (which are not available for earlier periods).

We regress expected inflation on an average of lagged core inflation and lagged total inflation,

and find a weight on lagged core of 0.86 (with a standard error of 0.06).

   Finally, for 1985-2010 we experiment with time-varying weights on lagged core and lagged

total inflation. We find little variation: in equations for both actual and expected inflation, the

weights on lagged core inflation are consistently close to one. Shock anchoring is a stable feature

of the post-Volcker monetary regime.


5.2   Level Anchoring

Many recent discussions of anchoring suggest that expected inflation is tied to a particular

level–specifically, 2%. Economists such as Mishkin argue that the Fed is committed to keeping

inflation close to 2%, and that the public has come to understand this fact. This anchoring of

expectations pushes actual inflation toward 2% as well.

   More precisely, Mishkin suggests that expectations of core PCE inflation are anchored at 2%.

Since 1980, core CPI inflation has exceeded core PCE by about 0.5% on average (for both the

weighted median and XFE measures of core). We should expect, therefore, that expectations of

core inflation are anchored at 2.5%.

   Using rolling regressions, Williams (2006) and Fuhrer and Olivei (2010) find that the coef-

ficients on inflation lags in the Phillips curve, when not constrained to sum to one, have fallen

over time. This finding is consistent with the level anchoring of expectations. We add to this

evidence by estimating the degrees of anchoring of both expected and actual inflation and how

these parameters have evolved over time. One innovation is that we impose a specific level-2.5%–

at which inflation is anchored if it is anchored at all.

   While shock anchoring dates back to the Volcker regime shift, level anchoring is more recent.

The idea that the Fed has an inflation target around 2% was first discussed in the early 1990s

(e.g. Taylor, 1993) and slowly became more prominent. To capture this history, we use data


                                                 20
from 1985 through 2010 to estimate

                                             1
                     πte = δt 2.5 + (1 − δt ) (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + ǫt                 (5)
                                             4

where δt follows a random walk. Expected inflation is an average of lagged inflation and 2.5%,

with time-varying weights. When δ = 0, expectations are purely backward-looking; when δ = 1,

expectations are fully anchored at 2.5%.

   To estimate equation (5), we measure π e with SPF forecasts for inflation over the next four

quarters. We measure past inflation with the Cleveland Fed median. We estimate the path

of δt using the Kalman smoother, assuming that the variance of ǫ is 100 times the variance of

innovations in δ.

   Figure 10 presents our estimated series for δt We find that δt is near zero until the early

1990s and then rises. It is around 0.6 over 2007-2010. Expectations have become largely but

not completely anchored.

   We next examine the behavior of actual inflation. We assume that inflation depends on

expected inflation and the unemployment gap, equation (1), and substitute in equation (5) for

expected inflation. The result is

                                      1
               πt = δt 2.5 + (1 − δt ) (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(u − u∗t ) + ǫt          (6)
                                      4

We estimate this equation and a variation with the output gap replacing the unemployment gap.

   Figures 11 and 12 shows the estimated path of δt for these specifications. Once again, δ is near

zero until the early 1990s and then rises. According to these results, as inflation expectations

have become anchored, so has actual inflation.

   The value of δ in 2010Q4, the end of the sample, is 0.47 when the Phillips curve includes

the unemployment gap and 0.30 with the output gap. These δs are smaller than the degree

of anchoring that we estimate for SPF expectations in Figure 10. One possible explanation is

that the expectations that enter the Phillips curve are those of typical price setters, who are less

sophisticated than professional forecasters. They learn more slowly about the Fed’s commitment

to 2.5% inflation. But we should not make too much of the differences among Figures 10-12,


                                                 21
because the confidence intervals for the δs overlap.

   Our estimates of the coefficient α in equation (6) is -0.24 (standard error = 0.03) for the

unemployment gap and 0.13 (standard error = 0.02) for the output gap. These estimates are

somewhat larger in absolute value than the αs for our basic Phillips curve, which includes lagged

inflation with a coefficient of one–but again, the confidence intervals overlap.


5.3   Dynamic Forecasts

We now revisit the behavior of inflation in the recent past and the future. Figure 13 parallels

Figure 7: it presents dynamic forecasts of four-quarter inflation over 2008-2010, based on es-

timates of equation (6) for 1985-2007. We assume that, throughout 2008-2010, the anchoring

parameter δ remains at the level estimated for 2007Q4; this level is 0.31 when the equation

includes the unemployment gap and 0.26 with the output gap.

   In Figure 13, forecasted inflation falls less than actual inflation over 2008-2010. The forecasts

from our purely backward-looking equation, shown in Figure 7, are closer to actual inflation.

This difference in forecast performance, however, is modest in size and statistically insignificant:

accounting for anchoring does not sharply change inflation forecasts for the last few years. This

finding reflects the fact that the estimated degree of anchoring in 2007Q4 is fairly small. In

addition, inflation has been fairly close to 2.5%, so forecasts are not sensitive to the weights on

2.5% and lagged inflation.

   Figure 14 parallels Figure 9 for our basic Phillips curve. It shows forecasts of four-quarter

inflation over 2011-2013 based on estimates of equation (6) for 1985-2010. Here we assume that

δ stays at the level estimated for 2010Q4.

   In this exercise, anchoring makes a big difference. Deflation, which is predicted by our basic

Phillips curve, does not occur in our forecasts with anchoring. Instead, inflation is steady at

about 0.5% and then rises to 1% at the end of 2013. Partial anchoring pulls expected inflation

up toward 2.5%, and that causes actual inflation to bottom out rather than fall in response to

high unemployment.

   Two caveats are in order. First, there is considerable uncertainty about the degree of an-

choring in the Phillips curve. With unemployment in the equation, the 95% confidence interval


                                                22
for δ in 2010Q4 is roughly [0.2, 0.7]. With the output gap, the confidence interval is [0.2, 0.4].

    Second, even if expectations were anchored in 2010, they may become less anchored in the

near future. The weight on 2.5% rose during a period when actual inflation was near that level.

In contrast, Figure 14 tells us that actual inflation will stay below 1% for several years–yet

expectations will still be tied to 2.5%. That suggests sub-optimal forecasting. Price setters may

learn that inflation is stuck below 2.5%, and expectations will adjust downward.

    Believers in anchoring point out that long run inflation expectations–as measured, for ex-

ample, by ten-year SPF forecasts–have been close to 2.5% since 2000. It is plausible that these

expectations will remain anchored in the future, because the public believes that the Fed will

manage eventually to return inflation to its 2.5% target. However, in most theories of the Phillips

curve–both sticky-price and sticky-information models–prices depend on expected inflation over

the period when the prices are likely to be in effect. This period is on the order of one year

rather than ten years. Recent empirical work also finds that actual inflation depends on one-year

rather than ten-year SPF expectations (Fuhrer, 2011).

    The forecasts of inflation in Figure 14 are fairly close to the forecasts of others. At the end

of 2010, the CBO was forecasting core CPI inflation rates of 0.9%, 1.0%, and 1.4% over 2011-

2013. These forecasts are 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points above ours. These differences might be

explained by the definitions of core inflation-median for us and XFE for the CBO (although it

is not obvious that forecasts of either should be higher than the other). In the SPF, the median

forecast for XFE inflation is 1.3% for 2011 and 1.7% for 2012 (and unavailable for 2013). The

forecast for 2012 is a full percentage point above ours. One factor here is that only 44 percent of

SPF forecasters say they use the concept of the natural rate of unemployment. Evidently, many

forecasters use models of inflation that differ greatly from the Phillips curves we estimate.



6    The New Keynesian Phillips Curve

We have followed an empirical tradition that assumes expected inflation is determined by past in-

flation and possibly the central bank’s inflation target. Another literature studies Phillips curves

based on rational expectations. The foundation for much of this work is the “New Keynesian



                                                23
Phillips Curve” (NKPC) derived from Calvo (1983)’s model of staggered price adjustment. The

original version of this equation, presented by Roberts (1995), was:


                                     πt = Et πt+1 + λ(y − y ∗ )t                                  (7)


where Et πt+1 is this quarter’s rational forecast of next quarter’s inflation and y −y ∗ is the output

gap.

   A number of authors show that this Phillips curve fits the data poorly (e.g. Gali and Gertler,

1999; Mankiw, 2001). To understand this result, rearrange equation (7) to obtain


                                    Et πt+1 − πt = −λ(y − y ∗ )t                                  (8)


The theory behind the NKPC implies that the parameter λ is positive. Therefore, equation (8)

says that the output gap in quarter t has a negative effect on the expected change in inflation

from t to t + 1. In the data, output has a positive correlation with the change in inflation–both

before the Great Recession and during it, when output was low and inflation fell. As a result,

estimates of λ are consistently negative, contradicting the theory.

   Motivated by this finding, Gali and Gertler modify the NKPC by replacing the output gap

with real marginal cost:

                                        πt = Et πt+1 + λmct                                       (9)

Gali and Gertler measure real marginal cost with real unit labor costs, also known as labor’s

share of income. They obtain a positive estimate of λ, a result that has led many researchers to

adopt their specification.

   Rudd and Whelan (2005, 2007) and Mazumder (2010) criticize Gali and Gertler’s work.

They argue that labor’s share of income is not a credible measure of real marginal cost. Labor’s

share is generally countercyclical, and there is a strong case for procyclical marginal cost based

on both theory and evidence, such as the Bils (1987) and Mazumder studies of overtime labor.

Mazumder estimates equation (9) with a procyclical measure of marginal cost based on overtime,




                                                 24
and obtains negative estimates of λ–the same result that discredited the original NKPC.9

       Despite skepticism about the NKPC, we ask whether it helps explain inflation during the

Great Recession. It does not; indeed, recent experience provides a new reason to doubt the

model. The problem is different from the one stressed in previous work: the Gali-Gertler

specification does not fit recent data even if we accept their measure of marginal cost.

       Table 5 presents estimates of the parameter λ in the NKPC, with marginal cost measured by

labor’s share. We estimate the equation by GMM using the following orthogonality condition:


                                       Et {(πt − λmct − πt+1 )}zt = 0                                         (10)


where zt is a vector of variables dated t and earlier, thus these variables are orthogonal to the

inflation surprise in t + 1. We use the same instruments as Gali and Gertler: four lags each of

inflation, labor’s share, the output gap, a long-short interest rate spread, nominal wage inflation,

and commodity price inflation. We use the median CPI inflation rate, but the results are similar

for other inflation measures (including Gali and Gertler’s measure, the GDP deflator).10

       As in previous parts of this paper, we find that the coefficient in the Phillips curve varies

across time periods. Gali and Gertler report a significantly positive coefficient for 1960-1997,

which fits theory, and which we replicate. The noteworthy result in Table 5 is that the coefficient

on labor’s share is significantly positive for the period 1985-2007 (t = 2.04), but insignificant for

1985-2010 (t = 0.92). In other words the model’s fit deteriorates when we add 2008-2010 to the

sample.

       Figure 15 shows why. For 1985-2010, it plots annual averages of labor’s share of income

against the unemployment gap. We see that 2009 and 2010 are big outliers. Before then,

labor’s share was positively correlated with the unemployment gap–as noted before, it was

countercyclical. This is an unappealing feature for a marginal cost measure, but it produces a

positive estimate of λ. The Great Recession, unlike previous recessions, has been accompanied
   9
     Rudd and Whelan and Kleibergen and Mavroeidis (2009) also demonstrate technical problems with the studies
supporting the Gali-Gertler model, such as weak instruments.
  10
     More precisely, we use the inflation series we constructed to estimate the accelerationist Phillips curve over
1960-2010: the Cleveland Fed’s revised median for 1983-2010, the original median for 1968-1982, and XFE inflation
for 1960-1967.




                                                        25
by a sharp fall in labor’s share–for whatever reason, productivity growth was strong and real

wages did not keep up. This change in cyclicality changes the estimate of the Phillips curve

coefficient.

    To see the problem a different way, we substitute mc for the output gap in equation (8):


                                       Et πt+1 − πt = −λmct                                     (11)


This version of Gali and Gertler’s equation says that the expected change in inflation depends

negatively on labor’s share. Throughout 2009 and 2010, when labor’s share was lower than

average, the equation says that inflation was expected to rise. In fact, inflation fell, and it seems

dubious that price setters repeatedly expected the opposite–that inflation would rise during

the Great Recession. In any case, in quarterly data, falling inflation and expectations of rising

inflation imply repeated forecast errors in the same direction, a violation of rational expectations.



7    Conclusion

This paper examines U.S. inflation from 1960 through 2010. We find that a simple accelerationist

Phillips curve fits the entire period, including the recent Great Recession, under two conditions:

we measure core inflation with the weighted median of price changes, and we allow the Phillips

curve slope to change with the level and variance of inflation. Both of these ideas are motivated

by models of costly price adjustment.

    We also find evidence of a change in the Phillips curve since the 1990s: expectations of

inflation, and hence actual inflation, have become partially anchored at a level of 2.5%. If

this anchoring persists, the United States is likely to avoid deflation in the near future, despite

high unemployment. Deflation may occur, however, if low inflation leads to a de-anchoring of

expectations.

    We conclude with a topic for future research: the effect of unemployment duration on the

Phillips curve. For a number of countries, Llaudes (2005) finds that long-term unemployment

(the fraction of the labor force unemployed for more than 26 weeks) puts less downward pressure

on inflation than short-term unemployment. It is difficult to test this idea with U.S. data because


                                                 26
long-term and short-term unemployment are highly collinear. This collinearity is diminishing,

however, because long-term unemployment has risen much more than short-term unemployment

since 2008.We may soon have enough data to tell whether long-term unemployment has less effect

on inflation. If it does, then inflation will fall by less over the next few years than one would

expect based on aggregate unemployment. The shift toward long-term unemployment, along

with expectations anchoring, could prevent deflation.




                                               27
A         Appendix

Here we briefly discuss five variations to our basic Phillips curve specification that we also test

for robustness.


A.1        Longer Lags

Gordon (2011) argues that the Phillips curve fits history better if it includes lags of unemploy-

ment and long lags of inflation. Following Gordon, we modify our basic Phillips curve, equation

(1), by including four lags of unemployment and twenty-four lags of inflation (with the sum of

coefficients on the inflation lags set to one). We continue to measure inflation with the Cleve-

land Fed median. When we estimate this specification for the period 1960-2007,11 the sum of

unemployment coefficients is -0.26. Paralleling Figure 7, Figure A1 shows dynamic forecasts

of four-quarter inflation over 2008-2010. The forecast for 2010Q4 is -5.1%. Thus, our finding

that the pre-2008 Phillips curve incorrectly predicts deflation is robust to the equation’s lag

structure.


A.2        The Stock-Watson Unemployment Gap

Stock and Watson (2010) compute a new unemployment gap variable defined as the difference

between the unemployment rate in quarter t and the minimum unemployment rate from quarters

t to t − 11:

                                           uSW
                                            t  = ut − min(ut , .., ut−11 )                         (A-1)

Computing the gap variable in this way focuses on recessions by producing only non-negative

values for the unemployment gap. Tables A1(a) and A1(b) compare the results of our basic

Phillips curve specification for the CBO unemployment gap and the Stock-Watson unemploy-

ment gap. These results show a very similar Phillips curve is produced when either (u − u∗ )

or uSW are used in turn in the model. We then estimate a version of the Phillips curve that
  11
       Data on core inflation starts in 1957, therefore this regression actually starts in 1964.




                                                            28
incorporates both unemployment gap variables simultaneously:

             1
      πt =     (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + (β0 + β1 D1t + β2 D2t )((u − u∗ )t + λuSW
                                                                                     t  )      (A-2)
             4

where D1t is a dummy variable equal to 1 for 1973:1-2010:4 (0 otherwise), and D2t is a dummy

variable equal to 1 for 1985:1-2010:4 (0 otherwise). This model is estimated from 1960:1 to

2010:4, and allows us to compare the statistical significance of the two unemployment gap

variables at the same time. Specifically we estimate the model jointly while also imposing the

restriction that the ratio of the coefficients on the two variables is the same for every period.

We are able to do this since there is no obvious reason to believe that the relative importance

of (u − u∗ ) and uSW changes, even though the coefficient on the activity variable itself should

change over different time periods.

   The results (Table A1(c)) suggest that the Stock-Watson unemployment gap does not add

much to the explanatory power of our equation. The weight on the Stock-Watson unemployment

gap is not statistically significant, leading us to believe that the Stock-Watson variable is not

useful for our purposes (but might be better suited to real-time forecasting as Stock and Watson

(2010) originally intended it for).


A.3    A Nonlinear Phillips Curve

Debelle and Laxton (1997) estimate both linear and nonlinear Phillips curves for Canada, the

United Kingdom, and the United States, and argue that a nonlinear specification fits the data

better. The equation that Debelle and Laxton estimate essentially replaces the unemployment

gap (u − u∗ ) with the unemployment gap relative to the level of unemployment:

                              1                                  (u − u∗ )t
                       πt =     (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α            + ǫt               (A-3)
                              4                                     ut

Table A1(d) presents estimates of equation (A-3) for our three main sample periods. The fit of
                                      2
the equation, as measured by the R s, is very close to the fit of our linear Phillips curve, equation

(2). We have also estimated a Phillips curve that includes both (u − u∗ ) and (u − u∗ )/u. In

this case, high collinearity between the two variables causes both to be statistically insignificant.

                                                  29
Thus, the data do not suggest that making the Phillips curve nonlinear improves the model.

   When we estimate the Debelle-Laxton version of the Phillips curve from 1985-2007 and

compute dynamic forecasts of inflation for 2008-2010, the model performs less well than our

linear specification. The four-quarter average of median inflation fell from 3.1% to 0.5% from

2007Q4 to 2010Q4, whereas the Debelle-Laxton model predicts four-quarter inflation of 1.3% in

2010Q4. The forecast from the linear model, 0.3%, is closer to actual inflation.


A.4    Productivity Growth

Ball and Moffitt (2001) argue that the fit of the Phillips curve can be improved by adding the

change in productivity growth, g−b
                                 g . They explain this effect with a model in which workers’ real

wage aspirations adjust slowly to shifts in productivity growth. As a result, an acceleration of

productivity growth means that productivity growth is high relative to wage demands, thereby

reducing the natural rate of unemployment. Likewise a productivity slowdown does the reverse.

   Therefore we also estimate a version of the Philips curve which adds g − gb to our basic

specification, where g is labor productivity in the business sector (output divided by total hours

of work) and b
             g is a weighted average of past productivity growth defined recursively by a partial

adjustment equation, b
                     gt = µb
                           gt−1 + (1 − µ)gt−1 . Ball and Moffitt suggest a value of µ of 0.95

yields a good fit to annual data. We therefore use the quarterly analog of 0.9875.

   The results in Table A1(e) suggest that the productivity growth variable is insignificant for
                                                                                                2
1960-1972 and 1973-1984. It is however significant for 1985-2010 and adds modestly to the R .

However it does not substantially change our interpretation of the period 2008-2010. Computing

dynamic forecast based on estimates for 1985 to 2007 with g − b
                                                              g included are very similar to

those that ignore g − gb: median inflation is forecast to fall to -0.32% by the fourth quarter of

2010, which is close to the predicted fall to -0.24% in our basic specification.


A.5    Estimating A Time-Varying NAIRU

The way in which the NAIRU is computed is often a contentious issue in the literature, though

for the purposes of this paper we view the CBO estimate of the NAIRU as close as we can get to a

measure that captures a pattern common in other estimates. That being said, for robustness we


                                                30
also check what happens to our results when we alter the way in which the NAIRU is estimated.

   Specifically we compute the NAIRU in a similar manner as in Staiger et al. (1997). We

estimate the Phillips curve model with median CPI inflation and lagged median CPI inflation,

where the NAIRU is modeled as a random walk. Just as in Section 4 of the paper, we derive

maximum likelihood estimates of the path of the NAIRU using the Kalman filter with the

restriction that V /W is equal to 400.

   This produces a series for the NAIRU that is very close to the CBO estimate of the NAIRU.

For instance in 1985:1, the CBO estimate of the NAIRU is 6.03% and it falls to 5.20% by the end

of 2010. Over the exact same time period our estimate of the time-varying NAIRU goes from

6.04% at the start of 1985 to 5.44% by the end of 2010. In fact comparing all quarters from 1985

to 2010, the deviation between the CBO estimate of the NAIRU and our time-varying NAIRU

never exceeds 0.32%. Finally, we also estimate our basic specification of median inflation on

lagged median inflation and the unemployment gap using the new NAIRU estimate. We obtain

a coefficient of the unemployment gap of -0.178, which is extremely close to the coefficient

obtained under the CBO unemployment gap of -0.168. Therefore we conclude that our results

are robust to alternative measures of the NAIRU.


A.6    Supply Shocks

An alternative to estimating the Phillips curve with core inflation is to use total CPI inflation

and incorporate measures of supply shocks. We follow Ball and Mankiw (1995) by defining a

supply shock as the difference of current inflation from current core inflation which captures

asymmetries in the distribution of price changes. Thus our supply shock becomes total CPI

inflation less median inflation for 1972 to 2010. Hence the model we estimate is:

                     1
                πtT = (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(u − u∗ )t + βShock t + ǫt           (A-4)
                     4

where Shock is equal to total inflation minus core inflation, π T denotes total CPI inflation,

and π denotes median CPI inflation. Table A1(f) shows the results for the periods 1973-1984,

1985-2007, and 1985-2010. The interesting result to note here is that the coefficient on the



                                               31
supply shock variable is approximately equal to one in all periods, particularly for 1985-2007

and 1985-2010. Assuming β = 1 means that (A-4) becomes:

                          1
                  πtT =     (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(u − u∗ )t + (πtT − πt )            (A-5)
                          4

which further reduces into:

                              1
                          πt = (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(u − u∗ )t                       (A-6)
                              4

which is exactly our basic specification for the Phillips curve. In other words, the behavior of total

inflation in the presence of supply shocks is consistent with the behavior of core inflation that

we assumed previously. Since the estimated equations for total inflation reduce approximately

to our equations for core inflation, our estimates for the coefficient α are similar for the two

types of equations for a given time period and activity gap.




                                                  32
References

Ball, L. (1994): “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?”           in Monetary Policy, ed. by

  N. Mankiw, The University of Chicago Press, 155–193.

Ball, L. and N. Mankiw (1995): “Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate Supply Shocks,” The

  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 161–93.

Ball, L., N. Mankiw, and D. Romer (1988): “The New Keynsesian Economics and the

  Output-Inflation Trade-off,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 19, 1–82.

Ball, L. and R. Moffitt (2001): “Productivity Growth and the Phillips Curve,” NBER

  Working Papers 8421, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barsky, R. (1987): “The Fisher hypothesis and the forecastability and persistence of inflation,”

  Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, 3–24.

Bernanke, B. (2010): “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” Speech At the Federal

  Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.

Bils, M. (1987): “The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price,” American Economic

  Review, 77, 838–855.

Blanchard, O. and J. Gali (2008): “The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Shocks: Why are

  the 2000s so Different from the 1970s?” CEPR Discussion Papers 6631.

Bryan, M. and S. Cecchetti (1994): “Measuring Core Inflation,” in Monetary Policy, NBER,

  NBER Chapters.

Bryan, M., S. Cecchetti, and R. Wiggins (1997): “Efficient Inflation Estimation,” NBER

  Working Paper, 6183.

Bryan, M. and C. Pike (1991): “Median Price Changes: An Alternative Approach to Mea-

  suring Current Monetary Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper, 9304.

Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary

  Economics, 12, 383–398.

                                              33
Christiano, L. and C. Gust (2000): “The expectations trap hypothesis,” Federal Reserve

  Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, QII, 21–39.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules And Macroeconomic

  Stability: Evidence And Some Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147–180.

Debelle, G. and D. Laxton (1997): “Is the Phillips Curve Really a Curve? Some Evidence

  for Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States,” IMF Staff Papers, 44.

DeFina, R. (1991): “International Evidence on a New Keynesian Theory of the Output-

  Inflation Trade-Off,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 23, 410–422.

DeVeirman, E. (2007): “Which nonlinearity in the Phillips curve? The absence of accelerat-

  ing deflation in Japan,” Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper Series DP2007/14,

  Reserve Bank of New Zealand.

Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer (1990): Macroeconomics (5th edition), McGraw-Hill.

Friedman, M. (1968): “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 58, 1–17.

——— (1975): “Perspectives on Inflation,” Newsweek.

Fuhrer, J. (1995): “The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well,” New England Economic Review,

  2, 41–56.

——— (2011): “The role of expectations in inflation dynamics,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

  Conference on Recent Developments in Monetary Policy, Fiscal Policy, and Financial System

  Design.

Fuhrer, J. and G. Olivei (2010): “The role of expectations and output in the inflation

  process: an empirical assessment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Public Policy Brief.

Fuhrer, J., G. Olivei, and G. Tootell (2009): “Empirical estimates of changing inflation

  dynamics,” Working Papers 09-4, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Gali, J. and M. Gertler (1999): “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,”

  Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 195–222.

                                             34
Gordon, R. (1982): “Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of Unemploy-

  ment,” in Workers, Jobs, and Inflation, ed. by M. Baily, The Brookings Institution, 89–158.

——— (1990): “U.S. Inflation, Labor’s Share, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment,” in

  Economics of Wage Determination, ed. by H. Koenig, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

——— (2011): “The History of the Phillips Curve: Consensus and Bifurcation,” Economica,

  78, 10–50.

Harvey, A. (1989): Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models, and the Kalman Filter, Cam-

  bridge University Press.

Hooker, M. (2002): “Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear Specifications

  versus Changes in Regime,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 34, 540–561.

Kleibergen, F. and S. Mavroeidis (2009): “Weak Instrument Robust Tests in GMM and

  the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 27, 293–311.

Kohn, D. (2010): “The Federal Reserve’s Policy Actions during the Financial Crisis and Lessons

  for the Future,” Speech At Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada.

Llaudes, R. (2005): “The Phillips curve and long-term unemployment,” Working Paper Series

  441, European Central Bank.

Lucas, R. (1973): “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,” American

  Economic Review, 63, 326–34.

Mankiw, N. (2001): “The Inexorable and Mysterious Tradeoff Between Inflation and Unem-

  ployment,” Economic Journal, 111, C45–C61.

Mankiw, N. and R. Reis (2002): “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Price: A Proposal to

  Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1295–

  1328.

Mazumder, S. (2010): “The New Keynesian Phillips Curve and the Cyclicality of Marginal

  Cost,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 32, 747–765.

                                             35
Mishkin, F. (2007): “Inflation Dynamics,” International Finance, 10, 317–334.

Roberts, J. (1995): “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve,” Journal of Money,

  Credit, and Banking, 27, 975–984.

——— (2006): “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,” International Journal of Central

  Banking, 2.

Rudd, J. and K. Whelan (2005): “Does Labor’s Share Drive Inflation?” Journal of Money,

  Credit and Banking, 37, 297–312.

——— (2007): “Modelling Inflation Dynamics: A Critical Review of Recent Research,” Journal

  of Money, Credit, and Banking, 39, 155–170.

Smith, J. (2004): “Weighted Median Inflation: Is This Core Inflation?” Journal of Money,

  Credit and Banking, 36, 253–263.

Sommer, M. (2004): “Supply Shocks and the Persistence of Inflation,” Macroeconomics

  0408005, EconWPA.

Staiger, D., J. Stock, and M. Watson (1997): “How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural

  Rate of Unemployment?” in Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, NBER, NBER

  Chapters, 195–246.

Stock, J. and M. Watson (2007): “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?”

  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 3–33.

——— (2008): “Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts,” NBER Working Paper, 14322.

——— (2010): “Modeling Inflation After the Crisis,” NBER Working Paper, 16488.

Taylor, J. (1993): “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference

  Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.

——— (1999): “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Monetary Policy Rules,

  National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Chapters, 319–348.


                                             36
Williams, J. (2006): “Inflation persistence in an era of well-anchored inflation expectations,”

  FRBSF Economic Letter, 2006-27.

——— (2010): “Sailing into Headwinds: The Uncertain Outlook for the U.S. Economy,” Presen-

  tation to Joint Meeting of the San Francisco and Salt Lake City Branch Boards of Directors,

  Salt Lake City, UT.

Wright, J. (2010): “Kalman Filtering,” Econometrics study notes.




                                              37
                      Table 1: Phillips Curve Estimated from 1960:1 to 2007:4


                           (a) πt = 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t )

                           (b) πt = 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(yt − yt∗ )


                                      (a) Unemployment Gap              (b) Output Gap


                   πt measure:       TOTAL CPI        XFE CPI      TOTAL CPI         XFE CPI

                Coefficient for α        -0.507         -0.474         0.308          0.257
                      S.E.              (0.091)        (0.077)        (0.049)        (0.042)
                         2
                       R                 0.703          0.746          0.713          0.744

Note: πt is the inflation rate, ut is the national unemployment rate, u∗t is the CBO measure of the NAIRU, yt is
log of real GDP, and yt∗ is the CBO’s estimate of potential (log) real GDP. Estimation is conducted by OLS.




                                                      38
                     Table 2: Phillips Curve with Level and Variance of Inflation


                         (a) πt = 41 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + a0 (u − u∗ )t + ǫt

                                                                         a0
                 Coefficient                                           -0.355
                   S.E.                                               (0.058)
                       2
                    R                                                  0.773

       (b) πt = 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + a0 (u − u∗ )t + a1 π̄t (u − u∗ )t + a2 σt (u − u∗ )t + ǫt

                                      Quarterly Data for π̄t , σt
                                            a0                  a1                            a2
                Coefficient               0.194               -0.008                        -0.645
                   S.E.                  (0.115)             (0.036)                       (0.187)
                      2
                    R                                             0.800
       p-value for H0 : a1 = a2 = 0                               0.000
                                 4-Quarter Moving Averages for π̄t , σt
                                            a0                  a1                            a2
                Coefficient               0.132               -0.134                        -0.008
                   S.E.                  (0.110)             (0.036)                       (0.191)
                      2
                    R                                             0.807
       p-value for H0 : a1 = a2 = 0                               0.000

Note: Time period for results in this table is 1960:1-2010:4. π̄ and σ are the level of permanent inflation and the
standard deviation of shocks.




                                                        39
                               Table 3: Phillips Curves for Core Inflation


                           (a) πt = 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t )

                           (b) πt = 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(yt − yt∗ )


                                     (a) Unemployment Gap               (b) Output Gap


                 πt measure:       MEDIAN CPI        XFE CPI       MEDIAN CPI        XFE CPI

                                              1960:1-1972:4
              Coefficient for α                       -0.231                          0.135
                    S.E.                             (0.103)                         (0.056)
                       2
                     R                                0.729                           0.733
             S.E. of Regression                       0.992                           0.985
                                              1973:1-1984:4
              Coefficient for α         -0.650        -0.688            0.365         0.371
                    S.E.               (0.172)       (0.184)           (0.095)       (0.103)
                       2
                     R                  0.513         0.402             0.516         0.391
             S.E. of Regression         2.254         2.408             2.247         2.429
                                              1985:1-2007:4
              Coefficient for α         -0.202        -0.246            0.114         0.136
                    S.E.               (0.054)       (0.067)           (0.029)       (0.037)
                       2
                     R                  0.700         0.761             0.703         0.763
             S.E. of Regression         0.425         0.529             0.423         0.528
                                              1985:1-2010:4
              Coefficient for α         -0.168        -0.136            0.114         0.092
                    S.E.               (0.031)       (0.039)           (0.019)       (0.024)
                       2
                     R                  0.781         0.764             0.792         0.769
             S.E. of Regression         0.448         0.570             0.437         0.563

Note: Median CPI inflation data begins in 1967:2.




                                                     40
                              Table 4: Shock Anchoring in the Phillips Curve


                               (a) πt = 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t )

                                 1960:1-1972:4           1973:1-1984:4                1985:1-2010:4
          Coefficient for α          -0.231                  -0.650                       -0.168
                 SE                 (0.103)                 (0.172)                      (0.031)
                   2
                 R                    0.729                   0.513                        0.781

                               (b) πt = 41 (πt−1
                                             T      T
                                                 + πt−2    T
                                                        + πt−3    T
                                                               + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t )

                                 1960:1-1972:4           1973:1-1984:4                1985:1-2010:4
          Coefficient for α          -0.319                  -0.620                       -0.003
                 SE                 (0.091)                 (0.165)                      (0.064)
                   2
                 R                    0.789                   0.551                        0.042

          (c) πt = γ 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + (1 − γ) 41 (πt−1
                                                                    T      T
                                                                        + πt−2    T
                                                                               + πt−3    T
                                                                                      + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t )

                                 1960:1-1972:4           1973:1-1984:4                1985:1-2010:4
          Coefficient for α          -0.329                  -0.630                       -0.150
                 SE                 (0.095)                 (0.165)                      (0.031)
          Coefficient for γ          -0.117                   0.326                        0.886
                 SE                 (0.295)                 (0.294)                      (0.046)
                   2
                 R                    0.785                   0.553                        0.791

Note: πt is core inflation (XFE inflation for 1960:1-1972:4, and median inflation for 1973:1-2010:4), and πtT is the
total CPI inflation rate.




                                                          41
                           Table 5: New Keynesian Phillips Curve Results


                                             πt = Et πt+1 + λst

                                     1960:1-1997:4         1960:1-2010:4    1960:1-1972:4
                 Coefficient for λ       0.060                 0.040            0.110
                        SE              (0.012)               (0.045)          (0.020)
                          2
                        R                0.710                 0.740            0.733
                                     1973:1-1984:4         1985:1-2007:4    1985:1-2010:4
                 Coefficient for λ       0.129                 0.044            0.012
                        SE              (0.053)               (0.022)          (0.013)
                          2
                        R                0.398                 0.665            0.760

Note: In this table we again use the combined median inflation rate that uses the revised median series from
1983-2010, the original median series for 1967-1982, and XFE for 1960-1967. st is the log of the labor income
share. For the rational expectations Phillips curve we use GMM with instruments of: four lags of inflation,
the labor share, the output gap, a long-short interest rate spread, nominal wage inflation, and commodity price
inflation.




                                                      42
                                      A1. Variations on Basic Phillips Curves

                                                 1
                                  (a) πt =       4
                                                   (πt−1    + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t )

                                             1960:1-1972:4            1973:1-1984:4          1985:1-2010:4
                   Coefficient for α             -0.231                   -0.650                 -0.168
                          SE                    (0.103)                  (0.172)                (0.031)
                            2
                          R                      0.729                    0.513                  0.781

                                                   1
                                       (b) πt =    4
                                                     (πt−1    + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + αuSW
                                                                                         t

                                             1960:1-1972:4            1973:1-1984:4          1985:1-2010:4
                   Coefficient for α             -0.296                   -0.521                 -0.157
                          SE                    (0.118)                  (0.164)                (0.027)
                            2
                          R                      0.735                    0.477                  0.788

                            1
                 (c) πt =   4
                              (πt−1   + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + (β0 + β1 D1t + β2 D2t )((u − u∗ )t + λuSW
                                                                                                      t  )

                                                                     1960:1-2010:4
                                   β0                  β1                   β2                              λ
                 Coefficient     -0.259              -0.258               0.381                           0.269
                    SE          (0.125)             (0.189)              (0.141)                         (0.340)
                       2
                    R                                                    0.788
                                                                                                ∗
                                      (d) πt =    1
                                                  4
                                                    (πt−1   + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α (u−u
                                                                                         u
                                                                                                    )t
                                                                                            t


                                             1960:1-1972:4            1973:1-1984:4          1985:1-2010:4
                   Coefficient for α             -0.965                   -5.836                 -1.312
                          SE                    (0.390)                  (1.441)                (0.241)
                            2
                          R                      0.734                    0.529                  0.780

                                        1
                            (e) πt =    4
                                          (πt−1   + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t ) + β(gt − b
                                                                                                 gt )

                                             1960:1-1972:4            1973:1-1984:4          1985:1-2010:4
                   Coefficient for α             -0.224                   -0.636                 -0.158
                          SE                    (0.105)                  (0.172)                (0.030)
                   Coefficient for β             -0.014                   -0.096                 -0.049
                          SE                    (0.033)                  (0.085)                (0.016)
                            2
                          R                      0.724                    0.515                  0.798

                                         1
                            (f) πtT =    4
                                           (πt−1   + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(ut − u∗t ) + βShockt

                                             1973:1-1984:4            1985:1-2007:4          1985:1-2010:4
                   Coefficient for α             -0.667                   -0.194                 -0.167
                          SE                    (0.175)                  (0.055)                (0.030)
                   Coefficient for β             0.852                    1.031                  1.038
                          SE                    (0.221)                  (0.034)                (0.024)
                            2
                          R                      0.566                    0.922                  0.953


Note: ut is the national unemployment rate, u∗t is the CBO measure of the NAIRU, and uSW
                                                                                      t  is the difference
from unemployment in quarter t from the minimum unemployment rate from quarter t to t − 11. D1 is a dummy
variable equal to 1 for 1973:1 to 2010:4 (0 otherwise), and D2 is a dummy variable equal to 1 for 1985:1 to 2010:4
(0 otherwise). For Tables (a), (b), (d), and (e) πt is XFE inflation for 1960:1-1972:4, and is median CPI inflation
for subsequent periods. For Table (c), we use a combined median inflation rate that uses the ‘revised’ median
series from 1983-2010, the ‘original’ median series for 1967-1982, and XFE for 1960-1967. For Table (f), total CPI
inflation is used as dependent variable with median inflation for the lagged inflation term on the right-hand side,
and Shockt is total CPI inflation minus median CPI inflation.



                                                                    43
Figure 1: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecasts of Inflation for 2008 to 2010 Based
on 1960:1-2007:4 Regression
                                                                                                                             (a) Total CPI Inflation



                                                        6


                                                        5


                                                        4
                                  Inflation Rate ((%)




                                                        3


                                                        2
             Quarterly Annualized




                                                        1


                                                        0
                       A

                                                             2000Q1

                                                                       2000Q3

                                                                                2001Q1

                                                                                         2001Q3

                                                                                                  2002Q1

                                                                                                           2002Q3

                                                                                                                    2003Q1

                                                                                                                              2003Q3

                                                                                                                                       2004Q1

                                                                                                                                                2004Q3

                                                                                                                                                         2005Q1

                                                                                                                                                                  2005Q3

                                                                                                                                                                           2006Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                    2006Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                             2007Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                        2007Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2008Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010Q3
                                                        !1


                                                        !2


                                                        !3


                                                        !4
                                                                      Actual Inflation                        Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast                                                       Output Gap Dynamic Forecast




                                                                                                                             (b) XFE CPI Inflation



                                                        4


                                                        3


                                                        2
                                  Inflation Rate ((%)




                                                        1


                                                        0
                                                             2000Q1

                                                                       2000Q3

                                                                                2001Q1

                                                                                         2001Q3

                                                                                                  2002Q1

                                                                                                           2002Q3

                                                                                                                    2003Q1

                                                                                                                              2003Q3

                                                                                                                                       2004Q1

                                                                                                                                                2004Q3

                                                                                                                                                         2005Q1

                                                                                                                                                                  2005Q3

                                                                                                                                                                           2006Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                    2006Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                             2007Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                        2007Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2008Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010Q3
             Quarterly Annualized




                                                        !1
                       A




                                                        !2


                                                         3
                                                        !3


                                                        !4


                                                        !5
                                                                      Actual Inflation                        Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast                                                       Output Gap Dynamic Forecast



                                                                                                                                                         44
                                             Quarterly Annualized
                                                       A          Inflation Rate ((%)                                                                          Quarte
                                                                                                                                                                    erly Annualized Inflation R
                                                                                                                                                                                              Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             6




                                         0
                                              1
                                                          2
                                                                     3
                                                                                4
                                                                                        5
                                                                                            6




                           !1
                                1983
                                   3Q2                                                                                                        1983Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1984
                                   4Q2                                                                                                        1984Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1985
                                   5Q2                                                                                                        1985Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1986
                                   6Q2                                                                                                        1986Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1987
                                   7Q2                                                                                                        1987Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1988
                                   8Q2                                                                                                        1988Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1989
                                   9Q2                                                                                                        1989Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1990
                                   0Q2                                                                                                        1990Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1991
                                   1Q2                                                                                                        1991Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1992
                                   2Q2                                                                                                        1992Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1993
                                   3Q2                                                                                                        1993Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2




     Actual Inflation
                                                                                                                        Actual Inflation
                                1994
                                   4Q2                                                                                                        1994Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1995
                                   5Q2                                                                                                        1995Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2




45
                                1996
                                   6Q2                                                                                                        1996Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1997
                                   7Q2                                                                                                        1997Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1998
                                   8Q2                                                                                                        1998Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                1999
                                   9Q2                                                                                                        1999Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2




                                                                                                (b) XFE CPI Inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a) Median CPI Inflation




                                2000
                                   0Q2                                                                                                        2000Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2001
                                   1Q2                                                                                                        2001Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2002
                                   2Q2                                                                                                        2002Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2




     Permanent Component
                                2003
                                   3Q2                                                                                  Permanent Component   2003Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2004
                                   4Q2                                                                                                        2004Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2005
                                   5Q2                                                                                                        2005Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2006
                                   6Q2                                                                                                        2006Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2007
                                   7Q2                                                                                                        2007Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2008
                                   8Q2                                                                                                        2008Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                2009
                                   9Q2                                                                                                        2009Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 2: Median CPI and XFE CPI Inflation Rates, 1983:2-2010:4




                                2010
                                   0Q2                                                                                                        2010Q
                                                                                                                                                  Q2
     2
         1.5
               1
                   0.5
                   05
                                  0
                                      0.5
                                            1
                                                1.5
                                                                     3
                                                                         2.5
                                                                               2
                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                         1
                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                                                          2

                         1960Q1                                                              1960Q1
                         1961Q3                                                              1961Q3
                         1963Q1                                                              1963Q1
                         1964Q3                                                              1964Q3
                         1966Q1                                                              1966Q1
                         1967Q3                                                              1967Q3
                         1969Q1                                                              1969Q1
                         1970Q3                                                              1970Q3
                         1972Q1                                                              1972Q1
                         1973Q3                                                              1973Q3
                         1975Q1                                                              1975Q1
                         1976Q3                                                              1976Q3
                         1978Q1                                                              1978Q1
                         1979Q3                                                              1979Q3
                         1981Q1                                                              1981Q1
                         1982Q3                                                              1982Q3




46
                         1984Q1                                                              1984Q1
                         1985Q3                                                              1985Q3
                         1987Q1                                                              1987Q1




                                                      (b) V = 100Q
                         1988Q3                                                              1988Q3
                                                                                                                              (a) No Restriction




                         1990Q1                                                              1990Q1
                         1991Q3                                                              1991Q3
                         1993Q1                                                              1993Q1
                         1994Q3                                                              1994Q3
                         1996Q1                                                              1996Q1
                         1997Q3                                                              1997Q3
                         1999Q1                                                              1999Q1
                         2000Q3                                                              2000Q3
                         2002Q1                                                              2002Q1
                         2003Q3                                                              2003Q3
                         2005Q1                                                              2005Q1
                         2006Q3                                                              2006Q3
                                                                                                                                                   Figure 3: Time-Varying αt from Phillips Curve, 1960:1-2010:4




                         2008Q1                                                              2008Q1
                         2009Q3                                                              2009Q3
                                                                            d Inflation Raate (%), Stand
                                                        Quarterrly Annualized                          dard Error of
                                                           Perrmanent & Transitory Com   mponents of Inflation




                                         !4
                                                                1
                                                                                  6
                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                             16
                                                1
                                                1960Q1
                                                1961Q4
                                                1
                                                1963Q3
                                                1
                                                1965Q2
                                                1
                                                1967Q1
                                                1
                                                1968Q4
                                                1
                                                1970Q3
                                                1
                                                1972Q2
                                                1
                                                1974Q1
                                                1
                                                1975Q4
                                                1
                                                1977Q3
                                                1
                                                1979Q2
                                                1
                                                1981Q1
                                                1
                                                1982Q4
                                                1
                                                1984Q3
                                                1




      Permanent Component of Inflation




47
                                                1986Q2
                                                1
                                                1988Q1
                                                1
                                                1989Q4
                                                1
                                                1991Q3
                                                1
                                                1993Q2
                                                1
                                                1995Q1
                                                1




      SE times 10
                                                1996Q4
                                                1
                                                1998Q3
                                                1
                                                2000Q2
                                                2
                                                2002Q1
                                                2
                                                2003Q4
                                                2




     !alpha
                                                2005Q3
                                                2
                                                2007Q2
                                                2
                                                2009Q1
                                                2
                                                2010Q4
                                                2

                                                            0
                                                                                                    1




                                                                    0.2
                                                                            0.4
                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                             1.2
                                                                                                                       1.4
                                                                                                                                  1.6




                                         !0.4
                                                 !0.2
                                                                                                                                        Figure 4: Permanent Component of Median CPI Inflation vs. Time-Varying α
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Regression



                                   Quarterly Annualized
                                             A          Inflation Rate ((%)                                                          Quarterly Annualized
                                                                                                                                               A          Inflation Rate ((%)




                                       0
                                                1
                                                           2
                                                                      3
                                                                              4
                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                    5




                        !2
                             !1
                                                                                                                          !2
                                                                                                                               !1
                              2000Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2000Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2000Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2000Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2001Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2001Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2001Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2001Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2002Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2002Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2002Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2002Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2003Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2003Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2003Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2003Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2004Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2004Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1




                                                                                                       Actual Inflation
                              2004Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2004Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3




     Actual Inflation
                              2005Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2005Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1




48
                              2005Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2005Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2006Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2006Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1




                                                                                      (b) Output Gap
                              2006Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2006Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                        (a) Unemployment Gap




                              2007Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2007Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1


                                                                                                       Dynamic Forecast




     Dynamic Forecast
                              2007Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2007Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2008Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2008Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2008Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2008Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2009Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2009Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2009Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2009Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3

                              2010Q
                                  Q1                                                                                            2010Q
                                                                                                                                    Q1

                              2010Q
                                  Q3                                                                                            2010Q
                                                                                                                                    Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5: Dynamic Forecasts of Median CPI Inflation Based for 2008 to 2010 on 1985:1-2007:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Regression



                                   Quarterly Annualized
                                             A          Inflation Rate ((%)                                                          Quarterly Annualized
                                                                                                                                               A          Inflation Rate ((%)




                                                     0
                                                               1
                                                                         2
                                                                              3
                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                    4




                        !4
                             !3
                                  !2
                                           !1
                                                                                                                          !4
                                                                                                                               !3
                                                                                                                                    !2
                                                                                                                                             !1
                                            20
                                             000Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               000Q1

                                            20
                                             000Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               000Q3

                                            20
                                             001Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               001Q1

                                            20
                                             001Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               001Q3

                                            20
                                             002Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               002Q1

                                            20
                                             002Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               002Q3

                                            20
                                             003Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               003Q1

                                            20
                                             003Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               003Q3

                                            20
                                             004Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               004Q1




                                                                                                       Actual Inflation




     Actual Inflation
                                            20
                                             004Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               004Q3

                                            20
                                             005Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               005Q1




49
                                            20
                                             005Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               005Q3

                                            20
                                             006Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               006Q1




                                                                                      (b) Output Gap
                                            20
                                             006Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               006Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                        (a) Unemployment Gap




                                            20
                                             007Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               007Q1


                                                                                                       Dynamic Forecast




     Dynamic Forecast
                                            20
                                             007Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               007Q3

                                            20
                                             008Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               008Q1

                                            20
                                             008Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               008Q3

                                            20
                                             009Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               009Q1

                                            20
                                             009Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               009Q3

                                            20
                                             010Q1                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               010Q1

                                            20
                                             010Q3                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                               010Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 6: Dynamic Forecasts of XFE CPI Inflation Based for 2008 to 2010 on 1985:1-2007:4
                                                                                                                     2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to 2010




                                                            Quarterly Annualized
                                                                      A          Inflation Rate ((%)                                                                                                                                                                    Quarte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             erly Annualized Inflation R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.5




                                         !1.5
                                                     !0.5
                                                      05
                                                                 0
                                                                                   1
                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                 3




                                                !1
                                                                          0.5
                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                           2.5
                                                     20
                                                      000Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2000Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      000Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2000Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      001Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2001Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2001Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3




     Actual Inflation
                                                     20
                                                      001Q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Actual Inflation
                                                     20
                                                      002Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2002Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      002Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2002Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      003Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2003Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      003Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2003Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      004Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2004Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      004Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2004Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3




50
                                                     20
                                                      005Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2005Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      005Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2005Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      006Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2006Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1




     Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast
                                                     20
                                                      006Q3                                                                                                                                                      Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast   2006Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      007Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2007Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      007Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2007Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      008Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2008Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      008Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2008Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      009Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2009Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                     20
                                                      009Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2009Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                     20
                                                      010Q1                                                                                                                                                                                          2010Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1




     Output Gap Dynamic Forecast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Output Gap Dynamic Forecast




                                                     20
                                                      010Q3                                                                                                                                                                                          2010Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 7: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecasts of Median CPI Inflation for 2008




                                                                                                                     Figure 8: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecasts of XFE CPI Inflation for 2008 to
                                                                1985:1-2010:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Quarterly Annualized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A          Inflation Rate ((%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                        !3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !1




     0.6
           0.4
                 0.2
                          0
                              0.2
                              02
                                    0.4
                                          0.6
                                                0.8
                                                      1
                                                          1.2
                 1985Q
                     Q1                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 1985Q
                     Q4                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1986Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 1987Q
                     Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2001Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1988Q
                     Q1
                 1988Q
                     Q4                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                                                                                    Actual Inflation
                 1989Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1990Q
                     Q2                                                                                                                                                                                                 2003Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 1991Q
                     Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2003Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1991Q
                     Q4
                 1992Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2013 Based on 1985:1-2010:4 Regression




                 1993Q
                     Q2                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1994Q
                     Q1                                                                                                                                                                                                 2005Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 1994Q
                     Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2005Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1995Q
                     Q3
                 1996Q
                     Q2                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1




51
                 1997Q
                     Q1                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1997Q
                     Q4                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 1998Q
                     Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2007Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 1999Q
                     Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                    Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast
                 2000Q
                     Q1
                 2000Q
                     Q4                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 2001Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 2002Q
                     Q2
                 2003Q
                     Q1                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 2003Q
                     Q4                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 2004Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 2005Q
                     Q2                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 2006Q
                     Q1
                 2006Q
                     Q4                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                 2007Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2012Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 2008Q
                     Q2                                                                                                                                                                                                 2012Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                    Output Gap Dynamic Forecast




                 2009Q
                     Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2013Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                 2009Q
                     Q4
                 2010Q
                     Q3                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                Figure 10: Level Anchoring based on SP F 4Q = δt 2.5 + (1 − δt ) 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 9: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecast of Median CPI Inflation for 2011 to
                                                            1985:1-2010:4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1985:1-2010:4




     0.6
           0.4
                 0.2
                 02
                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                               06
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2




                                0
                                    0.2
                                          0.4
                                                0.6
                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8




                       1985Q1                                                                                                                                                               1985Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       1985Q4                                                                                                                                                               1985Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       1986Q3                                                                                                                                                               1986Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       1987Q2                                                                                                                                                               1987Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       1988Q1                                                                                                                                                               1988Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       1988Q4                                                                                                                                                               1988Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       1989Q3                                                                                                                                                               1989Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       1990Q2                                                                                                                                                               1990Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       1991Q1                                                                                                                                                               1991Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       1991Q4                                                                                                                                                               1991Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       1992Q3                                                                                                                                                               1992Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       1993Q2                                                                                                                                                               1993Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       1994Q1                                                                                                                                                               1994Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       1994Q4                                                                                                                                                               1994Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       1995Q3                                                                                                                                                               1995Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       1996Q2                                                                                                                                                               1996Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2




52
                       1997Q1                                                                                                                                                               1997Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       1997Q4                                                                                                                                                               1997Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       1998Q3                                                                                                                                                               1998Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       1999Q2                                                                                                                                                               1999Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       2000Q1                                                                                                                                                               2000Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       2000Q4                                                                                                                                                               2000Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       2001Q3                                                                                                                                                               2001Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       2002Q2                                                                                                                                                               2002Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       2003Q1                                                                                                                                                               2003Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       2003Q4                                                                                                                                                               2003Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       2004Q3                                                                                                                                                               2004Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       2005Q2                                                                                                                                                               2005Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       2006Q1                                                                                                                                                               2006Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       2006Q4                                                                                                                                                               2006Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       2007Q3                                                                                                                                                               2007Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                       2008Q2                                                                                                                                                               2008Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q2
                       2009Q1                                                                                                                                                               2009Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                       2009Q4                                                                                                                                                               2009Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q4
                       2010Q3                                                                                                                                                               2010Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                                                            Figure 12: Level Anchoring based on πt = δt 2.5 + (1 − δt ) 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 ) + α(y − yt∗ ),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 11: Level Anchoring based on πt = δt 2.5+ (1− δt ) 14 (πt−1 + πt−2 + πt−3 + πt−4 )+ α(u− u∗t ),
Figure 13: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecasts of Median CPI Inflation for 2008
to 2010 Based on Phillips Curve with Anchoring, 1985:1-2007:4


                                                            3.5


                                                 Rate (%)    3


                                                            2.5
                      erly Annualizeed Inflation R




                                                             2


                                                            1.5
                 Quarte




                                                             1


                                                            0.5


                                                             0
                                                                      Q1

                                                                                  Q3

                                                                                                    Q1

                                                                                                                 Q3

                                                                                                                            Q1

                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                                                                                                                           Q1

                                                                                                                                                                       Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                  Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                                                                  2000Q

                                                                              2000Q

                                                                                                2001Q

                                                                                                             2001Q

                                                                                                                        2002Q

                                                                                                                                     2002Q

                                                                                                                                                       2003Q

                                                                                                                                                                   2003Q

                                                                                                                                                                              2004Q

                                                                                                                                                                                            2004Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                          2005Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2005Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2008Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2010Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2010Q
                                                                           Actual Inflation                                           Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast                                                                                              Output Gap Dynamic Forecast




Figure 14: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecasts of Median CPI Inflation for 2011
to 2013 Based on Phillips Curve with Anchoring, 1985:1-2010:4


                                                            3.5


                                                             3
                                                Rate (%)




                                                            2.5
                      erly Annualized Inflation R




                                                             2


                                                            1.5
                 Quarte




                                                             1


                                                            0.5


                                                             0
                                                                      Q1
                                                                                Q3
                                                                                           Q1
                                                                                                        Q3
                                                                                                                  Q1
                                                                                                                           Q3
                                                                                                                                     Q1
                                                                                                                                                  Q3
                                                                                                                                                              Q1
                                                                                                                                                                       Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                           Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Q3
                                                                  2000Q
                                                                            2000Q
                                                                                       2001Q
                                                                                                    2001Q
                                                                                                              2002Q
                                                                                                                       2002Q
                                                                                                                                 2003Q
                                                                                                                                              2003Q
                                                                                                                                                          2004Q
                                                                                                                                                                   2004Q
                                                                                                                                                                            2005Q
                                                                                                                                                                                       2005Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2006Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2007Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2007Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2008Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2013Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2013Q




                                                                           Actual Inflation                                           Unemployment Gap Dynamic Forecast                                                                                              Output Gap Dynamic Forecast




                                                                                                                                                                                                     53
   Figure 15: Labor Income Share vs. Unemployment Gap (Annual Averages), 1985-2010


                                                                                                                          108



                                                                                                                          106



                                                                                                                          104
                                                               92=100)




                                                                                                                          102
                                                  bor Share (199




                                                                                                                          100                                 2008
                                                Lab




                                                                                                                          98                                                                                                                                      2009


                                                                                                                          96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2010


                                                                                                                          94
                                                           !2                                     !1                                 0                              1                              2                          3                          4                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                 U!U*




Figure A1: 4-Quarter Moving Averages of Dynamic Forecasts of Median CPI Inflation for 2008
to 2010 Based on Gordon (2011)


                                                                         4


                                                                         3


                                                                         2
                         Annualized Inflation Rate ((%)




                                                                         1


                                                                         0
                                                                                 Q1

                                                                                          Q3

                                                                                                   Q1

                                                                                                            Q3

                                                                                                                     Q1

                                                                                                                                Q3

                                                                                                                                             Q1

                                                                                                                                                      Q3

                                                                                                                                                               Q1

                                                                                                                                                                            Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                     Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                              Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Q3
                                                                             2000Q

                                                                                      2000Q

                                                                                               2001Q

                                                                                                        2001Q

                                                                                                                 2002Q

                                                                                                                            2002Q

                                                                                                                                         2003Q

                                                                                                                                                  2003Q

                                                                                                                                                           2004Q

                                                                                                                                                                        2004Q

                                                                                                                                                                                 2005Q

                                                                                                                                                                                          2005Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                            2006Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2007Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2007Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2008Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2010Q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2010Q




                                                                    !1


                                                                    !2
               Quarterly A




                                                                    !3


                                                                    !4


                                                                    !5


                                                                    !6
                                                                                                                           Actual Inflation                                      Gordon (2011) Dynamic Forecast




                                                                                                                                                                                 54
