NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO SMALL BUSINESSES DO?
Erik Hurst
Benjamin Wild Pugsley
Working Paper 17041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17041

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

This paper was previously circulated with the title "Understanding Small Business Heterogeneity."
We would like to thank Mark Aguiar, Fernando Alvarez, Jaroslav Borovicka, Augustin Landier, Josh
Lerner, E.J. Reedy, Jim Poterba, David Romer, Sarada, Andrei Shleifer, Mihkel Tombak, Justin Wolfers
and seminar participants at Boston College, the 2011 Duke/Kauffman Entrepreneurship Conference,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Harvard Business School, the Institute for Fiscal Studies,
the 2011 International Industrial Organization Conference, London School of Economics, MIT, 2010
NBER Summer Institute Entrepreneurship Workshop, Penn State, Stanford University, and the University
of Chicago for comments. Hurst and Pugsley gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided
by the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of Economy and the State as well as the financial support
provided by the Brookings Institute. Additionally Hurst thanks the financial support provided by the
University of Chicago's Booth School of Business and Pugsley thanks the financial support from the
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Certain data included herein are derived from the Kauffman
Firm Survey release 3.1 public-use data file. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Erik Hurst and Benjamin Wild Pugsley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

What Do Small Businesses Do?
Erik Hurst and Benjamin Wild Pugsley
NBER Working Paper No. 17041
May 2011, Revised October 2011
JEL No. L21,L25,L26
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we show that most small business owners are very different from the entrepreneurs that
economic models and policy makers often have in mind. Using new data that samples early stage entrepreneurs
just prior to business start up, we show that few small businesses intend to bring a new idea to market.
Instead, most intend to provide an existing service to an existing market. Further, we find that most
small businesses have little desire to grow big or to innovate in any observable way. We show that
such behavior is consistent with the industry characteristics of the majority of small businesses, which
are concentrated among skilled craftsmen, lawyers, real estate agents, doctors, small shopkeepers,
and restaurateurs. Lastly, we show non pecuniary benefits (being one’s own boss, having flexibility
of hours, etc.) play a first-order role in the business formation decision. We then discuss how our
findings suggest that the importance of entrepreneurial talent, entrepreneurial luck, and financial frictions
in explaining the firm size distribution may be overstated. We conclude by discussing the potential
policy implications of our findings.
Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu
Benjamin Wild Pugsley
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
bpugsley@uchicago.edu

1.

Introduction

Economists and policy makers alike have long been interested in the effects of various economic
policies on business ownership. In fact, the U.S. Small Business Administration is a federally
funded agency whose sole purpose is to help Americans “start, build, and grow businesses.”
Researchers and policy makers often either explicitly or implicitly equate small business owners
with “entrepreneurs.” While this association could be tautological, we show the typical small
business owner is often very different than the entrepreneur that economic models and policy
makers have in mind.

For example, economic theory usually considers entrepreneurs as

individuals who (1) innovate and render aging technologies obsolete (Schumpeter, 1942), (2)
take economic risks (Knight (1921); Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979); Kanbur (1979), and
Jovanovic (1979)), or (3) are considered jacks-of-all-trades in the sense that they have a broad
skill set (Lazear, 2005). Policy makers often consider entrepreneurs to be job creators or the
engines of economic growth.
In this paper we shed light on what the vast majority of small businesses actually do and,
further, what they report ex-ante wanting to do. The paper proceeds in six parts.
highlighting the industrial breakdown of small business within the US.

We begin by

When referring to small

businesses, we primarily refer to firms with between 1 and 19 employees which employs roughly
20 percent of the private sector workforce.

However, throughout our analysis, we also define

alternative classifications such as firms with between 1 and 100 employees. As we show in this
section, over two-thirds of all small businesses are confined to just 40 narrow 4-digit NAICS
industries. All of these industries are ones where participants provide a relatively standardized
good or service to an existing customer base.

Specifically, these industries primarily include

skilled craftsmen (e.g., plumbers, electricians, contractors, painters), skilled professionals (e.g.,

1

lawyers, accountants, and architects), insurance and real estate agents, doctors, dentists,
mechanics, beauticians, restaurateurs, and small shop keepers (e.g., gas station owners and
grocery store owners). Although there is still substantial within industry heterogeneity in size,
we show these industries have a disproportionate share of small businesses. This composition of
small businesses foreshadows our subsequent empirical results.
In Section 3 of the paper, we study job creation and innovation at small and/or new firms.
First, using a variety of data sets, we show that most surviving small businesses do not grow by
any significant margin. Most firms start small and stay small throughout their entire lifecycle.2
Also, most surviving small firms do not innovate along any observable margin. We show that
very few small firms report spending resources on research and development, getting a patent, or
even copywriting or trade marking something related to the business (including the company’s
name). Furthermore, we show that nearly half of all new businesses report providing an existing
good or service to an existing market.

This is not surprising in light of the most common small

businesses. A new plumber or a new lawyer who opens up a practice often does so in an area
where existing plumbers and existing lawyers already operate.
Most of the existing research attributes differences across firms with respect to ex-post
performance to either differences in financing constraints facing the firms (e.g., Evans and
Jovanovic (1989) and Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006)), differences in ex-post productivity
draws across the firms (e.g., Bonini and Simon (1958), Jovanovic (1982), Pakes and Ericson
(1989), Hopenhayn (1992)), or differences in entrepreneurial ability of the firms owners (e.g.,
Lucas (1978)). In Section 4, we use new data which samples nascent small business owners
2

Haltiwanger et al. (2010) show that controlling for firm age there is no systematic relationship between firm size
and growth. They conclude that the small firms that tend to grow fast (relative to large firms) are those newly
established small firms. We discuss how our results add to these findings in later sections. In particular, we show
that most surviving new firms also do not grow in any meaningful way.

2

about their expectations for the business in the future to show that these stories are incomplete.
When asked at the time of their business formation, most business owners report having no
desire to grow big and no desire to innovate along observable dimensions. In other words, when
starting their business, the plumber and lawyer do so while expecting to remain small well into
the foreseeable future and with little expectation to innovate by developing a new product or
service or even enter new markets with an existing product or service.
If most small businesses do not want to grow or do not want to innovate, why do they
start? We address this question in Section 5. Again, we use a new data set that samples nascent
business owners at the time they were starting their business that specifically asks about motives
and expectations. We find that over 50 percent of new businesses reported that non pecuniary
benefits were the primary reason as to why they started their business. Non pecuniary benefits
included answers such as “wanting flexibility over schedule” or “to be one’s own boss”. By
comparison, only 34 percent of respondents reported that they were starting the business to
generate income and only 40 percent indicated that they were starting a business because they
wanted to create a new product or because they had a good business idea. Using the panel nature
of the data, we show that those small businesses that started for other than innovative reasons
were less likely to subsequently grow, less likely to report wanting to grow, less likely to
subsequently innovate, and less likely to report wanting to innovate.
Collectively, these results suggest that there are other first order reasons why small
businesses form aside from the innovation or growth motives which are embedded in most
theories of entrepreneurship. For example, non pecuniary benefits of small business ownership
may be an important driver of why firms start and remain small. Additionally, some industries
may have a natural size of production at an establishment level that is quite low (e.g., insurance
3

agent).

In Section 6 of the paper, we discuss how our results challenge much of the existing

work on entrepreneurship and small firm dynamics. In particular, we highlight how our findings
suggest that the importance of entrepreneurial talent, entrepreneurial luck, and financial frictions
in explaining the firm size distribution may be overstated.

In the last section of the paper, we

discuss the policy implications of our results.
The work discussing the diversity of motives and expectations among small businesses in
developing economies is more extensive than for developed economies.3

Recent work by La

Porta and Shleifer (2008) and Banerjee and Duflo (2011) show that most small businesses in
developing economies do not grow or innovate in any observable way. In the latter sections, we
also discuss how the qualitatively similar outcomes we observe are driven by different forces
than in developing economies.
Overall, our results show that there is substantial skewness among small businesses
within the U.S both in actual and expected growth and innovation behavior. Most small
businesses do not want to grow or innovate which are the usual cornerstones of most of these
entrepreneurial models and policy justifications. Our results suggest that it is often inappropriate
for researchers and policy makers to use the universe of small business (or self employment) data
to test standard theories of entrepreneurship. Researchers and policy makers interested in testing
theories of entrepreneurship may need to use more specialized data sets like the ones that track
small businesses seeking venture capital funding because these firms have been shown to be

3

Two notable exceptions include Bhide (2000) and Ardagna and Lusardi (2008). Bhide (2000) examines the
attributes of the founders of many successful firms and concludes that the actions and behaviors of the founders are
an important determinant of firm growth.
Ardagna and Lusardi (2008) use survey data from the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) to show that there are demographic differences between those individuals who
report starting a business because they had a good business opportunity or other business owners.

4

more likely to actually grow or innovate relative to other small businesses.4 Additionally, policy
makers wanting to promote growth and innovation may want to consider more targeted policies
as opposed to creating policies that target the universe of small businesses.
2.

Industrial Composition of Small Businesses

The goal of this section is to show that most small businesses are concentrated in a small number
of 4-digit NAICS industries that mostly provide standard services to local customers. This
context is important when interpreting our findings that the majority of small businesses do not
intend to grow or innovate in any substantive way.
To examine the types of small businesses that exist within the U.S., we use data from the
Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB) compiled by the U.S. Census Bureau.5 To create these
statistics the Census compiles data extracted from the Business Register, which contains the
Census Bureau’s most current and consistent data for U.S. business establishments. 6 The data
cover most U.S. firms with at least one paid employee.

Below, we discuss how our results

would extend if we included information from the non-employer firms. We focus our attention
on the statistics from the years 2003 to 2007, all of which are coded using the NAICS 2002
industry definitions; additional data from the Economic Census are also available for 2007.
However, it should be noted that our results are nearly identical if we pick any year between
1998 and 2008. Throughout the paper we classify business size by total firm employment in

4

Some papers in the literature take this approach. See, for example, recent work by Kaplan and Lerner (2009),
Puri and Zarutskie (2010), and Hall and Woodward (2010). As shown by Puri and Zarutskie (2010), firms who seek
venture capital funding are much more likely to grow than the universe of remaining firms.
5
For a complete description of the data, see http://www.census.gov/econ/susb/.
6
The Business Register is updated continuously and incorporates data from the Census Bureau’s economic censuses
and current business surveys, quarterly and annual Federal tax records, and other departmental and federal statistics.
The data includes information from all NAICS industries aside from crop and animal production; rail transportation;
National Postal Service; pensions, welfare, and vacation funds; trusts, estates, and agency accounts; private
households; and public administration.

5

order to exclude large firms operating many small establishments.7 For most purposes in this
section, we refer to "small businesses" as those businesses with between 1 and 20 employees,
although we consider alternative definitions based on different employment size cutoffs.
As is already well known, small businesses are a very large fraction of the population of
employer firms. In Figure 1, we use the SUSB data from 2007 to construct the cumulative
distribution function for firm size using several measures of economic activity. In 2007, there
were roughly 6 million firms with paid employment; 90 percent of these firms had fewer than 20
employees.

These firms comprised 20 percent of aggregate paid employment and about 15

percent of sales receipts and payroll. The conclusions only change slightly if we look at firms
with fewer than 100 employees. The additional firms with between 20 and 99 employees
represent an additional 8 percent of all employer firms and 15 percent of aggregate employment.
Next we study the concentration of small businesses with paid employees at very fine
levels of industry classifications. These results yield two important messages. First, most small
businesses are concentrated in a few detailed industry classifications. Second, within these few
detailed industries, the distribution of employment across all firm sizes is different than the
overall distribution for all other industries.

Most of the industries in which small businesses

reside are also industries in which a disproportionate amount of economic activity takes place in
small firms.
We start by taking the universe of all employer firms with fewer than 20 employees.
Within these small firms, we rank the represented 4-digit industries by a crude measure of

7

A firm (termed enterprise) may consist of many establishments, which are distinct locations of business activity.
For example, the Starbucks corporation operates thousands of small establishments. Given our focus on total firm
employment, we do not treat the individual Starbucks establishments as small businesses.

6

concentration, namely each industry’s share out of the set of small firms.8

Specifically, we

define:

xj 

sj

s

j

j

where sj is the number of small businesses in industry j and xj is the share of small businesses in
industry j out of all small businesses (regardless of industries).

This measure gives the

importance of a given industry out of the universe of all small businesses with fewer than 20
employees. There are 294 four-digit NAICS industries in the SUSB data; industries are ranked
from 1 to 294, with the industry with the largest xj being ranked 1.
Figure 2 shows the cumulative sum of xj across each of the 4-digit industries by rank.
For example, the first twenty 4-digit industries account for just about 50 percent of all firms with
fewer than 20 employees. In other words, when talking about small businesses, roughly half of
them fall into only 20 narrowly defined 4-digit industries.

The top 40 4-digit industries

comprise two-thirds of all firms with fewer than 20 employees. The employment shares for the
top 20 industries and the top 40 industries (out of all employment in firms with fewer than 20
employees) were also nearly 50 percent and 65 percent, respectively.
Table 1 lists those top forty 4-digit industries ranked by xj. Again, two-thirds of all small
businesses in 2007 are in one of these forty 4-digit industries.

As seen from the list, most small

business are either restaurants (full service, limited service, or bars), skilled professionals
(doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, architects, consultants), skilled craftsmen (general
contractors, plumbers, electricians, mason workers, painters, roofers),

professional service

8

The national SUSB data are available at the 6-digit level of aggregation. Without much loss of generality, we
aggregate these data to a 4-digit level of aggregation.

7

provides (clergy, insurance agents, real estate agents, and travel agents), general service
providers (auto repair, building services such as landscaping, barbers/beauticians), or small
retailers (grocery stores, gas stations, pharmacies, and clothing stores).
These results are robust to alternative cuts of the data. If we extended our classification
to the top sixty 4-digit industries (which comprise over 80 percent of all firms with fewer than 20
employees), the type of industries in which small businesses reside are not altered.

The firms

ranked 41 to 60 are similar in spirit to those in the top 40. For example, they include dry
cleaners, office supply stores, hardware stores, jewelry stores, auto dealers, liquor stores,
furniture stores, and the like.

Additionally, if we extend our results to those firms with fewer

than 100 employees, our results are very similar. The 40 industries listed in Table 1 also
represent 66 percent of the firms and 61 percent of the employment in firms with fewer than 100
employees.
One concern may be that the important small business industries may reflect the overall
size of the industry rather than the role of small businesses within the industry. In fact, the bulk
of small businesses are concentrated in industries where a disproportionate amount of
employment is concentrated in small firms. For example, looking within the skilled craftsmen
industries, 48 percent of all employment (on average) is in firms with between 1 and 20
employees. Notices, this figure is much larger than the 20 percent of employment that is in firms
with between 1 and 20 employees for the entire economy (as shown in Figure 1).
To better document the relationship between the importance of an industry within small
businesses and the amount of activity that takes place within small firms within that that

8

industry, we present Figure 3.9 The x-axis of Figure 3 are deciles based upon x j , the number of
small firms within a given industry out of all small firms in the economy. As in Figure 2 and
Table 1, we define small firms as those firms with between 1-19 employees.

However, the

patterns we show are broadly consistent if we define small firms to have between 1 and 99
employees.

The y-axis of Figure 3 is the within industry share of employment in small firms

relative to all employment in the industry averaged across the industries in the decile. Formally,
we define the within industry share of employment in small firms as:
yj 

e sj
e nj

where e sj is the number of employees in small businesses within industry j and e nj is the number
of employees in all businesses (regardless of size) within industry j. The figure is drawn using
data from 2007. The results of Figure 3 show that industries that comprise the bulk of small
businesses (i.e., they have a high xj) are also industries where more of the employment within the
industry is in small firms (have a high yj). The top decile of industries with respect to xj is
comprised of the first 29 industries documented in Table 1. These industries comprise about 60
percent of the number of small businesses and about 60 percent of the employment within small
businesses.

For these industries, about 40 percent of employment within the industry, on

average, is in small firms. As seen from Figure 1, only about 20 percent of employment across
all industries is in small firms. The high x j industries are skewed toward small firms. As x j
falls and the industries become less important as a fraction of all small businesses, the scale of
these industries, for the most part, monotonically increases.
9

We also performed a different set of robustness results. In particular, we made a measure of the importance of
small businesses in industry j out of all small businesses adjusting for the importance of industry j out of all firms
regardless of size. The patterns in Table 1 and Figures 1-3 were robust to this adjustment.

9

A few other comments can be made about Figure 3. First, the top three deciles of xj
contain roughly 90 4-digit industries that comprise roughly 85 percent of all small businesses.
Even the industries in the second and third deciles have within industry employment (yj) that is
skewed toward small firms. Second, the difference between the average yj for the industries
within the first decile is statistically different from the average yj for the industries within all
other deciles. For example, the p-value of the difference between the first and the second deciles
is 0.017 and the p-value of the difference between the first and fourth deciles is < 0.001.
Likewise, the p-value of the difference between the average yi for the second and third deciles
relative to the fourth decile is about 0.03. This figure suggests that it may not be surprising that
most small firms do not grow nor report wanting to grow given that most small firms are in
industries where the observed scale of production is quite low.
Our analysis in this section focuses on employer firms, which have at least one paid
employee. Most firms within the U.S., however, are non-employer firms. In 2007, for example,
there were 21.7 million zero employee firms which represented roughly 78% of all firms. Often,
these are second businesses or independent consultants who report self employment income on
their Federal income tax returns. As a result, despite their importance in the number of firms,
the non-employers collectively represent less than 4 percent of all sales or receipts within the
U.S. during a given year.10 Because many of the existing datasets, exclude the non-employers
from their analysis, it is hard to systematically analyze their composition.

Recently, however,

the U.S. Census has released data that segments the non-employer firms both in numbers and
receipts by broad industry classifications.11

We summarize this data for 2007 in Appendix

10

Even though they are currently small, the non-employers are an important source of future paid employee firms.
Many eventual employer firms start outs and non-employers. See Davis et al. (2007) for a more detailed discussion.
11
See http://www.census.gov/econ/nonemployer/index.html.

10

Table A1.

The patterns documented in Table 1 carry through to non-employers.

Most non-

employer firms are in a handful of industries where the bulk of production takes place in small
firms. As a result, we feel our broad results extend to the inclusion of the non-employer firms.
The major take away from this section is that most small businesses are from a limited set
of narrowly defined industries where more of the industries’ economic activity takes place in
small firms. As we discuss in later sections of the paper, these industries usually do not match
the theoretical models of "entrepreneurship" that is usually put forth in the literature.
Before proceeding, we wish to acknowledge that even within the industries where most
small businesses are located there are many firms that are still quite large. John Haltiwanger, in
his discussion of our paper that follows, emphasizes this point. Any theory focusing on the
distribution of firm size needs to account for the fact that (1) most small businesses are
concentrated in a small set of industries, (2) the fraction of employment in small businesses
within these small business intensive industries (y) is higher than in other industries, and (3) even
within the small business intensive industries, there are still many large firms.

We emphasize

the first two points while Haltiwanger emphasizes the third.
3. Ex-Post Small Business Growth and Innovation
A.

Small Business Growth

It is well documented that there is heterogeneity in the extent to which small businesses grow
across observable factors such as firm size or firm age. Most recently, Haltiwanger et al. (2010)
find, that there is little relationship between firm size and firm growth conditional on firm age.
Employment growth is driven by young firms, who also happen to be small.

In this section, we

use some new and existing data sets to illustrate some additional facts about the distribution of
11

growth propensities across both small and young firms. Specifically, we show that even among
young firms and conditional on survival, growth is still rare overall.
Tables 2a and 2b show data from the 2005 Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS). The BDS
is produced by the U.S. Census Bureau from longitudinal annual establishment-level
administrative data similar to the source data for the SUSB discussed above. The BDS provides
measures of gross job creation and destruction by firm size and age for the years 1977 through
2009. Sector level measures are available for the US, and overall measures are available by state.
Again, like the SUSB, the database only tracks the employment patterns of employer firms.
Table 2a shows the percent of businesses within different firm age categories that are businesses
with fewer than 20 employees. We do this for the entire economy (top row) and then separately
within different one digit sectors.
Table 2a should be read as follows. In 2005, of all operating firms within the economy
that have survived fewer than ten years, 92 percent have fewer than 20 employees (column 1).
Within the construction sector (column 1, fourth row), 93.6 percent of operating “young” firms
have fewer than 20 employees. Table 2b shows the share of employment in firms with fewer
than 20 employees as opposed to the share of firms. The employment share exhibits similar
patterns: for example, firms with fewer than 20 employees have 44.8 percent of the total
employment for all firms who have been in existence for fewer than ten years.
Tables 2a and 2b highlight two important facts. First, among mature firms (firms in
existence between ten and twenty-five years), most firms and much of the employment is in
firms with fewer than twenty employees. For example, across the economy as whole, small firms
represent nearly 90 percent of all firms and nearly 25 percent of all employment out of all firms

12

that have been in existence between ten and twenty-five years. Even well into their lifecycle, the
overwhelming majority of firms remain small.
Second, similar to the results in the previous section, there is substantial variation among
industries. Relative to construction, very little of employment of mature firms is in small
businesses within the manufacturing industry (16 percent). Additional industries that include a
high concentration of the employment of mature firms being in small businesses include the
FIRE, wholesale trade, retail trade and service industries. Again, this is consistent with the
results from Table 1 and Figure 3. The heterogeneity in the firm size distribution across sectors
implies differences in dynamics by sector.
To shed light on employment dynamics for firms of different ages and industries, we use
data from a variety of additional sources. We start by using data from the 2003 Survey of Small
Business Finances (SSBF).12 The SSBF is a random sample of businesses with fewer than 500
employees and was conducted by the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve. The
survey is designed to measure the financial position of these businesses. However, the survey
also contains other background questions. In 2003, firms were asked to state whether in the past
year the total employees within their business grew, remained the same, or contracted. Firms
were also asked the same question over a three-year horizon.
The responses to these questions by small firms are shown in Table 3. Like above, we
define small firms as those firms with fewer than 20 employees. We break down the responses
by firm age to try to highlight differences between newer businesses and more established
businesses. The SSBF asks businesses to report how long the business has been in existence. As
seen from the table, the overwhelming majority of small firms do not grow by adding employees
12

The SSBF was formerly known as the National Survey of Small Business Finances. It was a quinquennial survey
that began in 1983 and was last conducted in 2003.

13

year to year or even over three-year periods.13 Not conditioning on firm age, only 14 percent of
surviving small businesses added an employee between 2002 and 2003 and only 21 percent
added employees between 2000 and 2003. Taking the converse, roughly 80 percent of surviving
small firms did not grow at all over a relatively long three year period. The percentages are
slightly higher among newer firms. However, even among small firms which have been in
existence between 1 and 10 years, only 19 percent grew between 2002 and 2003 and only 28
percent grew between 2000 and 2003. These data show that while most aggregate employment
growth may come from small (new) firms growing big, the vast majority of small (new) firms do
not grow, even over longer horizons.
Within the modest share of growing firms, the SSBF data does not tell us by how much
the firms grew. To assess this question, we turn to the Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS). The KFS
is a panel study of 4,928 businesses that were newly founded in 2004 administered by the
Kauffman Foundation.14

As shown in Haltiwanger et al. (2010), it is the new firms that

contribute, on average, to job growth. Yet, as we have just shown, this is rare for typical small
businesses. While much employment growth is due to new firms, it is not true that most new
businesses generate employment growth. To create the KFS sample, researchers began with a
sample frame of nearly 250,000 new businesses started in 2004 provided by the Dun and
Bradstreet database.

From this data, the KFS oversampled businesses in high tech industries

and businesses for whom research and development employment in the primary business
industry was high. The final sample admits 4,928 firms, which are re-surveyed annually in

13

We exclude newly founded firms that are unable to answer the employment change question because they did not
exist in the base year. The firms responding to the 1 year change question are at least 1 year old, and the firms
responding to the 3 year change question are at least 3 years old.
14
The Kauffman Foundation is an organization whose goals are to study and understand entrepreneurship.
Information about the organization can be found at http://www.kauffman.org/.

14

follow up interviews. Currently, public use data is available on these firms up through 2009. For
the work below, we only focus on those firms that have survived through 2008. There were
2,617 such firms in the data.

When using the KFS data, we use the survey weights proved

which are designed to make the firms in the sample representative of all new firms in the
economy.
Because the KFS is a four year panel, we can assess the growth rate of employment for
new businesses within the KFS over four years. In each wave of the survey, the KFS asks firms
to report the number of their employees. Column I of Table 4 shows that between 2004 and
2008, 41.9 percent of the surviving firms in the KFS reported growing the total number of
employees within their business. In columns 2 and 3 of Table 4, we show the fraction of new
surviving businesses who added more than 5 employees (column 2) and 10 employees (column
3) between 2004 and 2008. While about forty percent of the surviving new firms within the KFS
added employees, very few added more than one or two employees. Specifically, 60 percent of
all new firms in this sample did not add an employee, 90 percent added fewer than 5 employees,
and 97 percent added fewer than 10 employees.
The results from the KFS hold more broadly in the U.S. We find that small businesses
within the top small business industries (i.e, the ones documented in Table 1) actually have lower
than average job creation rates. To see this we pool employment change data from the SUSB
from the years 2003 to 2006. These data are released as a companion to the levels reported in the
SUSB annual data. Using the same administrative data, the Census Bureau measures the number
of jobs created (either from expanding or new establishments) or destroyed (either from
contracting or exiting establishments) at the establishment level and aggregates these into annual

15

measures of gross job creation and destruction by industry and firm size.15 At the 4-digit industry
level, we compute for each size category the gross job creation rate, the gross job birth rate, and
the gross job destruction rate. We split job creation into jobs created at continuing establishments
(the gross job creation rate) and jobs created at opening establishment (the gross job birth rate).
The job destruction rate reflects job loss at both contracting or exiting establishments. We follow
Davis, et al. (1996) and define these rates as follows:
g Ms
jt 

where

M sjt

(e sj ,t  e sj ,t 1 ) / 2

M sjt represents a measure of job creation or destruction (either jobs created from

expansion, jobs created from births, or overall jobs destroyed from contracting and exiting
establishments) for small businesses, s, within industry j between period t and t  1 , and e sjt is
defined as above to be the number of employees in small businesses within industry j during
period t. Consistent with our earlier definition, we define small businesses to be those firms with
between 1 and 20 employees.

Davis, et al. (1996) show that this form of growth rate has a

number of desirable properties: it accommodates entry and exit, and is equivalent to a log
difference up to second order.
We use these growth rates to ask whether or not industries that comprise a large fraction
of small businesses can predict the degree of job creation or destruction for small businesses
within that industry, conditional on aggregate industry characteristics. To do this, we estimate
the following:
15

The distinction between firms (referred to as enterprises by the Census Bureau) and establishments is important.
The SUSB data report expansions (contractions) by firm size, by measuring the employment changes at the
establishment level. If the Starbucks Corporation opens 100 new stores in a year and closes 50, the gross job
creation and destruction from the establishment births and deaths (as well as from continuing establishments) would
be attributed to the 2500+ firm size category.

16

s
g Ms
jt   0   1 x j  Z j  t   jt

where g Ms
takes one of three different measures, depending on the regression, representing
jt
either the gross job creation rate, the gross job birth rate, or the gross job destruction rate for
firms of small firms in industry j. These measures are define above. Likewise, as above, xj
represents the share of small businesses in industry j out of all small business across all
industries. This measure is the same as what was summarized in Figure 2 and Table 1. Zj is a
vector of industry level controls and μt is a vector of year dummies. The industry level controls
include industry wide measures of gross job creation rate, the gross job birth rate, and the gross
job destruction rate. The sample for this regression is all 4-digit industries with non-missing
measures of M sjt during the 2003-2006 period.

This gives us 929 observations for the small

business gross job creation regressions, 666 observations for the small business gross job birth
rate regression, and 656 observations for the small business gross job destruction regression.
The difference in sample sizes is due to more missing data for the measures of births and job
destruction relative to job creation at the 4-digit industry level.
Table 5 reports the estimation results. We estimate each specification first where each
industry is equally weighted and second where each industry is weighted in proportion to its
share of small businesses. The weighted estimation is similar to a grouped data estimator and
would deliver the same point estimates as firm level data if each small firms employment share
within an industry were equal.16 The results support our earlier claims that the "typical" small
business does not create jobs. The small business share of an industry has little to say about small
business job creation through new small businesses or small business job destruction (columns 4
16

This is a reasonable approximation since all firms have fewer than 20 employees, so there would be very little
variation in the employment share within an industry if this were estimated with the underlying administrative micro
data.

17

and 5 of Table 5). However, it is a powerful predictor of weaker than average small business job
creation for existing firms (columns 1-3 of Table 5). The most common small businesses (those
with a high xj shown in Table 1) grow slower than average. These results hold even controlling
for each industry’s overall characteristics (comparing column 1 vs. column 2 of Table 5). One
may be concerned that that the difference between the strong effects for job creation relative to
the no effects found for job births and job destruction could stem from differences in the samples
across the regression. Column 3 of Table 5 shows such concerns are unwarranted. In this
regression, we restrict the job creation regression to only include observations that had nonmissing job births and job destruction. The job creation results are unaltered with this additional
sample restriction.
According the to the weighted results, for each percentage point increase in the share of
small businesses, an industry's small business job creation rate falls by a little less than threequarters of a percentage point. To provide greater context, a one-standard deviation increase in
xj (1.1 percentage points) reduces the job creation rate by roughly 0.8 percentage points.
average weighted job creation rate for the sample was 14.6 percent.

The

So, a one-standard

deviation increase in the industry share of small businesses reduces the small business job
creation rate by about 6 percent (0.8 divided by 14.6). When industries are treated equally, a one
standard deviation increase in xj reduces the industry small business job creation rate by roughly
8 percent. All the results are robust to alternative specifications of industry controls.
It may initially be surprising that so little job creation comes from the industries that most
small business owners are likely to enter. However it is consistent with an understanding of the
important heterogeneity among small businesses.

Most small businesses (those highlighted in

Table 1) start small and stay small throughout the life of their business. Collectively, we can
18

conclude three things from the results in Tables 2-5. First, there is substantial skewness across
firms in the extent to which they grow over time. While some firms do grow (in terms of the
number of employees) over time, most do not. Only a small portion of small firms add a more
than ten employees over the life of their business.

To this end, the bulk of employment in

mature firms is still concentrated in firms with fewer than 20 employees. Second, even among
new or young firms, most firms do not grow by any meaningful amount, even conditional on
survival. Finally, a portion of the heterogeneity in employment growth for small firms is
explained by industry.

While many mature businesses in manufacturing are quite large, most

mature businesses in other industries like construction remain quite small. The industries that
tend to remain small are the industries that tend to comprise the bulk of small businesses.
We wish again to stress that even within these small business intensive industries there is
considerable heterogeneity and skewness. The focus of this paper is on the behavior of small
firms, which in our selected small business intensive industries account for nearly half of the
employment. John Haltiwanger, in his discussion of this paper that follows, looks closely at the
other half. It turns out that in many of these industries where employment in small firms is
overrepresented, the firms within these industries can also be more dynamic than average. In
retail trade, for example, the industry is composed of local shopkeepers and big box stores. In
the retail trade industry, job creation was almost 10 percentage points higher than average over
the two year period from 2003 to 2005 relative to other industries. However, almost all of the job
creation was due to a relatively small number of high impact firms. The high degree of skewness,
especially in these industries, makes analyzing the averages very deceiving. As we show, the
typical (modal or median) small business is not creating jobs. In the last section, we return to the
potential implication of these findings for public policy.
19

B.

Small Business Innovation

In this sub-section, we document that there is also substantial heterogeneity across firms in the
extent to which they successfully innovate along observable measures.

Again, while some

authors have shown that a large share of measured innovation (patent applications for example)
is attributed to small businesses, the converse is not true.17 Most small firms do not seem to
innovate along those observable margins. Before proceeding, we want to stress that it is hard to
measure all aspects of potential small business innovation via the surveys we are analyzing.

As

a result, we focus on some broad measures of innovation that are asked of firms within the
surveys.
We begin by documenting the fact that very few new firms innovate via patent,
trademarks, or copyrights during the first 4 or 5 years of their existence using two data sources.
First, we continue our use of the Kaufman Firm Survey focusing on the same sample as above.
The KFS survey asks respondents to report separately whether they have already applied or are
in the process of applying for any patents, copyrights, or trademarks. We focus on the responses
in 2008 when the firms have been in business for four years already. These results using the
2008 data from the KFS are shown in Table 6. Within the first four years of business, only 2.7
percent of the businesses in the sample had already applied or were in the process of applying for
patents. Copyright and trademark usage is slightly higher but still most firms do not innovate at
least according to these crude observable measures. According to the KFS, nearly 85 percent of
small businesses did not acquire a patent, trademark or copyright during their first four years of
existence.

17

See Acs and Audretsch (1990) and the cites within.

20

We augment our analysis of patents and other measure of innovation using data from the
Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics II (PSED).18

The PSED started with a nationally

representative sample of 34,000 individuals during the fall of 2005 and the early winter of 2006.
An initial screening survey identified 1,214 "nascent entrepreneurs". To be considered a nascent
entrepreneur, individuals had to meet the following four criteria. First, the individual had to
currently consider themselves as involved in the firm creation process. Second, they had to have
engaged in some start up activity in the past twelve months. Third, they had to expect to own all
or part of the new firm. Finally, the initiative, at the time of the initial screening survey, could
not have progressed to the point that it could have been considered an operating business. The
goal was to sample individuals who were in the process of establishing a new business.
In the winter of 2006, after the initial screening interview, the 1,214 respondents that had
been initially identified as being in the process of starting a business were surveyed about a wide
variety of the activities associated with their business start up. As part of the first real interview,
respondents were asked detailed questions about their motivation for starting the business, the
current activities undertaken as part of the start up process, the competitive environment in
which the business would take place, and their expectation of desired future business size and
activities.

Follow up interviews occurred annually for 4 years so that the data has a panel

dimension. When analyzing the PSED data, we use three samples. The first is a sample of all
1,214 PSED respondents. The second sample is the 602 respondents who actually had positive
revenues during their first interview in 2006. This latter sample distinguishes people who only
said that they were planning to start a business from those who actually followed through and

18

There was an early wave of the PSED (PSED I) that was a test run for the bigger PSED II. We do not use the initial data in
our analysis. All data and documentation for the PSED can be found at http://www.psed.isr.umich.edu/psed/data.

21

engaged in some market business activity.

The third sample is the 162 respondents who had

positive revenues from the same business venture in 2010, four years after the first interview.
In terms of innovation activity, the PSED asks three different types of questions. First,
the PSED respondents were asked a similar question as the KFS respondents with respect to
patent, trademark, and copyright application. However, instead of being asked about the three
measures separately, they were asked one joint question. As seen from the PSED data in Table
7, only between 5 and 6 percent of the new firms applied for patents, trademarks, and copyrights
during their first few years in existence. By the fifth year of operation, surviving firms appear
similar to those in the KFS with roughly 17 percent having obtained a patent, trademark or
copyright.
Of course patents, copyrights, and trademarks are imperfect measures of innovation.
Many firms can innovate without applying for a patent, and many firms can trademark their
company name without doing any real innovation.

We focus first on these measures because

they are easily observable in both the KFS and the PSED.

The PSED, however, also has

broader measures of innovation. In a separate set of question, businesses were asked directly
whether they have "developed any proprietary technology, processes, or procedures". This is a
slightly broader measure of innovation than patent, trademark and copyright applications in that
it conceivably covers a more fluid set of activities that the business owner could relay about the
innovation in production or business model that is taking place within their business. Yet, only
between 6 and 8 percent of new businesses (depending on the sample) reported than they had
developed any proprietary business practices or technology during their first few years of

22

business. Even conditional on survival five years later, 80 percent of firms still report not
developing any proprietary technology, process or procedure.19
The PSED asks one last broad question about the potential innovation taking place within
the firm.

This question asks about how the product or service produced by the businesses

compares with the products and services of other producers within the market.

Specifically,

PSED respondents were asked: “Right now, are there many, few, or no other businesses offering
the same products or services to your [intended] customers?” Respondents were allowed to
provide one of the following answers: many, few, or no other. This question is informative in
the sense that it states whether the firm is providing a new product or service to existing
customers or an existing product or service to potentially new customers.

Across the three

samples, between 36 and 43 percent of new business owners report providing a similar service to
an existing customer base as existing firms in the market.

These businesses, more often than

not, provide a standardized service (e.g., plumbing) to existing local customers.

Conversely,

Table 7 also shows that fewer than 20 percent of respondents reported that no one other business
was provided their expected product or service to their expected customer base.
There was substantial variation in the response to this question across business owners in
different industries. For example, owners who reported starting a business in the professional,
health, construction and real estate industries, were between 7.5 and 9.5 percentage points more
likely to report saying that they were staring their business in an area where there were many
current providers of the service to their expected customer base.

Owners in these same

19

We should be wary of putting too much emphasis on self reports of innovative behavior by small businesses.
However, most behavior stories of how the business owners would respond to such questions would likely lead us to
believe that the innovation numbers are upper bounds on actual behavior. This would occur if the respondents were
more likely to report that they were innovative even if there was no actual innovation taking place within the
business.

23

industries were nearly 10 percentage points less likely to report that they were providing a new
product or service or were targeting an underserved customer base.
4.

Ex-Ante Expectations About Growth and Innovation

In this section, we document that many business owners have no expectation or desire to grow or
innovate when they start their business. One of the strengths of the PSED data is that it asks the
nascent business owners about their expectations for the business, their desired future business
size, and for their motivations for starting the business.

For example, all new firms were asked

the following: “Which of the following two statements best describe your preference for the
future size of this new business: ‘I want this new business to be as large as possible’ or ‘I want a
size I can manage myself or with a few key employees’”.

The top row of Table 7 shows the

response to this question across our three different PSED samples.

For the sample of those

businesses who lasted to 2010, we report their expectations when they were first asked in 2006.
Nearly three quarters of all respondents, regardless of sample, reported they wanted to keep their
business small.
Of course the meaning of a manageable size could vary across respondents. In a separate
part of the survey, the respondents were asked to provide their expectation as to the number of
employees that the firm would employ when the firm was 5 years old.
responses for each sample when they were first asked in 2006.

Again, we report the

The median number of

employees was between 3 or 4, depending on the sample. Even the 75th percentile of responses
was small as respondents only expected to employ between 6 and 10 employees. Not only do
very few small businesses grow, most of them do not want or expect to grow when they form
their new business.

24

The PSED also asks about expected innovative activity. Specifically, businesses where
asked, at the inception of starting their business, whether they expected to innovate in the future.
These results are also shown in Table 8. For example, only roughly 10 percent of all new
businesses reported that they plan to develop proprietary technology, processes, or procedures in
the future. The numbers are slightly higher with respect to a business's expectation about future
patent, copyright and trademark behavior. This is likely because many firms trademark the name
of their business.
Firms in the PSED were also asked if they expected that research and development will
be a major priority for the business.

Again, as seen in Table 8, nearly 80 percent of all new

businesses report that they have no plans for research and development to be a majority priority
for the business when they are establishing the business.
The results in Table 8 suggest that the observed lack of innovation and growth may be
deliberate; When starting their business most business owners have no plans to grow or innovate
in the future. Interestingly, despite new business owners’ expectations that their businesses will
remain small with little innovation, they remain committed to starting and running a firm. In the
next section, we examine the stated motives of nascent small business owners and explore how
these motives correlate with expectations.
5.

Motivations For Starting Businesses

To explore heterogeneity in founders’ motives, we again turn to the PSED data. As part of the
initial survey of the PSED, the business owners were asked “Why did you want to start this new
business?”. The respondent could report up to two potential motives. The respondents provided
unstructured answers and the PSED staff coded the answers into 44 specific categories. All the
categories are listed in Appendix Table A2, along with the number of all PSED respondents who
25

provided the reason on either their first report (in the first parentheses) or on their second report
(in the second parentheses).
We took the raw responses to the question “Why did you start your business” and created
five broad categories of our own. The five categories were: (1) non pecuniary reasons, (2)
reasons related to the generation of income, (3) reasons related to the desire to develop a new
product or because they had a good business idea, (4) reasons related to the fact the respondent
has no better job options, and (5) all other reasons. The main responses in the non pecuniary
category include: “want to be my own boss”, “want flexibility over my schedule”, “want to work
from home”, “enjoy the work/it is my hobby”. The main responses in the generating income
category include: “to make money” or “need extra income”. The main responses in the new
product/business idea category include: “satisfy a business need”, “there is high demand for this
product/business”, “untapped market”, and “lots of experience at this type of work”. A full
breakdown of our classification of the raw responses into these five broad categories can also be
found in Appendix Table A2.
Table 9 provides the distribution of first responses by category (column A) and the
distribution of either the first or second response by category (column B) for the three PSED
samples discussed above. Three preliminary things should be noted. First, only 60 percent of
respondents provided a second response. Second, given that the respondents could provide any
answer they wanted, the first and second response often fell into the same broad category (e.g.,
answer 1 was “be own boss” and answer 2 was “have flexibility over schedule”, both of which
we count as being a non pecuniary benefit of starting a business). Third, summing down column
A exactly equals 100 percent while summing down column B exceeds 100 percent given that
respondents could report a second answer.
26

The main result from Table 9 is that there is substantial heterogeneity across respondents
in their reported primary reason for starting a small business. In particular, non pecuniary
benefits play a leading role for most respondents. These results are consistent across all three
PSED samples. For example, between 35 and 37 percent of first reports across all samples
referred to non pecuniary reasons being the primary driver of the business start up decision.
Combining the first and second reports, over half of all respondents in all samples stated that non
pecuniary benefits were an important component of their start up decision.
The second most common response for the business start up motivation was having a
good business idea/creating a new product. Roughly 30 percent of first reports and roughly 38
percent of combined reports referred to the fact that the reason the business was started was
because of a good business idea or a new product.
to “generate income”.

Many people also reported that they wanted

Answers in this broad category represented roughly 20 percent of first

reports and 32 percent of combined reports.

Finally, very few people reported starting the

business because of a lack of other employment options.20
In the remainder of this section, we explore to what extent the respondents’ reported
motives can predict their expected and actual values of growth and innovation measures. We
focus on two motives in particular: new business idea and non pecuniary. The first is the motive
most closely associated with the traditional role of an entrepreneur whereas the second is
typically ignored or only considered anecdotally. To do this, we define a dummy variable for
each motive that is equal to one if that motive was identified in either the first or second mention.
Then we run a simple regression of the various measures described in Tables 7 and 8 from the

20

Ardagna and Lusardi (2008) show that the lack of employment options is a much more important motivation for
starting a small business in developing economies.

27

PSED on the two dummy variables.21 Note that since a motive can be identified in either
mention, it is possible for both dummies to be equal to one. The results to these regressions are
shown in Tables 10a and 10b. We only show these results for the first two PSID samples (in
Tables 10a and 10b, respectively). Given the small sample size for the third sample (those that
are still earning revenues in 2010), power is an issue for the interpreting the coefficients. We do
wish to note, however, that even in this sample the patterns for the signs of the coefficient were
very similar to what are shown for the other samples in Tables 10a and 10b.
For each sample in Table 10, we show five sets of results.

The first column is the

constant from the regression and represents the unconditional mean for those individuals who
never report starting a business for either "non pecuniary" or "create a new product" motives.
The next two columns show the coefficients on the two dummy variables for the reason that the
business was started. These coefficients can be interpreted as the percentage difference in
probability of the outcome (or difference in employment forecast) relative to respondents that
mention neither business idea or non pecuniary motives.22 In the fourth column, we show the
difference in the coefficient on the non pecuniary motivation dummy (column 3) relative to the
coefficient on the business idea motivation dummy (column 2). This can be interpreted as the
difference in probability of the outcome (or employment) for those that mention exactly one of
the motives. For example, respondents who specified a business idea and did not mention non
pecuniary motives were 13 percent less likely than those that specified non pecuniary motives

21

Estimating the saturated version of this regression with an interaction term had almost no effect on the point
estimates and p-values shown in Tables 10a and 10b. We also estimated the same regression with each category that
could be named in either mention represented. This also did not change the results.
22
Respondents that mention neither motive, would have specified either for income reasons, lack of other options,
or some other motive. The vast majority of these cases specified income motives .

28

and not a business idea to enter a market already offering the same product or service

In

column 5, we show the p-value of a two-sided test for equality.
Individuals who start their business because they think they have a good idea or because
they want to create a new product are much more likely to 1) want to grow, 2) want to innovate,
and 3) actually innovate. Conversely, those who start for non pecuniary reasons are less likely
to want to grow, less likely to want to innovate, and are less likely to actually innovate.

As

mentioned above, those with non pecuniary motives were much more likely to enter an already
crowded market relative to those with a new business idea. Likewise, they were 5.1 percentage
points less likely to report that they have already developed some proprietary technology or
processes as part of their business start up and are 9.0 percentage points less likely to report
expecting to get a patent, trademark, or copyright in the future.

The p-values on both these

differences are 0.01.
As can also be seen in Table 10, those who reported starting their business because they
had a new idea were much more likely to want to be big in 5 years and to grow their business
than those who started for non pecuniary reasons.

For example, those who started because they

had a good idea were 8.3 percentage points less likely to report wanting to remain small opposed
to growing the business.
We wish to highlight a few additional results not shown in Table 10. First, there is little
statistical difference in survival rates to 2010 for those who reported non pecuniary benefits as a
primary motivation of starting the business relative to those who reported a new idea as the
reason they started. If anything, in some samples and specifications, those that reported non

29

pecuniary benefits as a primary motivation survived with a higher probability.23 Second, there
is no statistical difference of actual firm size across the different groups based on the reason they
started the business in 2010.

The reason for this is that nearly all firms have only 1 or fewer

employees even four years after the business started.

There is not much variation across the

firms in this small sample of survivors. This is consistent with the results shown in 3 showing
that most surviving firms remain really small.

Finally, there is some variation across industries

with respect to non pecuniary reasons being an important driver relative to wanting to create a
new product.

Specifically, those in the finance industry were statistically much more likely,

relative to other industries, to have people report non pecuniary benefits be an important motive
for starting in that industry. A similar pattern appears among those starting businesses in retail
trade. Two industries where the dominant reason to start the business was because of a desire to
create a new product/service was in manufacturing and wholesale trade. The data lack enough
power to draw decisive conclusions about the other industries.
The results in this section show that there is substantial ex-ante heterogeneity across
individuals in why they started their businesses. Only a fraction of firms start because they have
a good business reason. However, these firms at the time of inception report a higher desire to
grow and innovate and higher actual realizations of innovation. Many firms, however, report
non pecuniary benefits as being an important driver of small business behavior. Incorporating
such ex-ante heterogeneity into models of small business dynamics will almost certainly alter
conclusions about the importance of ex-post measures of heterogeneity such as stochastic

23

This would be consistent with a model where non pecuniary benefits are a large part of the return to small
business formation as shown in Pugsley (2011). In that model, individuals will be willing to stay in business even if
they get a bad productivity draw because the pecuniary returns are just a small portion of the total return to business
entry.

30

productivity draws or binding financial constraints. We turn to this discussion in the next
section.
6.

Why Heterogeneity in Starting Motives/Expectations Can Matter

There are a number of reasons why ignoring the ex-ante heterogeneity in motives and
expectations may matter. We sketch how this ex-ante heterogeneity confounds inferences in a
number of relevant contexts. We consider two literatures: firm dynamics and the measurement of
the private equity risk-return tradeoff. Finally, we also assess how our work relates to the recent
papers documenting the nature and growth patterns of small businesses in developing economies.
A.

Firm Dynamics

In theoretical models, differences in employment growth across firms are attributed to either
differences in entrepreneurial ability (e.g., Lucas, 1978), differences in realized productivity
draws (e.g., Simon and Bonini (1958); Jovanovic (1982); Pakes and Ericson (1989); Hopenhayn
(1992)), differences in access to capital markets (e.g., Evans and Jovanovic (1989);
Vereshchagina and Hopenhayn (2009)), or some combinations of the above (e.g., Clementi and
Hopenhayn (2006)). While all of the above highlights some potential drivers of firm dynamics,
the results we document in the prior sections suggest that these stories are, at best, incomplete.
It is not only differences in luck, talent, or credit market access are the only determinants of firm
size.

As we show above, there is also substantial ex-ante heterogeneity in the desires and

expectations of new business owners with respect to their growth process. In other words, some
firms do not grow or innovate simply because they do not want to grow or innovate.
What drives these differences in ex-ante expectations and desires across owners of newly
formed firms with respect to their desire to grow or innovate? The results in the prior sections
point to at least two potential channels. First, many small business owners start their businesses,
31

in part, because of the non pecuniary benefits associated with small business ownership.

As

seen from the PSED data, many small business owners report starting their business because they
value the control and flexibility provided by small business ownership.

If these benefits

diminish with firm size, individuals who start for these reasons will prefer to keep their
businesses small. We do find evidence of such correlations in the data: those business owners
that report starting their business in part for non pecuniary reasons were much more likely to
want to keep their firm size small well into the future.
Second, some businesses may stay persistently small because they are in industries which
have low natural efficient scales. Many small businesses are dentists, plumbers, real estate and
insurance agents, small shop keepers, and beauticians. Within these industries, the productivity
of the firm is directly linked to the individual's skill set.

Given the fixed costs of production

may be small relative to the variable costs, optimal firm size may be quite small. As a result,
firms may start with no expectations of growth given that their natural scale is quite low.24
These firms may be particularly attractive to business owners driven by non pecuniary motives.
Pugsley (2011) and Pugsley and Hurst (2011) formalize the insights put forth in this
paper by writing down models of small business formation and small business dynamics where
individuals are allowed to have differential utility from small business ownership and industries
differ in their natural returns to scale. In these models, they show that many of the predictions
of the standard models of firm dynamics can be replicated in a model with no differences across
firms in entrepreneurial ability and no difference across firms in their financing constraints.
24

This idea is consistent with recent research by Holmes and Stevens (2010) which attributes the variation in firm
size within narrowly defined manufacturing industries to differences between large plants who produce standardized
goods and small plants that make custom or specialty goods. Similar differentiated product stories can also
potentially explain the within industry size variation in other narrow industries like retail (big box stores versus
smaller mom and pop stores), health care (small doctor practices versus hospitals), or lawyers (small law offices
versus big corporate law firms). Explaining the variation in within industry firm size is an interesting avenue for
future research.

32

There are two important results from these papers. First, Pugsley and Hurst (2011) show that the
existence of non pecuniary benefits can generate a positive relationship between wealth and
starting a business, by making business ownership a normal good, where wealthier individuals
“purchase” these benefits as their marginal utility of consumption diminishes. Second, Pugsley
(2011) shows that there is not a one-for-one mapping between the distribution of firm size and
productivity draws (like the ones emphasized in much of the literature outlined above) when
industries differ in their fixed costs and owners have a preference for keeping their business
small, which cautions against using unconditional firm level dynamics to estimate a process for
entrepreneurial productivity.
Finally, much of the empirical work on firm dynamics proceeds by studying either the
universe of firms, or focuses specifically on a sector thought to be representative of that universe.
Typically, this is the manufacturing sector where micro-level administrative data have
historically been the most available. It is in this empirical context where the applicability of
“Gibrat’s” law, which states firm growth rates are on average independent of size, or why the
distribution of firm sizes appears to follow a particular power law (“Zipf’s” law) are frequently
demonstrated.25 Why these empirical regularities appear at the aggregate level is an interesting
question. However, consistent with Pugsley (2011) it does not suggest that imposing this
structure on a particular industry, or assuming a representative industry typified by
manufacturing, is appropriate. The concentration of small businesses in industries varies
considerably, and the heterogeneity we consider is especially important for industries we

25

See, for example, Sutton (1997) and Gabaix (2008).

33

highlight in this paper. There is considerable cross industry variation in the distribution of firm
sizes, even conditional on average firm size.26
B.

Understanding the Risk-Return Tradeoff

There is a separate literature assessing the risk-return trade off of small business owners.

For

example, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) document that the returns to investing in
private equity (business ownership) are no higher than the returns to investing in public equity
despite the poor diversification and higher risk. Their focus is only on the pecuniary returns of
private business investment. This spans a large class of businesses, many of which are the small
businesses we study here. However, even among venture-backed startups, which are a tiny
fraction of small businesses, the risk-return tradeoff looks poor. Hall and Woodward (2010)
show that even among the highly skilled population of venture-backed entrepreneurs, potential
entrepreneurs would be roughly indifferent between salaried employment and launching a
venture-backed startup considering the high idiosyncratic risk of the payoffs to entrepreneurship
Not surprisingly, a model with non pecuniary benefits can help to explain these findings.
If there are private benefits to small business ownership (relative to allocating effort to the labor
market), the measured pecuniary return could be lower than the total return. Our results above
suggest that for many individuals, non pecuniary benefits are an important motive for starting
their small business.

While the results above are based on survey reports, they are consistent

with the work of Hamilton (2000) that shows the median small business owner receives lower
accumulated earnings over time relative to paid employment.27

26

For example, Figure 3 highlights these patterns at broad industry groupings.
Hamilton (2000) does not take into account of income underreporting by the self employed when performing his
analysis. Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2011) show that such income underreporting by the self employed is important.
Although, the results of Hamilton are mitigated when income underreporting is account for, it still appears that the
median self employed individual takes a pecuniary earnings loss when becoming self employed.
27

34

Overall, our results suggest that for many individuals, non pecuniary benefits could be an
important factor driving their small business formation. Incorporating such preferences into our
models of small business formations can alter our assessment of the risk-return tradeoff of small
business ownership.
C.

Small Businesses In Developing Economies
Recent work has emphasized the fact that most small businesses in developing economies

do not grow, do not innovate, and are started because of a lack of jobs in the larger firms within
the economy.

For example, La Porta and Shleifer (2008) examine the importance of the

informal sector in developing economies. They conclude that, on average, the small firms that
populate the informal sector in developing economies are much less productive than similar
small firms in the formal sector.

As a result of the low quality of the inputs into production

(including human capital), it is not surprising that the small firms in the informal sector do not
grow or innovate in any observable way. Banerjee and Duflo (2011) document the existence of
"reluctant entrepreneurs" in developing economies. They find that most individuals who own a
small business in the developing countries they analyze do not grow, are not profitable, and often
do so because of the lack of jobs in larger, established firms.
The results in our paper both complement this literature and show that different
mechanisms are at play in a developed country like the United States. In terms of similarities
with the literature on small businesses in developing economies, it is true that most small
businesses in the U.S. do not grow. However, the reason that small business seem to exist and
the nature of the small business owners seem quite different. In the U.S., many of the small
business owners are highly skilled (lawyers, doctors, dentists, etc.).

It is a well established fact

that there is little relationship between formal years of schooling and the propensity for either
35

small business entry or survival.28 Additionally, as we have shown above, very few of the small
business owners in the U.S. (less than 4 percent) report starting a business because of a lack of
employment options. In other words, it does not appear that the U.S. small business owners are
"reluctant entrepreneurs".
Overall, our results showing that most small business in the U.S. do not want to grow or
innovate is consistent with small businesses in developing economies, the underlying reasons for
this may be very different. A more formal analysis of the similarities and differences between
small businesses within developed and developing economies would be a worthy area for future
research.
7.

Policy Implications

Economic arguments for subsidizing small businesses hinge on small businesses being important
contributors to aggregate innovation and growth where market forces alone fail to allocate
sufficient resources to the sector. Market failures may stem from technological spillovers ignored
by entrepreneurs or financial constraints that inhibit an optimal quantity of capital from reaching
the small business sector. The subject of entrepreneurship and technological spillovers is well
studied in the endogenous growth literature (e.g. Audretsch et al. (2006), Acs and Audretsch
(2009)). If a substantial portion of R&D occurs in small firms, the social returns to
entrepreneurship could far exceed the private returns. Jones and Williams (1989), for example,
find the optimal level of investment in R&D to be 2 to 4 times the observed level of investment.
Additionally, subsidizing small businesses may be appropriate if liquidity constraints or other
financial market imperfections prevent small businesses from securing the financing they need to
bring their innovations to market (Evans and Jovanovic (1989); Evans and Leighton (1989)).
28

See, for example, Evans and Leighton (1989) or Asoni (2011).

36

Given the belief that there are social spillovers from small business innovation or that
small businesses face liquidity constraints, many developed economies enact policies that favor
small businesses relative to established firms.

The subsidies to small businesses could come in

two potential forms. First, there may be direct subsidies to small businesses where the explicit
intent is to promote small business activity. Within the United States, for example, small
business subsidies include providing subsidized or guaranteed loans to small businesses,
providing small businesses with access to special lending programs, exempting small businesses
from various regulations, providing small businesses preferential treatment when awarding
government contracts, and providing small businesses with preferential treatment through the tax
code.29 Adam Looney, in his discussion of our paper that follows, discusses a number of these
government mandated small business subsidies in the United States. These direct small business
subsidies are usually linked explicitly to firm size. Firms with less than a certain amount of
employees are eligible for the subsidy while firms with more than a certain amount of employees
are not eligible for the subsidy. As a result, many of the small business subsidies promote small
business entry but do not promote small business growth because if the firms grow beyond a
certain size the subsidy no long applies.
Second, there also are indirect subsidies that can promote small business activity. For
example, the fact that non pecuniary attributes are not taxed results in sectors where non
pecuniary benefits are a larger fraction of total compensation being tax preferred relative to other
sectors. To the extent that small business ownership offers larger non pecuniary benefits relative
to owning a larger business or being a wage worker, the small business sector would be tax
preferred even if there are no other direct subsidies. Additionally, there is a large literature
29

See De Rugy (2005) for a detailed discussion of the various ways the U.S. government provides subsidies to U.S.
small businesses.

37

showing that small business owners are much more likely to underreport their income to tax
authorities relative to wage and salary workers.30 Again, if it is easier to underreport income to
tax authorities if one owns a small business, the small business sector again would be tax
preferred relative to other sectors even if there are no additional direct small business subsidies.
The point we want to emphasize in this section is that while policy makers and researchers often
invoke the potential benefits of direct small business subsidies, there is very little quantitative
research documenting the actual benefits and costs of small business subsidies. The results in
our paper suggest that the potential costs may be nontrivial.
The potential costs associated with small business activity come from two sources. First,
as we show above, the bulk of small businesses report ex-ante that they do not want to grow nor
do they want to innovate. And, as anticipated, most small firms do not grow or innovate. Linking
small business subsidies to firm size may support the handful of firms that eventually turn into
Google or Microsoft, but they also stimulate real estate agents, small law firms, and construction
workers where the social spillovers and growth potential may be much smaller. To the extent
that these subsidies alter the behavior of firms who start for reasons unrelated to growth and
innovation, the policies can be distortionary by allocating more resources to the small business
sector than would be otherwise optimal.

Second, as mentioned above, the structure of most

current direct small business subsidies is to link the subsidies to firm size.

As a result, if the

benefits associated with subsidizing small business activity comes from the small businesses
actually growing, the policies, as currently structured, may actually inhibit firm growth. If a firm
grows beyond a certain size, the small business subsidy no longer applies.

30

See Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2011) for a recent discussion of this literature.

38

In a companion paper, Pugsley and Hurst (2011) illustrate the potential costs of small
business subsidies in a simple static general equilibrium model of small business formation and
occupational choice.

Within the model, industries differ by their natural return to scale.

Households differ by the size of the non pecuniary benefit they receive (in flow utility) from
starting their own business.

To highlight the potential costs of subsidizing small business

activity in the model, we assume that there are no differences across individual in their talent,
there are no social spillovers from small business formation and there are no liquidity constraints
preventing firm formation.

These extreme assumptions allow us to focus on potential costs of

subsidizing small businesses in a world where individuals get non pecuniary benefits from small
firm ownership. Individuals in the model can either allocate their labor to running a business or
working for some other business. Household run businesses cannot grow to their efficient scale
without forfeiting the utility flow.
The model makes many predictions which can inform researchers and policy makers
about the potential costs of small business subsidies. First, subsidizing small business (funded
with taxes on labor income) will distort the allocation of production within the economy to
smaller scale businesses. Individuals choosing to start a small business trade-off the size of their
non pecuniary benefits from owning a small business with the loss in wages they would incur
from foregoing the benefits of agglomeration.

When small business activity is directly

subsidized, the economy as a whole becomes less productive given the response of individuals to
work in small (subsidized) self-owned firms as opposed to establishing larger firms which can
produce at lower average costs by taking advantage of the returns to scale.

Notice, such

distortions could occur even in a world where there are no direct subsidies to small businesses
and only the indirect subsidies discussed above.
39

Moreover, in such a model where the non pecuniary benefit of small business ownership
is a normal good, the subsidies to small businesses are regressive. The reason for this is that the
high wealth individuals are going to be the ones that are much more likely to start a business in
the no subsidy world because they are more able to afford (in utility terms) the foregone benefits
of agglomeration when they start their business. For the wealthy, the small business subsidy is
simply a transfer tied to activity that they were more likely to do anyway.

Not only do the

existence of non pecuniary benefits to small business ownership result in subsidies being welfare
reducing, lower wealth households suffer more from the subsidy than do higher wealth
households.
To our knowledge, there is no empirical work that evaluates whether subsidizing small
businesses is a positive net present value venture.

Addressing this question seems like a very

important area for future research. Our work suggests that subsidies may be less distortionary if
they were targeted at growth and innovation as opposed to being mostly linked to firm size.
Such policies could address the concerns raised by our results in at least two ways. First, we
show that most small businesses operate in industries with potentially smaller natural scales.
Business owners with little intention to grow or innovate may select into these industries for that
very reason. By focusing the subsidy on the intensive margin, the subsidy is more likely to be
taken up by a business owner focused on growth or innovative activity. Subsidies could lower
the cost of credit for existing firms, and by increasing their value entice productive entrepreneurs
with high wage employment opportunity costs. Second, if non pecuniary compensation is
independent of the scale of the firm, the incidence of an expansion subsidy would be undistorted
by non pecuniary benefits. If anything, non pecuniary benefits may help separate businesses that
want to grow from businesses that would prefer to remain small. Of course there may be other
40

social virtues to non-innovative small businesses, such as supporting communities and
neighborhoods, which are aided by subsidizing the entry and exit margins. However, when
targeting job creation or innovative risk taking, our findings suggest caution when supporting
businesses purely by size. At a minimum, future research is necessary to better understand both
the costs and benefits of subsidizing small business activity.
8.

Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown that there is substantial skewness in the desires and expectations of
individuals who start small businesses. Specifically, the vast majority of small business owners
do not expect to grow, report not wanting to grow, never expect to innovate along observable
dimensions, and report not wanting to innovate along observable dimensions. We also show that
there is also substantial heterogeneity in the reported reasons for why individuals start their
business.

In particular, only about one-third of new businesses (on the eve of their start up)

reported that they were starting their business because they have a product or service that they
want to bring to market. Instead, the most common response for why individuals were starting
their business was the existence of non pecuniary benefits. Individuals reported that they liked
being their own boss and like the flexibility that small business ownership provided.
Our results suggest that much of the current literature has overlooked an important
component of many small businesses.

Essentially all of the current literature on firm dynamics

explains the ex-post distribution of firm size with models emphasizing differences in
entrepreneurial talent, differences in entrepreneurial luck, and differential access to credit
markets.

The results in this paper, however, suggest that another factor may be at play: many

small business owners just do not wish to grow big or innovate along observable dimensions in
any meaningful way.

The paper shows two potential reasons for the ex-ante differences in
41

desires and expectations with respect to future growth. First, the natural scale of some industries
may be quite small. For example, the fixed costs to be a plumber, barber, lawyer, or insurance
agent may be small relative to the variable costs making the returns to scale quite small.
Second, the existence of non pecuniary benefits of owning a small business (because of
increased flexibility and control) may cause individuals to forgo some natural benefits of
agglomeration in exchange for higher utility.

Regardless of the exact reason, most individuals

who start their small business have little desire or expectation to grow their business beyond
having a few employees.
Recognizing these characteristics common to many small businesses has immediate
policy implications. Often subsidies targeted at increasing innovative risk taking and overcoming
financing constraints are focused on small businesses. Our analysis cautions that this treatment
may be misguided. We believe that these targets are better reached through lowering the costs of
expansion, so they are taken up by the much smaller share of small businesses aspiring to grow
and innovate. In fact, the US Small Business Administration already partners with venture
capitalists whose high powered incentives are aligned with finding these small businesses with a
desire to be in the tail of the firm size distribution. We also think a missing component of the
academic and policy discussion is a formal cost-benefit analysis associated with small business
subsidies. To do this, more work is needed on the potential frictions to small business growth
and on the externalities associated with small business growth.
Lastly, we conclude that our results suggest that it is often inappropriate for researchers
to use the universe of small business (or self employment) data to test standard theories of
entrepreneurship. Most small businesses do not match our conceptual measures of
entrepreneurship which focuses on the desire to innovate or grow. Researchers interested in
42

testing such specific theories of entrepreneurship may need to use more specialized data sets like
the ones that track small businesses seeking venture capital funding.

43

References
Acs, Zoltan and David Audretsch (1990). Innovation and Small Firms, MIT Press: Cambridge,
Ma.
Acs, Zoltan and David Audretsch (2009).
"The Knowledge Spillover Theory of
Entrepreneurship." Small Business Economics (32), 15-30.
Audretsch, David, Max Keilbach, and Erik Lehmann (2006). Entrepreneurship and Economic
Growth. Oxford University Press, Inc. New York, New York.
Ardagna, Sivia and Annamaria Lusardi (2008). "Explaining International Differences in
Entrepreneurship: The Role of Individual Characteristics and Regulatory Constraints", NBER
Working Paper 14012.
Asoni, Andrea (2011). "What Drives Entrepreneurship?", University of Chicago Mimeo.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Ester Duflo (2011). Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to
Fight Global Poverty. PublicAffairs.
Bhide, Amar (2000). The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford University Press.
Clementi, Gian Luca and Hugo Hopenhayn (2006). "A Theory of Financing Constraints and
Firm Dynamics", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1), 229-65.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh (1996). Job Creation and Destruction. MIT
Press.
Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, C.J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Alfred Nucci, Kristin
Sandusky (2007). "Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small Businesses: Integrating the
Employer and Nonemployer Universes." NBER Working Paper 13266.
De Rugy, Veronique (2005). "Are Small Businesses The Engine of Growth?". American
Enterprise Institute Working Paper #123.
Evans, D. and B. Jovanovic (1989). "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice Under
Liquidity Constraints." Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808-.
Evans, D. and L. Leighton (1989).
Economic Review, 79(3), 519-35.

"Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship", American

Gabaix, Xavier (2009). "Power Laws in Economics and Finance", Annual Review of Economics,
1, 255-93.
Hall, Robert and Susan Woodward (2003). “Benchmarking the Returns to Venture.” NBER
Working Paper 10202.

0

Hall, Robert and Susan Woodward (2010). "The Burden of the Nondiversifiable Risk of
Entrepreneurship", American Economic Review, 100(3), 1163-1194.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2010). "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs.
Large vs. Young", NBER Working Paper 16300.
Hamilton, B. (2000). "Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to
Self Employment". Journal of Political Economy, 108(3), 604-31.
Holmes, Thomas and John Stevens (2010). "An Alternate Theory of the Plant Size Distribution
with an Application to Trade", NBER Working Paper 15957.
Hopenhayne, Hugo (1992). "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium",
Econometrica, 60(5), 1127-50.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley (2010). "Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms:
Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self Employed", NBER Working Paper 16433.
Jones, Charles and John Williams (1989). “Measuring the Social Return to R&D” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113, pp 1119-1135.
Jovanovic, B. (1982). "Selection and the Evolution of Industry", Econometrica, 50(3), 649-70.
Jovanovic, B. (1979).
Economy, 87(5), 972-.

"Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover", Journal of Political

Kanbur, S (1979). "Of Risk Taking and the Personal Distribution of Income." Journal of
Political Economy, 87(4), 769-97.
Kaplan, S. and J. Lerner (2009). "It Ain't Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of Venture
Capital", University of Chicago Working Paper.
Kihlstrom, Richard and Jean-Jaques Laffont (1979). "A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion", Journal of Political Economy, 719-48.
Knight, Frank (1921). Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit, Houghton Mifflin.
La Porta, Rafael and Andrei Shleifer (2008). "The Unofficial Economy and Economic
Development", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall.
Lazear, Edward (2005). "Entrepreneurship", Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4), 649-80.
Lucas, Robert (1978). "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms", Bell Journal of Economics,
9(2), 508-523.
1

Moskowitz, Tobias and Annette Vising-Jorgensen (2002). "The Returns to Entrepreneurial
Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?" American Economic Review, 92(4), 745 - 778.
Pakes, Ariel and Richard Ericson (1989). "Empirical Implications of Alternate Models of Firm
Dynamics", NBER Working Paper 2893.
Pastor, Lubos, Lucian Taylor, and Pietro Veronesi (2009). "Entrepreneurial Learning, the IPO
Decision, and the Post-IPO Drop in Firm Profitability", Review of Financial Studies, 22, 30053046.
Pugsley, Benjamin (2011), “Small Business Dynamics,” University of Chicago, Mimeo.
Pugsley, Benjamin and Erik Hurst (2011), “Wealth, Tastes, and Entrepreneurship.” University of
Chicago, Mimeo.
Puri, M. and R. Zarutskie (2011). "On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture Capital and NonVenture Capital Financed Firms", Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Schumpeter, Joseph (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. George Allen and Unwin
Ltd.
Simon, Herbert and Charles Bonini (1958).
American Economic Review, 48(4), 607-17.

"The Size Distribution of Business Firms",

Sutton, John (1997). "Gibrat's Legacy", Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1), 40-59.
Vereshchagina, Galina and Hugo Hopenhayn (2009).
American Economic Review, 99(5), 1808-30.

"Risk Taking By Entrepreneurs",

2

Table 1: Share of Small Businesses Within Narrow 4 Digit NAICS Industries Based On Rank

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

4 Digit NAICS Industry
Residential Build. Const. 2361)
Offices of Physicians (6211)
Legal Services (5411)
Build. Equip. Contractors (2382)
Religious Organizations (8131)
Svcs to Build. and Dwellings (5617)
Auto Repair and Maint. (8111)
Limited-Svc Eating Places (7222)
Full-Service Restaurants (7221)
Mgmt/Sci/Tech. Consult. (5416)
Insurance Agencies (5242)
Build. Finishing Contractors (2383)
Offices of Dentists (6212)
Other Health Practitioners (6213)
Found/Struct/Build. Contr. (2381)
Accounting Services (5412)
Real Estate Agnt and Brokers (5312)
Computer Systems Design (5415)
Personal Care Services (8121)
Lessors of Real Estate (5311)

Percent of
Small
Businesses

Cum.
Percent

Rank

3.5
3.2
3.2
3.1
3.0
3.0
2.7
2.6
2.6
2.5
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.0
1.9
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.7
1.7

3.5
6.7
9.9
13.0
16.0
19.0
21.7
24.3
26.9
29.4
31.8
34.1
36.2
38.2
40.1
42.0
43.9
45.6
47.3
49.0

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

4 Digit NAICS Industry
Arch/ Engineering Serv. (5413)
Oth. Spec. Trade Contr. (2389)
Activ. Rltd to Real Estate (5313)
Gasoline Stations (4471)
Oth. Prof., Sci, Tech. Svcs (5419)
Grocery Stores (4451)
Bus/Prof/Labor/Politic Org (8139)
General Freight Trucking (4841)
Wholesale Electronic Mkts (4251)
Amusement and Recr. (7139)
Child Day Care Services (6244)
Spec. Freight Trucking (4842)
Drinking Places (Alch.) (7224)
Other Fin/Invest Activities (5239)
Health and Pers. Care Store (4461)
Clothing Stores (4481)
Build. Material Dlrs (4441)
Nonres. Build. Constr. (2362)
Mach/Equip/Supl Whsle (4238)
Other Misc. Retailers (4539)

Percent of
Small
Businesses

Cum.
Percent

1.7
1.7
1.3
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7

49.0
50.7
52.0
53.3
54.4
55.5
56.6
57.6
58.6
59.6
60.5
61.4
62.2
63.0
63.8
64.5
65.2
65.9
66.6
67.3

Note: The table shows the results of taking all small businesses (specifically firms with fewer than 20 employees) in the 2007 Economic Census
and segmenting them by their 4 digit NAICS industry code. The specific NAICS codes are shown in parenthesis. We then rank the industries
based on the number of small businesses in that industry relative to all small businesses in the data. Given there are 294 4-digit NAICS industry
codes, we rank the firms from 1 through 294. The table lists the top 40 industries.

3

Industry

Table 2a
Small Businesses Out of All Firms, By Firm Age and Industry,
2005 Business Dynamic Statistics Data
Firm Age
0-10 Years Old
10-25 Years Old
All Firm Ages

All

92.0

85.7

87.2

FIRE
Agriculture
Construction
Wholesale Trade
Services
TCU
Retail
Manufacturing

95.5
94.8
93.7
93.0
92.7
92.3
88.6
85.5

91.8
88.1
86.0
83.2
88.4
82.2
81.8
71.5

91.9
91.6
88.9
84.1
89.1
86.0
84.6
72.4

Table 2b
Small Business Employment Out of All Employment, By Firm Age and Industry,
2005 Business Dynamic Statistics Data
Firm Age Categories
Industry
0-10 Years Old
10-25 Years Old
All Firm Ages
All

44.8

24.7

19.4

FIRE
Agriculture
Construction
Wholesale Trade
Services
TCU
Retail
Manufacturing

50.8
57.7
59.1
52.8
40.7
44.2
46.9
34.6

31.7
47.1
38.4
30.6
23.1
14.7
24.8
16.0

19.0
50.1
39.4
21.7
20.8
11.8
18.8
8.5

Notes:
All
data
in
Tables
2a
and
2b
can
be
found
at
http://www.ces.census.gov/index.php/bds/bds_database_list. The industry classifications are the ones
provided by the Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS). Like the Statistics on U.S. Business (SUSB) data,
the BDS data only includes information on firms with paid employees. The data in each column of Table
2a should be read as the percent of small business firms in a given firm age and industry grouping out of
all firms in that firm age and industry grouping. Table 2b is analogous except it is for employment
instead of firms. In these tables, we define small businesses as firms with fewer than twenty employees.

4

Direction of Emp. Change

Table 3: Change in Employment By Existing Small Businesses, By Firm Age,
2003 Survey of Small Business Finances Data
Percent Changing Employment Over Last 1 Year
Percent Changing Employment Over Last 3 Years
Age of Firm
Age of Firm
1-10 Years 11-20 Years 20+ Years
All
1-10 Years
11-20 Years 20+ Years
All

Increase Employment

18.9

10.6

9.1

13.9

27.6

19.4

15.3

21.3

No Change in Employment

74.3

79.7

84.0

78.4

61.0

65.0.7

72.5

65.6

Decrease Employment

6.8

9.8

6.9

7.7

11.3

15.7

12.2

13.1

1,163

817

727

2,707

847

818

725

2,386

Sample Size

Table 4: Change in Employment By New Businesses, By Firm Age,
Kaufman Firm Survey Data
Percent Changing Employment Over Last 4 Years
Percent With
Percent With
Percent With
Δ Employment > 1 Employee
Δ Employment > 5 Employees
Δ Employment > 10 Employees
All New Firms

41.9

10.8

3.6

Sample Size

2,617

2,617

2,617

Notes: See text for a description of both the 2003 SSBF sample (used in Table 3) and the KFS sample (used in Table 4). We restricted the SSBF
to focus only on those firms with fewer than 20 employees. For the KFS sample, we looked at all new firms regardless of firm size. However,
we did restrict the KFS sample to only those firms that remained in business for the four years since the survey started. The median and mean
number of employees for the firms in the KFS sample was 1 and 3, respectively. The 90th percentile of number of employees for the firms in the
KFS sample was 14. All data was weighted using the sample weights provided within the survey.

5

Table 5: Using Industry Share of Small Businesses to Predict Small Business Job Creation and Destruction
Pooled 2003 to 2006 Statistics of U.S. Businesses Employment Change Data

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Small Bus. Gross Small Bus. Gross Small Bus. Gross Small Bus. Gross
Job Creation Rate Job Creation Rate Job Creation Rate
Job Birth Rate
A. Equally Weighted

(5)
Small Bus. Gross
Job Destruction
Rate

Industry Share of Small Firms

-2.14
(0.25)

-1.98
(0.23)

-2.05
(0.29)

0.10
(0.17)

-0.23
(0.17)

Observations
R-squared

929
0.077

929
0.093

652
0.205

666
0.351

656
0.353

B. Weighted by Number of Small Firms within Industry
Industry Share of Small Firms
Observations
R-squared
Controls
Industry Gross Job Creation
Industry Gross Job Births
Industry Gross Job Destruction
Time Effects

-0.73
(0.00)

-0.73
(0.00)

-0.73
(0.00)

0.03
(0.00)

0.04
(0.00)

929
0.42

929
0.421

652
0.437

666
0.588

656
0.531

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Notes: The table reports estimation results of five specifications estimated with and without firm frequency weights. The regressions are small firms (firms with
between 1 and 19 employees) gross job creation rate (columns 1-3), gross job birth rate (column 4), and gross job destruction rate (column 5) on the industry's
share of small firms out of all small firms. The unit of observation is 6-digit industries. The regression assesses, for example, whether the gross job creation rate
of small firms within a narrow industry is related to the industry's share of small firms out of all small firms. Data for these regressions come from the pooled
2003-2006 SUSB data. All regressions included time effects. Other controls are listed on the table (when included). Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
The weighted estimation can be viewed as a grouped data estimate of firm level job creation/destruction from administrative records if employment shares of
small firms within an industry are approximately equal.

6

Table 6
Innovation Behavior of New Businesses
Kaufman Firm Survey Data
Measure of Innovative Activity By Year 4
Percent of Firms Who
Percent of Firms Who
Percent of Firms Who
Have or Are Applying for
Have or Are Applying for
Have or Are Applying for
a Trademark
a Copyright
a Patent
All New Firms
Sample Size

Percent of Firms Who
Have Either a Patent, a
Trademark, or a Copyright

2.7

8.9

12.3

17.3

2,581

2,550

2,546

2,510

Notes: Data are from the 2004-2008 Kaufman Firm Survey (KFS). Sample sizes differ slightly over the responses due to different response rates
for different questions. See the text for a full discussion of the KFS. All data are weighted using the provided survey weights.

7

Table 7
Innovative Activities of New Business Owners
PSED Data
First Year of Business (2006)
Sample 1:
Sample 2:
All
Positive Revenues

Fifth Year of
Business (2010)
Sample 3:
Positive Revenues

Percent of Firms that Already Developed Proprietary Technology,
Processes, or Procedures

6.5

8.3

20.3

Percent of Firms that Already Applied for Patent, Copyright, or
Trademark

4.9

6.0

17.6

Percent of Firms Stating That Many Existing Firms Already Offer Same
Product/Service to Customer Base

35.7

43.3

39.6

Percent of Firms Stating That No Existing Firms Offers Same
Product/Service to Customers

19.2

13.3

17.3

Sample Size

1,214

602

162

Notes: This table summarizes the responses to the questions asked of the nascent small business owners in the PSED about their actual and expected innovative
activities. See text for the details. We focus on three samples. The first sample is all PSED respondents of nascent small business owners. The second
sample is the set of all nascent entrepreneurs who actually had positive revenues during 2006 (first wave of the survey). The third sample is the set of all nascent
entrepreneurs who actually had positive revenues during 2010 (most recent follow up wave of the survey). All data are weighted using the PSED sample
weights from their respective survey wave. Responses for samples 1 and 2 are from the initial wave. Responses for sample 3 are from fifth wave.

8

Table 8
Ex Ante Expectations and Desires About Future Firm Growth and Innovation
PSED Data
Sample 1:
Sample 2:
Positive Revenues In
All PSED
First Year (2006)
Respondents
Percent of New Firms That Report That They Want to Be “Big”
Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5 Years Old
(25th percentile)
Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5 Years Old
(Median)
Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5 Years Old
(75th percentile)
Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5 Years Old
(90th percentile)
Percent of Firms that Expect To Develop Proprietary Technology,
Processes, or Procedures in Future
Percent of Firms that Expect to Apply for Patent, Copyright, or Trademark
in Future
Percent of Firms that Expect R&D Spending Will Be a Major Priority for
Business

Sample 3:
Positive Revenues in
Fifth Year (2010)

24.3

23.0

28.3

1

0

0

4

3

3

10

8

6

29

24

25

14.6

9.2

12.2

26.0

17.9

24.9

25.7

19.5

22.8

Note: Data comes from the PSED. See text for the details of the survey and details about the individual questions summarized in the table. We
focus on three samples. The first sample is all PSED respondents of nascent small business owners. The second sample is the set of all nascent
entrepreneurs who actually had positive revenues during 2006 (first follow up wave of the survey). The third sample is the set of all nascent
entrepreneurs who actually had positive revenues during 2010 (most recent follow up wave of the survey). All data are weighted using the PSED
sample weights from their respective survey wave. Sample sizes differ slightly from those in Table 7 because not all respondents provided
responses to all the questions. However, the differences in sample sizes were small when they existed.

9

Table 9
Importance of Non Pecuniary Reasons for Starting a Business by Nascent Entrepreneurs
PSED Data
II. Sample:
III. Sample:
Respondents With Positive
Respondents With Positive
I. Sample:
Revenues In 2006
Revenues In 2010
All Respondents
(602
obs.)
(162 obs.)
(1,214 obs.)
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Reason For Starting Business
First
First
Any
Any
First
Any
(Up to Two Reasons Provided)
Report
Report
Report
Report
Report
Report
Non Pecuniary Reasons

35.3

50.5

37.6

53.9

35.0

52.4

To Generate Income

19.5

34.1

21.4

36.6

17.6

32.4

Had A Good Business Idea/Create New Product

32.2

40.6

28.3

34.9

33.8

37.5

Lack of Other Employment Options

2.2

3.8

2.6

4.0

2.6

4.3

Other

10.8

15.7

10.2

15.5

11.0

14.7

Notes: The table uses the same dataset and sample construction as in Table 7. This table summarizes the responses to the questions “Why did you
start this new business?” We classified the responses to the open ended question of “Why did you start this new business?” into five broad
categories of response: non pecuniary responses, income reasons, having a good business idea, lack of other employment options, and other. For
a complete discussion of our classification, see appendix Table A1. Respondents were allowed to provide up to two reasons for why they started
the business. In columns A, we report the fraction of respondents who provided the specific reason on their first report. In columns B, we report
the fraction of respondents who provided the specific reason on either their first or second report. The numbers in column B sum to fewer than
200 percent because about one-quarter of respondents did not provide a second report and, of those that did, some provided a report that was
classified in the same broad category. All data are weighted using the PSED sample weights.

10

Table 10a: Differences in Business Start Up Motivation and Expectations about Growth and Innovation Behavior,
PSED Sample, All Respondents
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean for
Coefficient
Coefficient
Omitted
Create New
NonDiff.
Product
Group
Pecuniary
(3) - (2)
Dependent Variable

(5)
p-value
of
Diff.

Firms Stated That Many Existing Firms Already Offer Same
Product/Service to Expected Customer Base

0.380

-0.082
(0.035)

0.049
(0.035)

0.131

<0.01

Firm Stated That No Existing Firms Offers Same
Product/Service to Expected Customers

0.190

0.037
(0.029)

-0.049
(0.028)

-0.086

0.01

Firms Already Developed Proprietary Technology, Processes, or
Procedures

0.084

0.010
(0.019)

-0.041
(0.018)

-0.051

0.01

Firms Expects to Apply for Patent, Copyright, or Trademark in
Future

0.230

0.104
(0.034)

0.010
(0.033)

-0.094

0.01

Percent of New Firms That Report That They Want to Be “Big”

0.288

0.036
(0.035)

-0.047
(0.033)

-0.083

0.03

Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5
Years Old (75th percentile)

8

4.0
(2.3)

-2.0
(2.3)

-6.0

0.03

Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5
Years Old (90th percentile)

25

15.0
(5.3)

-10.0
(5.1)

-25.0

0.01

Notes: The results in Tables 10a and 10b are from a regression of different dependent variables indicating the business or the expectation about
the business for future growth and innovation on a dummy for whether the respondent reporting starting the business because they wanted to
create a new product (row 3 from Table 9) or because of non pecuniary reasons (row 1 of Table 9). For the regression, the dummy variable equals
one if the respondent reported the given motive on either their first or second report. Columns 2 and 3 of this table show the coefficients on these
dummy variables. Column 4 is the simple difference of these coefficients. Column 5 is the p-value on the difference. Column 1 shows the mean
dependent variable for the omitted groups (the constant from the regression). Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
11

Table 10b: Differences in Business Start Up Motivation and Expectations about Growth and Innovation Behavior,
PSED Sample, Respondents who Had Positive Revenues in 2006
(1)
(2)
(3)
Coefficient
Coefficient
Create New
NonDiff.
Product
Pecuniary
(2) - (1)
Dependent Variable

(4)
p-value
of
Diff.

Firms Stated That Many Existing Firms Already Offer Same Product/Service to Expected
Customer Base

-0.112
(0.053)

0.020
(0.051)

0.132

0.02

Firm Stated That No Existing Firms Offers Same Product/Service to Expected Customers

0.059
(0.041)

-0.024
(0.036)

-0.083

0.05

Firms Already Developed Proprietary Technology, Processes, or Procedures

0.027
(0.029)

-0.051
(0.028)

-0.078

0.02

Firms Expects to Apply for Patent, Copyright, or Trademark in Future

0.067
(0.045)

0.054
(0.041)

-0.013

0.77

Percent of New Firms That Report That They Want to Be “Big”

0.042
(0.049)

-0.028
(0.046)

-0.070

0.17

Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5 Years Old (75th percentile)

5.0
(1.1)

0.0
(1.1)

-5.0

0.01

Expected Number of Employees Working in Firm When it is 5 Years Old (90th percentile)

20.0
(8.0)

-10.0
(7.7)

-30.0

0.01

12

Figure 1: Share of Firms, Employment, Receipts, and Payroll Belonging to
Different Firm Size Categories, 2007 SUSB

1
0.9
0.8

Cummulative Share

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Firm Size
Firms

Establishments

Employment

Payroll

Receipts

13

0

.2

Cumulative Fraction
.4
.6

.8

1

Figure 2: Breakdown of Firms With Fewer than 20 Employees By 4 Digit NAICS Industry

0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300
Rank of 4 Digit Industries

Note: Figure starts with the sample of all firms with fewer than 20 employees from the 2007 SUSB. These firms
are then grouped by their 4 digit NAICS industry code. There are 294 such industries. Industries are then ranked
by the fraction of small businesses (out of all small businesses) that are in each industry. A rank of 1 means that
industry had the largest fraction of small businesses (out of all small businesses) in that industry. The rank is then
plotted against the cumulative fraction of small businesses (out of all small businesses) in an industry of a given
rank.

14

Within Industry Share of Employment By Small Firms
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

Figure 3: Within Industry Share of Employment By Small Firms by Decile of Industry
Share of Small Firms out of All Small Firms

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Decile of Industry Firm Share out of all Small Firms
Notes: The y-axis in this figure is the average within industry share of employment by small firms across different
industry deciles. The within industry share of employment by small firms is defined as yj in the text. This measures
the share of employment in small firms in industry j out of all employment in industry j. The x-axis are deciles
based upon the share if firms from industry j out of all small firms (regardless of industry). This is defined as xj in
the text. This is the same metric used to rank firms in Table 1 and Figure 2. The sample includes all 294 4-digit
industries. Each decile, therefore, includes roughly 29 industries. For example, decile 1 includes the top 29
industries from Table 1.

15

Appendix Table A1: Industry Breakdown of Non-Employer Firms,
2007 U.S. Non-Employer Statistics
Industry

Fraction of Non Employers in Industry
Out of All Non Employers

Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
Other Services (Except Public Administration)
Construction
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Retail Trade
Administrative and Support and Waste Management
Health Care and Social Assistance
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
Transportation and Warehousing
Finance and Insurance
Education Services
Wholesale Trade
Manufacturing
Information
Accommodation and Food Services
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
Utilities

14%
14%
12%
11%
9%
8%
8%
5%
5%
4%
2%
2%
2%
1%
1%
1%
0%
0%

Notes: See http://www.census.gov/econ/nonemployer/index.html for data.

16

Appendix Table A2:
Classifications of Reasons Starting a Business Reported for
Starting a Business by Nascent Entrepreneurs in the PSED

Non Pecuniary Reasons
Be own boss; tired of working for others (80) (75)
Flexibility ; more free time ; set own hours (26) (22)
Stay home with children ; work from home (33) (12)
Enjoy the work, have passion for it ; hobby (122) (96)
Job security/Financial independence (34) (14)
Try new career ; charge career ; do something new (24) (10)
Creative ; do creative work ; creative outlet (9) (5)
Better life (3) (0)
Life long ambition (24) (10)
Challenge (3) (3)
Personal Growth (2) (8)
To do more fulfilling work (2) (3)
Other lifestyle references (20) (7)
Other work desirability references (20) (7)
To Generate Income
Income; To Make Money (117) (93)
Extra Income (50) (20)
Need Supplemental Income (8) (6)
Retired – need to supplement income (8) (3)
Income for educational expenses (1) (3)
Income for retirement (11) (8)
To leave business/money to children (5) (4)
Unlimited income potential; good money (22) (19)
Potential to make more money working for self (7) (12)
Other income references (23) (22)
Had A Good Business Idea/Create New Product
Take advantage of opportunity (23) (17)
High demand for products/business; satisfy need (75) (30)
Market Opportunity; untapped market; shift in market (42) (17)
New technology/product/service (110) (3)
Good product/faith in product (13) (5)
Expansion of old/current business (23) (2)
Good Business Opportunity (1) (2)
Lots of experience at this type of work; background in field; knowledge (129) (25)
Have formal training/education in field (21) (13)
Have talent in field, area of expertise; ability to do it (23) (23)
Other business opportunity references (33) (21)

17

Lack of Employment Options
Cannot find employment elsewhere; lost job (18) (8)
Disabled/injured/sick and cannot work elsewhere (18) (12)
Retired (14) (8)
Other
Friend/family member had an idea and started a business (25) (9)
Inheritance (5) (1)
Believe in value of work ; think business is important (4) (1)
Help others ; help community (32) (31)
Aid in economy ; economic development (9) (1)
Other reasons (51) (20)
Note: Table shows the grouping of PSED respondent answers to the following open ended questions:
“Why do you/did you want to start this new business?” Each respondent was allowed to provide up to
two responses. This question was only asked in the initial wave of the PSED. The PSED staff took the
responses to the open ended questions and coded them into the 44 specific responses – all of which are
listed in this table. In the codebook, the 44 responses were grouped into 6 broader categories. Those
categories were “income”, “business opportunities”, “employment”, “personal reasons”, “lifestyle”, and
“other”. For our purpose, this classification was not exactly ideal. For example, the personal reason
category included both “lots of experience at this type of work” and “enjoy the work, have passion for it;
hobby”. As a result, we reclassified the responses into the five categories above (used in Tables 9 and
10). Our classification was close to – but not identical to – the PSED classification. One can see the
PSED code book for an exact comparison. Lastly, the numbers in parentheses represent the actual
number of respondents who provided the reason on their first report (in the first parentheses) and on their
second report (in the second parentheses). These numbers are for all PSED respondents and the sample
from which they are drawn is analogous to the sample described in column 1 of Table 9. The numbers in
the second parentheses sum to fewer than the full sample because roughly 500 respondents did not
provide a second response.

18

