NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
Zheng Liu
Pengfei Wang
Tao Zha
Working Paper 17045
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17045

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

For helpful discussions, we thank Susanto Basu, Larry Christiano, Russell Cooper, Morris Davis, Steve
Durlauf, Marty Eichenbaum, John Fernald, Kris Gerardi, Mark Gertler, Simon Gilchrist, Mike Golosov,
Pat Higgins, Matteo Iacoviello, Nobu Kiyotaki, Dirk Krueger, Junior Maih, Jim Nason, Lee Ohanian,
Alberto Oritz-Bolanos, Richard Rogerson, Julio Rotemberg, Tom Sargent, Frank Schorfheide, Mark
Spiegel, Harald Uhlig, Dan Waggoner, Carl Walsh, John Williams, and seminar participates at Federal
Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San Francisco, the 2009 NBER Summer Workshop on Impulse and
Propagation Mechanisms, University of Pennsylvania, University of Wisconsin, Georgetown University,
UCLA, UCSD, UC Riverside, UC Santa Cruz, UC Davis, USC, the European University Institute,
Banque de France, Bank of New Zealand Conference on Twenty Years of Inflation Targeting. We
thank David Lang, Jacob Smith, and Diego Vilan for research assistance and Anita Todd and Sam
Zuckerman for editorial assistance. Pengfei Wang acknowledges the financial support from Hong
Kong Research Grant Council (project \#643908). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San Francisco,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Zheng Liu, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Land-price dynamics and macroeconomic fluctuations
Zheng Liu, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 17045
May 2011
JEL No. E21,E27,E32,E44
ABSTRACT
We argue that positive co-movements between land prices and business investment are a driving force
behind the broad impact of land-price dynamics on the macroeconomy. We develop an economic mechanism
that captures the co-movements by incorporating two key features into a DSGE model: We introduce
land as a collateral asset in firms' credit constraints and we identify a shock that drives most of the
observed fluctuations in land prices. Our estimates imply that these two features combine to generate
an empirically important mechanism that amplifies and propagates macroeconomic fluctuations through
the joint dynamics of land prices and business investment.
Zheng Liu
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street, MS 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
zheng.liu@sf.frb.org
Pengfei Wang
Department of Economics
Business School
Hong Kong University of Science & Technology
pfwang@ust.hk

Tao Zha
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
and also NBER
tzha@emory.edu

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
I. Introduction
The recent financial crisis caused by a collapse of the housing market propelled the U.S.
economy into the Great Recession. A notable development during the crisis period was
a slump in business investment in tandem with a sharp decline in land prices (Figure 1).
The crisis has generated substantial interest in understanding the links between the housing
market and the macroeconomy. Although it is widely accepted that house prices could have
an important influence on macroeconomic fluctuations, quantitative studies in a general
equilibrium framework have been scant.
This paper aims to fill part of this gap by modeling, through econometric estimation, the
links between land-price dynamics and macroeconomic fluctuations in a quantitative general
equilibrium framework. We focus on land prices because most of the fluctuations in house
prices are driven by land prices rather than by the cost of structures (Davis and Heathcote,
2007). We first establish evidence that land prices move together with macroeconomic variables not just in the Great Recession period, but also for the entire sample period from 1975
to 2010.1 The first column of Figure 2 displays the estimated impulse responses of land prices
and business investment following a shock to the land price series. These impulse responses
are estimated from a bivariate Bayesian vector autoregression (BVAR) model with the Sims
and Zha (1998) prior. A positive shock to land prices leads to persistent increases in both
land prices and business investment. The last two columns of the figure show that the shock
also leads to persistent increases in labor hours and consumption, although the magnitudes
of the responses are not as large as that of investment.
To understand these salient features of the data, we build a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) model that is a generalization of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). A strand
of recent DSGE literature on house prices assumes that a subset of households are credit
constrained and these households use land or houses as collateral to finance consumption
expenditures (Iacoviello, 2005; Iacoviello and Neri, 2010; Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Nieuwerburgh, 2011). These models with credit-constrained households are capable of explaining
positive co-movements between house prices and consumption expenditures, but in general
they have difficulty delivering positive co-movements between land prices and business investment (Iacoviello and Neri, 2010). To overcome this difficulty, we assume that firms, instead
of households, are credit constrained. In particular we assume that firms finance investment
spending by using land as a collateral asset. Thus, in our model, a shock that drives up
1

Our benchmark land price series is constructed based on the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)

house price index, which is available from 1975 to 2010.
1

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

2

land prices raises firms’ borrowing capacity and facilitates an expansion in investment and
production.
In the data, collateralized loans are an important form of business borrowing. Nearly
70% of all commercial and industrial loans in the United States are secured by collateral
assets (Berger and Udell, 1990). An important collateral asset for both small firms and large
corporations is real estate. In the U.S. data, real estate represents a large fraction of the
tangible assets held by nonfinancial corporate firms on their balance sheets. According to
the Flow-of-Funds tables provided by the Federal Reserve Board, for the period from 1952
to 2010, tangible assets (the sum of real estate, equipment, and software) average about
two-thirds of total corporate assets, and real estate averages about 58% of total tangible
assets. For nonfarm noncorporate U.S. firms, real estate averages about 90% of tangible
assets (which is in turn about 87% of total assets).
Formal empirical studies show that shocks to real estate prices have important effects on
business investment, even for large corporations. For example, Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar
(2009) find that, over the 1993-2007 period, a dollar increase in collateral value enables
a representative U.S. corporate firm to raise new borrowing by four cents and investment
by six cents. Their analysis shows that shocks to real estate prices have a large impact on
aggregate investment. Since fluctuations in real estate values are primarily driven by changes
in land prices (Davis and Heathcote, 2007), these formal empirical findings, along with the
balance-sheet data, constitute compelling evidence that land provides important collateral
value for business investment spending.2
A novel feature of our model, relative to the DSGE literature, is that firms are credit
constrained by land value. As our BVAR evidence shows, business investment responds more
than do hours and consumption following a shock to land prices. The estimation of our DSGE
model identifies a driving force behind the joint dynamics between land prices and business
investment in influencing macroeconomic fluctuations. Because firms are credit constrained,
a shock to housing demand originating in the household sector triggers competing demand
for land between the household sector and the business sector and sets off a financial spiral
that drives large fluctuations in land prices and strong co-movements of land prices with
investment, hours, and consumption.
Figure 3 illustrates our model’s propagation mechanism. Suppose the economy starts from
the steady state (point A). Consider then the effect of a positive shock to housing demand. In
the standard real business cycle (RBC) model with housing, this shock shifts the household’s
2Complementary

to the study by Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2009) for U.S. firms, Gan (2007) shows

that, following the real estate market collapse in Japan in the early 1990s, drops in collateral values lowered
corporate firms’ borrowing capacity and had a large adverse impact on corporate investment. For every 10%
drop in collateral value, investment by a representative corporate firm in Japan declined by about 0.8%.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

3

land demand curve upward. Land prices rise and land reallocates from the entrepreneur to
the household (from point A to point B) and there are no further actions. As land shifts
away from the business sector, investment falls. Thus, the unconstrained model predicts
negative co-movements between land prices and business investment.
Now consider an economy in which entrepreneurs are credit constrained by land value. In
this case, the initial rise in land prices through the shift in the household land demand curve
raises the entrepreneur’s net worth and expands her borrowing capacity. The expansion of
net worth and credit shifts the entrepreneur’s land demand curve upward, which reinforces
the household’s response and result in a further rise in the land price and a further expansion
of credit, generating a static financial multiplier (point C). More importantly, the rise in the
entrepreneur’s net worth and the expansion of credit produce a dynamic financial multiplier:
More credit allows for more business investment in the current period, which means more
capital stock in the future; since capital and land are complementary factors of production,
more future capital stock raises the future marginal product of land, which relaxes the firm’s
credit constraint further, creating a ripple effect (from point C to point E). Thus, a shift in
housing demand in a credit-constrained economy can lead to large fluctuations in land prices
and produce a broader economic impact on investment, hours, and consumption.
To assess the quantitative importance of our model’s propagation mechanism, we estimate
the model using Bayesian methods and fit the model to aggregate U.S. time-series data.
Our estimation indicates that, propagated through credit constraints on firms, a housing
demand shock alone accounts for about 90% of land price fluctuations, 30-50% of investment
fluctuations, and 20-40% of output fluctuations.
To quantify how much our model’s propagation mechanism contributes to explaining both
the BVAR facts and the recent sharp declines in land prices and business investment, we
compute counterfactual simulations of history from the model based on the estimated time
series of housing demand shocks. We find that the simulated data yield a driving force behind
the observed, strong co-movements of land prices with investment, hours, and consumption.
Our work belongs to a burgeoning strand of literature that incorporates financial frictions into DSGE models (for example, Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), Cooley, Marimon, and
Quadrini (2004), De Fiore and Uhlig (2005), Gertler, Gilchrist, and Natalucci (2007)). This
literature builds on the seminal works by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist (1999) (henceforth BGG). Although the details of the financial friction differ,
the transmission mechanisms in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and BGG are similar since they
both provide a direct link between firms’ assets and investment spending.
In recent papers, Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2007) and Christiano, Motto, and
Rostagno (2010) build on BGG and examine the empirical importance of the financial accelerator using time series data from the United States and the euro area. Gilchrist, Ortiz, and

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

4

Zakrajsek (2009) examine the importance of credit spread for macroeconomic fluctuations
by fitting a version of the BGG model to a measure of credit spread constructed with microlevel data, following the approach in Gilchrist, Yankov, and Zakrajsek (2009). Jermann and
Quadrini (2009) find that a financial shock that affects firms’ borrowing ability has a large
impact on employment and aggregate output. Del Negro, Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Kiyotaki
(2010) introduce nominal rigidities into the model of Kiyotaki and Moore (2008) to examine
the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy.3
Our paper has a different emphasis than previous literature. We focus on exploring the
dynamic links between land prices and the macroeconomy. We identify and quantify a
financial mechanism that propagates the effects of a shock that primarily influences land
prices, which in turn generate macroeconomic fluctuations.
II. The Benchmark Model
The economy consists of two types of agents—a representative household and a representative entrepreneur. There are four types of commodities: labor, goods, land, and loanable
bonds. The representative household’s utility depends on consumption goods, land services
(housing), and leisure; the representative entrepreneur’s utility depends on consumption
goods only. Goods production requires labor, capital, and land as inputs. The entrepreneur
needs external financing for investment spending. Imperfect contract enforcement implies
that the entrepreneur’s borrowing capacity is constrained by the value of collateral assets,
consisting of land and capital stocks. Following the literature, we assume that the household
is more patient than the entrepreneur so that the collateral constraint is binding in and near
the steady-state equilibrium.4
II.1. The representative household. The household has the utility function
E

∞
X

β t At {log(Cht − γh Ch,t−1 ) + ϕt log Lht − ψt Nht } ,

(1)

t=0

where Cht denotes consumption, Lht denotes land holdings, and Nht denotes labor hours.
The parameter β ∈ (0, 1) is a subjective discount factor, the parameter γh measures the
degree of habit persistence, and the term E is a mathematical expectation operator. The
term At represents a shock to the household’s patience factor, ϕt a shock to the household’s
3

For a comprehensive survey of this literature, see Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).
In Liu, Wang, and Zha (2009b), we provide a micro-foundation for the representative household’s patience

4

factor. In particular, we consider an economy with heterogeneous households and entrepreneurs, where the
households face uninsurable idiosyncratic income risks and thus have a precautionary motive for saving.
We show that the desire for precautionary saving will make the households appear more patient than the
entrepreneurs at the aggregate level, provided that the households face more persistent idiosyncratic shocks
than do the entrepreneurs.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

5

taste for land services, and ψt a shock to labor supply. For convenience, we label the land
taste shock ϕt the “housing demand shock.”
The intertemporal preference shock At follows the stochastic process
At = At−1 (1 + λat ),

ln λat = (1 − ρa ) ln λ̄a + ρa ln λa,t−1 + σa εat ,

(2)

where λ̄a > 0 is a constant, ρa ∈ (−1, 1) is the persistence parameter, σa is the standard
deviation of the innovation, and εat is an identically and independently distributed (i.i.d.)
standard normal process.
The housing demand shock ϕt follows the stationary process
ln ϕt = (1 − ρϕ ) ln ϕ̄ + ρϕ ln ϕt−1 + σϕ εϕt ,

(3)

where ϕ̄ > 0 is a constant, ρϕ ∈ (−1, 1) measures the persistence of the shock, σϕ > 0 is the
standard deviation of the innovation, and εϕt is an i.i.d. standard normal process.
The labor supply shock ψt follows the stationary process
ln ψt = (1 − ρψ ) ln ψ̄ + ρψ ln ψt−1 + σψ εψt ,

(4)

where ϕ̄ > 0 is a constant, ρψ ∈ (−1, 1) measures the persistence, σψ is the standard
deviation, and εψt ) is an i.i.d. standard normal process.
Denote by qlt the relative price of land (in consumption units), Rt the gross real loan rate,
and wt the real wage; denote by St the household’s purchase in period t of the loanable bond
that pays off one unit of consumption good in all states of nature in period t + 1. In period
0, the household begins with Lh,−1 > 0 units of housing and S−1 > 0 units of the loanable
bond. The flow of funds constraint for the household is given by
Cht + qlt (Lht − Lh,t−1 ) +

St
≤ wt Nht + St−1 .
Rt

(5)

The household chooses Cht , Lh,t , Nht , and St to maximize (1) subject to (2)-(5) and the
borrowing constraint St ≥ −S̄ for some large number S̄.
II.2. The representative entrepreneur. The entrepreneur has the utility function
E

∞
X

β t [log(Cet − γe Ce,t−1 )] ,

(6)

t=0

where Cet denotes the entrepreneur’s consumption and γe is the habit persistence parameter.
The entrepreneur produces goods using capital, labor, and land as inputs. The production
function is given by
1−φ α 1−α
Yt = Zt [Lφe,t−1 Kt−1
] Net ,

(7)

where Yt denotes output, Kt−1 , Net , and Le,t−1 denote the inputs capital, labor, and land,
respectively, and the parameters α ∈ (0, 1) and φ ∈ (0, 1) measure the output elasticities of
these production factors. We assume that the total factor productivity Zt is composed of a

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

6

permanent component Ztp and a transitory component νt such that Zt = Ztp νzt , where the
permanent component Ztp follows the stochastic process
p
Ztp = Zt−1
λzt ,

ln λzt = (1 − ρz ) ln λ̄z + ρz ln λz,t−1 + σz εzt ,

(8)

and the transitory component follows the stochastic process
ln νzt = ρνz ln νz,t−1 + σνz ενz t .

(9)

The parameter λ̄z is the steady-state growth rate of Ztp ; the parameters ρz and ρνz measure
the degrees of persistence; and the parameters σz and σνz measure the standard deviations.
The innovations εzt and ενz t are i.i.d. standard normal processes.
The entrepreneur is endowed with K−1 units of initial capital stock and Le,−1 units of
initial land. Capital accumulation follows the law of motion
"

2 #
Ω
It
It ,
Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + 1 −
− λ̄I
2 It−1

(10)

where It denotes investment, λ̄I denotes the steady-state growth rate of investment, and
Ω > 0 is the adjustment cost parameter.
The entrepreneur faces the flow of funds constraint
1−φ α 1−α
Cet + qlt (Let − Le,t−1 ) + Bt−1 = Zt [Lφe,t−1 Kt−1
] Net −

It
Bt
− wt Net + ,
Qt
Rt

(11)

where Bt−1 is the amount of matured debt and Bt /Rt is the value of new debt.
Following Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), we interpret Qt as the investmentspecific technological change. Specifically, we assume that Qt = Qpt νqt , where the permanent
component Qpt follows the stochastic process
Qpt = Qpt−1 λqt ,

ln λqt = (1 − ρq ) ln λ̄q + ρq ln λq,t−1 + σq εqt ,

(12)

and the transitory component µt follows the stochastic process
ln νqt = ρνq ln νq,t−1 + σνq ενq t .

(13)

The parameter λ̄q is the steady-state growth rate of Qpt ; the parameters ρq and ρνq measure
the degree of persistence; and the parameters σq and σνq measure the standard deviations.
The innovations εqt and ενq t are i.i.d. standard normal processes.
The entrepreneur faces the credit constraint
Bt ≤ θt Et [ql,t+1 Let + qk,t+1 Kt ],

(14)

where qk,t+1 is the shadow price of capital in consumption units.5 Under this credit constraint,
the amount that the entrepreneur can borrow is limited by a fraction of the value of the
5Since

the price of new capital is 1/Qt , Tobin’s q in this model is given by qkt Qt , which is the ratio of the

value of installed capital to the price of new capital.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

7

collateral assets—land and capital. Following Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), we interpret this
type of credit constraint as reflecting the problem of costly contract enforcement: if the
entrepreneur fails to pay the debt, the creditor can seize the land and the accumulated
capital; since it is costly to liquidate the seized land and capital stock, the creditor can
recoup up to a fraction θt of the total value of collateral assets.
We interpret θt as a “collateral shock” that reflects the tightness of the credit market
related to financial regulations or financial innovations. We assume that θt follows the
stochastic process
ln θt = (1 − ρθ ) ln θ̄ + ρθ ln θt−1 + σθ εθt ,

(15)

where θ̄ is the steady-state value of θt , ρθ ∈ (0, 1) is the persistence parameter, σθ is the
standard deviation, and εθt is an i.i.d. standard normal process.
The entrepreneur chooses Cet , Net , It , Le,t , Kt , and Bt to maximize (6) subject to (7)
through (15).
II.3. Market clearing conditions and equilibrium. In a competitive equilibrium, the
markets for goods, labor, land, and loanable bonds all clear. The goods market clearing
condition implies that
It
= Yt ,
(16)
Qt
where Ct = Cht + Cet denotes aggregate consumption. The labor market clearing condition
Ct +

implies that labor demand equals labor supply:
Net = Nht ≡ Nt .

(17)

The land market clearing condition implies that
Lht + Let = L̄.

(18)

Finally, the bond market clearing condition implies that
St = Bt .

(19)

A competitive equilibrium consists of sequences of prices {wt , qlt , Rt }∞
t=0 and allocations
{Cht , Cet , It , Nht , Net , Lht , Let , St , Bt , Kt , Yt }∞
t=0 such that (i) taking the prices as given, the
allocations solve the optimizing problems for the household and the entrepreneur and (ii) all
markets clear.
III. Estimation
We log-linearized the model around the steady state in which the credit constraint is
binding. We use Bayesian methods to fit the linearized model to 6 quarterly U.S. time
series: the real price of land, the inverse of the quality-adjusted relative price of investment,
real per capita consumption, real per capita investment (in consumption units), real per

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

8

capita nonfarm nonfinancial business debt, and per capita hours worked (as a fraction of
total time endowment). The sample covers the period from 1975:Q1 to 2010:Q4. The prior
distributions are summarized in Table 1. We provide more detailed descriptions of the data
and the prior distributions in Appendices A and B.6
We follow Sims and Zha (1999) and report 90% probability intervals for model parameters
and 68% probability intervals for impulse responses. The two levels of probability intervals
are designed to better characterize the model’s likelihood shape (Sims and Uhlig, 1991; Sims
and Zha, 1999).
Table 1 reports the estimates of structural parameters at the posterior mode, along with
90% posterior probability intervals (the last 3 columns). Table 2 reports the estimates of
shock parameters, along with 90% probability intervals.
The estimated habit parameters suggest that both types of agents have modest degrees of
habit persistence, with the entrepreneur’s habit formation slightly stronger than the household’s (0.66 vs. 0.50). The estimated investment adjustment cost parameter (Ω = 0.18) is
much smaller than the values reported in the DSGE literature without financial frictions.
The estimated patience factor (0.0089) implies that the first-order excess return (i.e.,
the steady-state return from investment less the steady-state loan rate) is about 3.60% per
annum. Thus, the entrepreneur assigns a substantial premium to existing loans.7 The
estimated values of β, ϕ̄, φ, and δ are broadly in line with those reported in the literature
(Iacoviello, 2005).
The estimation reveals that the two financial shocks—a housing demand shock and a
collateral shock—are both persistent and have large standard deviations relative to other
shocks. The 90% probability intervals indicate that all parameters in the model are tightly
estimated.

IV. Economic Implications
In this section, we discuss the model’s quantitative implications based on the estimated
parameters. In particular, we identify a driving force behind the joint dynamics between
land prices and key macroeconomic variables, and we evaluate the quantitative importance
of the model’s transmission mechanism for this driving force. In addition, we examine the
extent to which the model can generate large declines in investment following a collapse in
land prices, as we observe in the recent financial crisis.
6Supplemental

Appendix I derives the system of log-linearized equations and discusses the difficulty and

challenge of estimating this credit-constraint model. The supplemental materials, along with dynare and
C/C++ source code, are available at http://www.tzha.net/articles#CREDITCONSTRAINTS.
7Supplemental

Appendix I describes our derivations of the first-order excess return.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

9

IV.1. Relative importance of the shocks. Our estimated model helps us assess the relative importance of the shocks in driving fluctuations in the land price and macroeconomic
variables. We do this through variance decompositions. Table 3 reports variance decompositions for the land price and several key macroeconomic variables across the 8 types of
structural shocks at forecasting horizons between the impact period (1Q) and six years after
the initial shock (24Q).
Variance decompositions show that a shock to the investment-specific technology (IST),
either permanent or transitory, does not explain much of the fluctuations in the land price and
key macroeconomic variables. The DSGE literature shows that, in models without financial
friction, IST shocks are not important for macroeconomic fluctuations if the model is fitted
to time-series data of the relative price of investment; but if such shocks are treated as latent
variables in estimation, they can be important (Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, 2011;
Liu, Waggoner, and Zha, Forthcoming). As we discuss below in Section V.4, even when we
estimate our model without fitting to the investment price series, an IST shock still does not
drive investment fluctuations because firms are credit constrained.
A neutral technology shock (i.e., a TFP shock), either permanent or transitory, contributes
little to land price fluctuations. Although a TFP shock, especially the permanent component,
accounts for a substantial fraction of fluctuations in output, its impact is not amplified
through credit constraints since the shock does not move the land price. These findings
are consistent with Kocherlakota (2000) and Cordoba and Ripoll (2004), who report weak
amplification and propagation effects of credit constraints following a TFP shock.
Similar to a TFP shock, a labor supply shock or a patience shock explains a sizable fraction
of fluctuations in output, investment, and labor hours, but these shocks do not contribute to
land price fluctuations. These shocks do drive business cycle fluctuations, but they do not
work through the financial channel created by credit constraints because they do not move
asset prices.
In contrast, a housing demand shock drives most (about 90%) of land price fluctuations.
Working through firms’ credit constraints, moreover, a housing demand shock causes a substantial fraction of fluctuations in investment (about 30-40%), output (about 20-30%), and
labor hours (about 35-45%).
Similar to a housing demand shock, a collateral shock is propagated through the credit
constraint since it directly impacts upon the entrepreneur’s borrowing capacity. In our
estimation, the shock is persistent and accounts for a non-negligible fraction of fluctuations
in investment, output, and hours (about 10-15%). The two financial shocks together (i.e., the
housing demand shock and the collateral shock) account for about 30% of the fluctuations in
output, 40-55% in business investment, and 50% in labor hours. This finding corroborates

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

10

the results obtained by Jermann and Quadrini (2009), who show that financial shocks that
affect firms’ ability to borrow play an important role for business cycles.
IV.2. What shocks drive the land price? Estimated variance decompositions show that
a housing demand shock is the primary force driving fluctuations in the the land price, while
other shocks, including a TFP shock, have little impact on the land price. Since credit
constraints can amplify and propagate a particular shock only when the shock can trigger
fluctuations in the collateral value, it is important to understand why a housing demand
shock can drive land price fluctuations but other shocks such as a TFP shock do not.
To illustrate an economic intuition, consider an example in which the representative household has linear utility in consumption and land services: U(C, Lh ) = C + ϕLh . Suppose the
taste shifter ϕ is constant. The land Euler equation implies that the land price is a discounted sum of future marginal rates of substitution (MRS) between land and consumption.
In this case, the MRS is constant and equals ϕ. Since the interest rate is constant, the land
price is simply qt = ϕ/(1 − β), which is constant unless ϕ varies. Thus, in this example, the
land price does not respond to any shocks other than a housing demand shock.
This intuition carries over to a more general case with curvatures in the utility function.
In our benchmark model with log-utility in consumption and land services, for instance, the
land Euler equation (absent habit formation) is given by
qlt = βEt

ϕt Cht
Cht
ql,t+1 +
.
Ch,t+1
Lht

(20)

In the absence of housing demand shocks (i.e., with ϕt held constant), the MRS is as volatile
as consumption and the land price is as volatile as the discounted sum of current and future
consumption expenditures. Since the land price is much more volatile than consumption
expenditures in the data, a TFP shock cannot generate the observed fluctuations in the
land price and therefore it cannot be propagated through credit constraints, confirming the
findings in Kocherlakota (2000) and Cordoba and Ripoll (2004).
In contrast, a housing demand shock directly influences the MRS and thus can drive large
fluctuations in the land price without requiring consumption to be highly volatile at the
same time. This finding is consistent with Davis and Heathcote (2007), who argue, based on
a regression analysis, that land prices are “strongly influenced by the factors traditionally
associated with housing demand.” Our model provides a formal quantitative evaluation of
a driving force behind land price fluctuations in the context of a DSGE model.8
IV.3. The model’s propagation mechanism. To explain large fluctuations in land prices
and strong co-movements between land prices and macroeconomic variables, we need both
8We

discuss some interpretations of housing demand shocks in Appendix C.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

11

a shock to lift the land price on impact (which we identify as a housing demand shock) and
a mechanism to propagate the shock’s effect on the macroeconomy.
To understand the model’s propagation mechanism, we analyze the optimal land holding
decision (20) by the household, along with the land holding decision by the entrepreneur:


Cet
Yt+1
µbt
+ ql,t+1 +
θt Et ql,t+1 .
qlt = βEt
αφ
(21)
Ce,t+1
Let
µet
To simplify exposition, we abstract from habit formation by setting γh = γe = 0. The term
µbt
µet

in (21) is the shadow value of the entrepreneur’s existing loans (in consumption units),

which is strictly positive if and only if the credit constraint is binding.
According to Equation (20), the cost of acquiring a marginal unit of land is qlt units of
consumption goods; the benefit of having the marginal unit of land, which is summarized on
the right-hand side of (20), consists of the marginal utility of land services (in consumption
units) and the discounted resale value of land. At the margin, the marginal cost equals the
marginal benefit. Equation (21) indicates that, since the entrepreneur is credit constrained,
acquiring a marginal unit of land yields benefits not only from the future marginal product
of land and the resale value, but also from the shadow value of land as a collateral asset.
These Euler equations can be intuitively thought of as the land demand equations by
the two types of agents, as illustrated in Figure 3 and discussed in the introduction. The
figure plots the relation between the current land price qlt and the quantity of land held
by the household (Lht ) and the relation between qlt and the quantity of land held by the
entrepreneur (Let ). In plotting these land demand curves, we treat other variables such as
the future land price, consumption growth, the marginal product of land, and exogenous
shocks as shift factors. We assume that the initial equilibrium (Point A) is at the steady
state.
Consider a housing demand shock that raises the household’s marginal utility of land.
The higher land demand from the household raises the land price and the entrepreneur’s
net worth, triggering competing demand for land between the two sectors that drives up the
land price further, setting off a financial multiplier that leads to a large increase in the land
price and a significant expansion of business investment and production.9
IV.4. Effects of amplification and propagation. We have argued that a housing demand
shock is an important source of fluctuations in the land price and macroeconomic variables.
We have also argued that our model’s mechanism amplifies and propagates a housing demand
shock but not a technology shock.
9In

Supplement Appendix II, we discuss our model’s implications for the reallocation of land follow-

ing a housing demand shock. We present some evidence that supports our model’s implications for land
reallocation.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

12

One way to examine the effectiveness of the model’s propagation mechanism is to compare
impulse responses of macroeconomic variables in the benchmark economy with endogenous
credit limit to those in a counterfactual economy with exogenously fixed credit limit. Unlike
the benchmark model in which a firm’s debt interacts with asset prices, debt in the counterfactual economy does not vary endogenously (it varies only if there is a collateral shock).
Comparing impulse responses across the two economies thus informs us of the quantitative
importance of the endogenous interactions between debt and asset prices in propagating
economic shocks.
Figure 4 displays the impulse responses of the land price and key macroeconomic variables
following a permanent technology shock (the left column) and those following a housing
demand shock (the right column). The impulse responses of macroeconomic variables to a
TFP shock in the benchmark economy (solid lines) are not much different from those in the
counterfactual economy (dashed lines). Indeed, the impulse responses in the counterfactual
economy lie well within the standard error bands of the impulse responses estimated in our
benchmark model (measured by dotted-dashed lines). This result is similar to the findings
by Kocherlakota (2000) and Cordoba and Ripoll (2004). As we have discussed before, credit
constraints do not propagate the effects of a TFP shock because the shock do not lift asset
prices.
In contrast, the model does propagate the effects of a housing demand shock, as is evident
in the right column of Figure 4. The housing demand shock drives much larger fluctuations
in the land price than does the TFP shock. More important is the finding that the housing demand shock generates much larger responses of consumption, investment, and labor
hours in the benchmark model (solid lines) than in the counterfactual economy (dashed
lines). Firms’ credit constraints are thus very effective in propagating a housing demand
shock because the shock directly impacts upon the land price, triggering a dynamic financial
multiplier through interactions between the land price and investment spending.
Consumption decisions, in particular the entrepreneur’s, have implications for investment
dynamics in response to a shock to the land price. The right column of Figure 4 shows
that a housing demand shock leads to a slow, highly persistent, and hump-shaped response
of aggregate consumption. Being impatient, the entrepreneur would have a desire to consume every penny borrowed if the utility function were linear. With concave utility, the
entrepreneur would like to smooth consumption by investing part of the loans; and this intertemporal smoothing incentive is reinforced by habit persistence. Thus, the entrepreneur’s
habit persistence dampens consumption and amplifies an investment response to land price
shocks.10
10Since

entrepreneurs own the firms, their consumption can be interpreted as dividend payout from firms.

Thus, our model’s mechanism for explaining the joint dynamics in the land price and investment requires

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

13

IV.5. Historical counterfactuals. Empirical studies have documented co-movements between housing prices and consumption expenditures (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989; Zeldes,
1989; Case, Quigley, and Shiller, 2005; Mian and Sufi, 2010). Some recent work examines the effects of changes in housing prices on consumption in a DSGE framework with
households facing collateral constraints (Iacoviello, 2005; Iacoviello and Neri, 2010; Kiyotaki, Michaelides, and Nikolov, 2010; Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Nieuwerburgh, 2011). In
this section, we compare the relative importance of the effects of a housing demand shock
on consumption with the effects on business investment and labor hours, both in the data
and in the simulated model.
We begin with the data. Figure 2 reveals that, in the data, consumption, business investment, and labor hours move together with the land price. A positive shock to the land price
raises investment and hours by more than it does consumption. In particular, following a
shock to the land price, the peak response of business investment is about 25% of the peak
response of the land price, while the peak response of consumption is much smaller at about
12% of the peak land-price response.11
We now show that the two types of financial shocks identified in our structural model—a
housing demand shock and a collateral shock—are a driving force behind these facts. For this
purpose, we calculate what would have happened if only the financial shocks had occurred
throughout the history. Since our model is structural, it is internally coherent to perform this
counterfactual exercise. We implement this exercise by first estimating the time-series paths
of all shocks based on our estimated parameters. Conditioning on the estimated initial state
variables and the estimated sequence of housing demand shocks or the estimated sequences
of both housing demand and collateral shocks (with all other shocks turned off accordingly),
we simulate the data from our DSGE model. We then compare the BVAR impulse responses
estimated with the simulated data to those implied by the actual data.
Figure 5 displays the BVAR impulse responses following a shock to the land price based
on simulated data from the benchmark DSGE model conditioned on housing demand shocks
alone. The 3 columns in each figure reports the impulse responses of the land price and each
of the 3 macroeconomic variables—business investment, labor hours, and consumption—
following a positive shock to the land price. The way these impulse responses are calculated
is exactly the same as the bivariate BVAR applied to the actual data. The figure shows that
some form of dividend smoothing. In a similar vein, Jermann and Quadrini (Forthcoming) show that, for
financial shocks to have an impact on real variables (such as employment), it is important to incorporate
costly adjustments in dividend payout.
11The size of the consumption response relative to the land-price response from our BVAR is consistent
with the magnitude of wealth effects of housing prices on consumption (of about 12%) reported by Iacoviello
and Neri (2010).

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

14

a housing demand shock is a primary cause of the positive co-movements of the land price
with business investment, labor hours, and consumption.
When we turn on both housing demand shocks and collateral shocks, the model is able to
generate the magnitude of impulse responses of macroeconomic variables and the persistence
of co-movements between the land price and these macroeconomic variables comparable to
those in the actual data, as a simple comparison between Figure 6 and Figure 2 reveals.12
The findings suggest that, working through the endogenous credit-constraint channel,
financial shocks—in particular housing demand shocks—lead to macroeconomic responses
that form a dominant force behind most of the co-movements between the land price and
macroeconomic variables observed in the data.

IV.6. Shedding light on the Great Recession. As discussed in the introduction and
documented in Figure 1, our model is motivated by the collapse in land prices and the
subsequent deep recession. During the Great Recession period from 2007:Q3 to 2009:Q2,
in particular, the real land price plummeted by 25% and business investment fell by 22%.
To what extent can our model generate the observed declines in land prices and business
investment observed in the Great Recession?
To quantify the model’s role in explaining the history, we calculate the paths of land prices
and business investment conditional on the estimated housing demand shocks alone (with
all other shocks shut off), using the same method as in Section IV.5. As can be seen from
Figure 7, housing demand shocks play a crucial role in driving the sharp declines of both
land prices and business investment from 2006:Q1 through 2010:Q4. Fluctuations in land
prices are almost entirely accounted for by housing demand shocks in our model; the effects
of these shocks are propagated through credit constraints to generate the declines in business
investment.
Comparing to the actual data (thin lines in Figure 7), these results suggest that shocks
originating in the household sector are primarily responsible for the joint declines in land
prices and business investment observed during the recent financial crisis period. They
reinforce our finding that since land is an important collateral asset for firms’ borrowing
capacity and investment spending, financial shocks are transmitted through firms’ credit
constraints to fluctuations in the macroeconomy.

12

By construction, had all the other shocks in our DSGE model been left in place, the simulations would

have matched the observed data exactly and the impulse responses from the BVAR applied to these simulated
data would have been exactly the same as those applied to the actual data.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

15

V. Sensitivity
In this section we evaluate the sensitivity of our results by studying several variations
of the benchmark model, the data, and the estimation approach. We highlight our main
findings below and provide the details in Supplemental Appendix III.
V.1. Allowing land supply to grow. In the benchmark model, we assume that aggregate
land supply is fixed. With fixed land supply, a shock to housing demand raises the land price
as households and firms compete for the limited amount of land. As the land price rises,
firms are able to borrow more to expand investment and production, leading to a boom.
The assumption of fixed land supply is, of course, not our literal interpretation of what
happens in the actual economy. Indeed, some microeconomic evidence suggests that land
supply elasticity varies substantially across regions and cities (Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saks,
2005). Land growth in U.S. urban areas can be restricted by zoning and other land-use
restrictions. More important is an urban land development that is limited by geographic
factors such as the presence of wetland and steep terrains (Saiz, Forthcoming). While heterogeneity abounds with man-made rules and geographic factors, Davis and Heathcote (2007)
show that aggregate land supply grows very slowly. Taking into account population growth,
per capital land growth is close to zero, consistent with our assumption in the model.
One may, however, be interested in knowing how the model’s implications would change
if we allow aggregate land supply to have trend growth at an exogenous rate of λ̄l . The
land growth captures low-frequency expansions of residential and commercial land. The
market clearing condition for land becomes Lht + Let = λ̄tl L̄. To obtain balanced growth
and maintain a well-defined equilibrium, we assume that the stocks of land holdings in each
sector grow with the same trend. Within any finite horizon the growth rates of land in the
two sectors may differ following economic shocks that lead to land reallocation. We find that
incorporating land supply growth does not affect the steady-state ratios, nor does it affect
dynamic deviations of endogenous variables from the balanced growth path.13
V.2. Incorporating working capital. Our benchmark model has intertemporal loans only
and abstracts from working capital. We now consider a broader set of debt instruments
by incorporating working capital in the model. In particular, we follow the approach in
13In

Supplemental Appendix III, we derive the balanced growth path in the model with land supply growth

and show that equilibrium dynamics remain unchanged relative to our benchmark model. We hope that our
mechanism for explaining how the effects of a shock on land prices can spill over into the macroeconomy
will lay the groundwork for building an ambitious and empirically plausible general equilibrium model that
takes into account some arguably more realistic setups in which land supply responds to man-made rules
that are endogenous to changes in the land price and in which land price dispersion responds to wage and
productivity dispersions.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

16

Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2010) and Mendoza (2010) by assuming that a fraction
φw of wage payment needs to be financed by working capital. The total amount of debt,
including intertemporal debt and working capital, cannot exceed a fraction of firms’ collateral
assets—land and capital. Thus, the borrowing constraint is given by
Bt ≤ θt Et [ql,t+1 Let + qk,t+1 Kt ] − φw wt Net Rt .

(22)

All other aspects of the model are the same as in the benchmark.
We re-estimate this model with working capital. The estimation results are very similar to
those in our benchmark model. Our results, therefore, are robust when we allow for working
capital.
V.3. No patience shocks. The DSGE literature often finds that an intertemporal preference shock (i.e., patience shock) is important in driving business cycles. A patience shock
is sometimes interpreted as a shock to risk premia (Smets and Wouters, 2007). In our estimated model, a patience shock accounts for a sizable fraction of investment fluctuations
(about 15-20%), making it the second most important shock that drives investment fluctuations after the housing demand shock (Table 3). Therefore it is important to examine
whether abstracting from this shock would change the model’s quantitative implications in
a significant way. When we re-estimate the model without patience shocks, we find that a
housing demand shock remains to be the most important driving force for investment dynamics, accounting for about 30-40% of investment fluctuations (see the column under “No
Patience” in Table 4).
V.4. Latent IST shocks. Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2011) argue that if the
price of investment goods is not used in fitting the model, investment-specific shocks can
be interpreted as “financial” shocks and may have a large impact on macroeconomic fluctuations. When we re-estimate the model by treating IST shocks as a latent variable (i.e.,
without fitting to the time-series data of the relative price of investment), we find that a
housing demand shock still accounts for 23-46% of investment fluctuations (see the column
under “Latent IST” in Table 4).
V.5. CoreLogic data. The land price series we use for the benchmark model is constructed
based on the FHFA home price index. In Supplemental Appendix III, we discuss some
advantages and disadvantages of using this home price index relative to using some other
measures such as the CoreLogic home price index. To examine whether our main findings
are robust to different land price series, we fit our model to the data in which the FHFA
land price series is replaced by the CoreLogic land price series. With the CoreLogic land
price data, a housing demand shock accounts for over 50% of investment fluctuations (see

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

17

the column under “CoreLogic” in Table 4) and remains to be the most important shock in
shaping investment variations.
VI. Two Key Issues
We address two important issues in this section. First, we quantify the importance of land
collateral for the model’s transmission mechanism. We do this by estimating an alternative
model in which firms do not use land as a collateral asset and we compare the transmission
mechanism of this alternative model to that of the benchmark. Second, we explore the
implications of potential volatility changes in the land price data for our quantitative results.
VI.1. Do we need land as a collateral asset? In the data, real estate represents a large
fraction of firms’ tangible assets and, as discussed in the introduction, changes in real estate
values have a significant impact on firms’ investment spending. In our benchmark model,
we assume that land is a collateral asset for firms. A positive housing demand shock raises
the land price and thereby expands firms’ borrowing capacity, enabling firms to finance
expansions of investment and production.
In a similar fashion, a positive collateral shock directly lifts firms’ borrowing capacity and
thus helps firms to expand investment and production, as shown in Jermann and Quadrini
(2009). Given the collateral shock, is it important to include land as a collateral asset for
our mechanism to operate?
To answer this question, we study an alternative model specification in which land is not
used as a collateral asset for firms and thus land prices do not influence investment decisions.
Specifically, we consider the collateral constraint
Bt ≤ θt Et qk,t+1 Kt ,

(23)

and we impose φ = 0 in the production function so that land is no longer used as collateral
or a production input. The alternative model is otherwise identical to the benchmark model.
With these changes in the model, the land price and investment are driven by separate
forces. While the land price is driven mostly by the household’s housing demand, business
investment is driven primarily by firms’ optimizing decisions. Consequently, we should expect
a collateral shock (θt ) to play a more important role in explaining investment dynamics.
We estimate the alternative model using the same set of time series data. Since capital
is the only collateral asset, the alternative model requires large fluctuations in the capital
price (qkt ) to match the business debt data. Thus, the estimated value for the investmentadjustment cost parameter is much larger than in the benchmark model (Ω = 6.35 vs. 0.18).
Accordingly, as investment adjustment becomes more sluggish, the model implies larger
values for habit persistence parameters in order to match the observed relative volatility
between consumption and investment. This is what we find in the estimation.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

18

Estimated variance decompositions confirm that, in this alternative model, fluctuations in
the land price are driven mostly by a housing demand shock, as we find in the benchmark
model but through a different mechanism. In the benchmark model, a housing demand shock
triggers competing demand for land between the two sectors and, through firms’ credit constraints, the land price and investment interact to amplify and propagate the initial shock. In
the alternative model, a housing demand shock continues to drive land-price fluctuations but,
by construction, there is no spillover of land-price dynamics to macroeconomic fluctuations.
Since changes in the land price do not have any impact on investment, a collateral shock
becomes more important in driving investment fluctuations. Indeed, estimated variance
decompositions show that a collateral shock accounts for 30-45% of investment fluctuations
in the alternative model, a much larger fraction than in the benchmark model (15%).
The two financial shocks (housing demand and collateral shocks), either acting alone or
together, have difficulty in explaining the observed co-movements between the land price
and investment. Figure 8 compares the impulse responses of the land price and business
investment to a land-price shock estimated in a BVAR using actual data (the left column)
with those estimated using simulated data from the alternative model conditioned on the
time series of the two estimated financial shocks combined (the right column). As shown
in the figure, the alternative model driven by the two financial shocks fails to generate
significant responses of business investment to a land price shock.
This result, along with our findings in the benchmark model, suggests that including
land as a collateral asset for the firm’s investment decisions is both empirically relevant and
theoretically necessary for explaining the observed co-movements between land prices and
macroeconomic variables.
VI.2. Volatility changes in land prices. Our land price series spans the sample from
1975 to 2010, covering several recession periods with changes in macroeconomic volatility
(Stock and Watson, 2003; Sims and Zha, 2006; Taylor, 2007). It is therefore important
to investigate how our results are affected when volatility changes are explicitly taken into
account. To accomplish this task, we generalize the benchmark model to allow for regime
shifts in the volatility of a housing demand shock with the following heteroskedastic process
ln ϕt = (1 − ρϕ ) ln ϕ̄ + ρϕ ln ϕt−1 + σϕ (st )εϕt ,

(24)

where the shock volatility σϕ (st ) varies with the regime st . We assume that the shock
volatility switches between two regimes (st = 1 or st = 2), with the Markov transition
probabilities summarized by the matrix P = [pij ], where pij = P rob(st+1 = i|st = j) for
i, j ∈ {1, 2}, p12 = 1 − p22 , and p21 = 1 − p11 .
We estimate this regime-switching DSGE model using the approach described in Liu,
Waggoner, and Zha (Forthcoming). In the estimation, we adopt the same prior distributions

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

19

for the parameters and use the same data set as in our benchmark model. The posterior
mode estimates of the structural parameters and the shock parameters are very similar to
those in the benchmark model. But the estimated volatility of a housing demand shock has
two distinct regimes: a low-volatility regime (regime 1 with σϕ = 0.03) and a high-volatility
regime (regime 2 with σϕ = 0.08). The posterior mode estimates of the Markov switching
probabilities (p11 = 0.9794 and p22 = 0.9662) indicate that both regimes are highly persistent,
although the low-volatility regime is more persistent than the high-volatility regime.14
Figure 9 shows the probability of the high volatility regime throughout the sample periods.
It indicates that the high volatility regime is associated with periods of large declines in land
prices (covering the two recessions between 1978 and 1983 and the recent deep recession).
According to the estimated variance decompositions, a housing demand shock accounts
for about 20% of investment fluctuations in the low-volatility regime and 55-65% in the
high-volatility regime (see the last two columns in Table 4). Since the high-volatility regime
captures periods with both large recessions and large declines in the land price, a housing
demand shock plays a more important role for explaining the dynamics in land prices and
business investment during recessions. This finding is consistent with Claessens, Kose, and
Terrones (2011), who find that a recession is typically deeper than other recessions if there
is a sharp fall in housing prices.
VII. Conclusion
We have presented evidence that land prices move together with macroeconomic variables
over the business cycles. The recent financial crisis highlights this connection. We have studied a DSGE model incorporating an empirically important feature that land is a valuable
collateral asset that firms use to finance investment spending. We have shown that, when
firms are credit constrained, a housing demand shock originating in the household sector
provides an impetus for the observed large fluctuations in land prices and for the persistent
co-movements between land prices and business investment. Thus, our model provides a
financial mechanism that propagates shocks to land prices to generate the observed macroeconomic fluctuations.
To bring out the transparency of the mechanism that drives our estimation results, our
analysis abstracts from a host of features to which our model can be extended in future
research. We abstract from investment in structures, for example, mainly because most of
the fluctuations in housing prices are driven by fluctuations in land prices, not changes in the
cost of structures (Davis and Heathcote, 2007). The cyclical behavior of residential investment, however, is an important subject studied in the literature. In particular, Fisher (2007)
14All

the estimation results for the regime-switching DSGE model are described in detail in Supplemental

Appendix III.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

20

discusses the challenges in using a standard RBC model to explain why residential investment leads business investment and offers some solutions. Studying the lead-lag relations
between structures investment and business investment in a model with financial frictions is
an important subject for future research.
In our model, there are two types of collateral assets: land and capital. We find that shocks
to land prices can explain a substantial fraction of investment fluctuations. We choose not to
fit the model to stock prices because our model, like most DSGE models in the literature, is
not equipped with the necessary frictions and shocks to explain joint dynamics between stock
prices and macroeconomic variables. When we estimate a BVAR model with land prices,
investment, and stock prices, we find that a positive shock to stock prices also leads to a
large and persistent increase in investment, although it does not seem to move land prices.
On the other hand, a positive shock to land prices leads to a positive but small increase in
stock prices.15 Thus, although stock prices do appear to co-move with investment, they are
likely to be driven by shocks other than those related to housing demand. In a related but
very different setup, Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2010) fit a DSGE model to stock
prices along with other macroeconomic variables. An ambitious project for future research
is to fit a DSGE model to both land prices and stock prices.
The financial crisis has made it painfully clear that a better understanding of the interactions between the housing market and the macroeconomy could improve policy making. The
financial mechanism identified in this paper provides a natural environment for evaluating
the role of policy interventions in the throes of financial crisis.

15For

details of the BVAR results, see the section entitled “Stock prices, land prices, and investment” in

Supplemental Appendix III.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

21

References
Berger, A. N., and G. F. Udell (1990): “Collateral, Loan Quality, and Bank Risk,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 25, 21–42.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Accelerator
in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in The Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed.
by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, pp. 1341–1393. Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,
North Holland.
Boldrin, M., L. J. Christiano, and J. D. Fisher (2001): “Habit Persistence, Asset
Returns, and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 149–166.
Campbell, J. Y., and N. G. Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates:
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by O. J.
Blanchard, and S. Fischer, vol. 4, pp. 185–216. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Carlstrom, C. T., and T. S. Fuerst (1997): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review,
87(5), 893–910.
Case, K., J. Quigley, and R. Shiller (2005): “Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock
Market versus the Housing Market,” Advances in Macroeconomics, Berkeley Electronic
Press, 5(1), 1–32.
Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2009): “The Collateral Channel: How Real
Estate Shocks affect Corporate Investment,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamics Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 1–45.
Christiano, L., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2010): “Financial Factors in Economic
Fluctuations,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Christiano, L. J., M. Trabandt, and K. Walentin (2007): “Introducing Financial
Frictions and Unemployment into a Small Open Economy Model,” Manuscript, Sveriges
Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 214.
Claessens, S., M. A. Kose, and M. E. Terrones (2011): “How Do Business and
Financial Cycles Interact?,” IMF Working Paper WP/11/88.
Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini (2004): “Aggregate Consequences of Limited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4), 817–847.
Cordoba, J.-C., and M. Ripoll (2004): “Credit Cycles Redux,” International Economic
Review, 45(4), 1011–1046.
Cummins, J. G., and G. L. Violante (2002): “Investment-Specific Technical Change in
the United States (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences,” Review
of Economic Dynamics, 5, 243–284.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

22

Davis, M. A., and J. Heathcote (2007): “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land
in the United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 2595–2620.
De Fiore, F., and H. Uhlig (2005): “Bank finance versus bond finance: what explains
the differences between US and Europe?,” European Central Bank Working Paper 547.
Del Negro, M., G. Eggertsson, A. Ferrero, and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “The Great
Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Feds Non-Standard Policies,” Manuscript,
Princeton University.
Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2008): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models (and
How It Affects the Assessment of Nominal Rigidities),” Journal of Monetary Economics,
pp. 1191–1208.
Denton, F. T. (1971): “Adjustment of Monthly or Quarterly Series to Annual Totals:
An Approach Based on Quadratic Minimization,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 66, 99–102.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. V. Nieuwerburgh (2011): “The Macroeconomic Eects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General
Equilibrium,” Unpublished manuscript, New York University.
Fisher, J. D. M. (2007): “Why Does Household Investment Lead Business Investment
over the Business Cycle?,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1), 141–168.
Gan, J. (2007): “Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 709–734.
Gertler, M., S. Gilchrist, and F. M. Natalucci (2007): “External Constraints on
Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 295–330.
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis,” Manuscript, New York University and Princeton University.
Gilchrist, S., A. Ortiz, and E. Zakrajsek (2009): “Credit Risk and the Macroeconomy: Evidence from an Estimated DSGE Model,” Unpublished manuscript, Boston
University.
Gilchrist, S., V. Yankov, and E. Zakrajsek (2009): “Credit market shocks and
economic fluctuations: Evidence from corporate bond and stock markets,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 56, 471–493.
Glaeser, E. L., J. Gyourko, and R. E. Saks (2005): “Why Have Housing Prices Gone
Up?,” American Economic Review, 95(2), 329–333.
Gordon, R. J. (1990): The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago,Illinois.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-Run Implications of
Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87, 342–362.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

23

Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron (2009): “Sources of Lifetime Inequality,”
Manuscript.
Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in
the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.
Iacoviello, M., and S. Neri (2010): “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
Estimated DSGE Model,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 125–164.
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2009): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”
American Economic Review, forthcoming.
(Forthcoming): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,” American Economic
Review.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2011): “Investment Shocks and
the Relative Price of Investment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 101–121.
Kiyotaki, N., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2010): “Winners and Losers in Housing Markets,” Central Bank of Cyprus Working Paper 2010-5.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
105(2), 211–248.
(2008): “Liquidity, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy,” Manuscript, Princeton
University and London School of Economics.
Kocherlakota, N. (2000): “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 24(3), 2–10.
Liu, Z., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (Forthcoming): “Sources of Macroeconomic
Fluctuations: A Regime-Switching DSGE Approach,” Quantitative Economics.
Liu, Z., P. Wang, and T. Zha (2009b): “A Theory of Housing Demand Shocks,” Manuscript.
(2009c): “Do Credit Constraints Amplify Macroeconomic Fluctuations?,” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2009-28.
Mendoza, E. G. (2010): “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic Review, 100, 1941–1966.
Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2010): “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009,”
NBER Working Papers 15896.
Quart, D. C., and J. M. Quigley (1989): “Inferring an Investment Return Series for
Real Estate from Observations on Sales,” Real Estate Economics, 17(2), 218–230.
(1991): “Price Formation and the Appraisal Function in Real Estate Markets,”
Journal of Real Estate Finance & Economics, 4(2), 127–146.
Saiz, A. (Forthcoming): “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

24

Sims, C. A., and H. Uhlig (1991): “Understanding Unit Rooters: A Helicopter Tour,”
Econometrica, 59(6), 1591–1599.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (1998): “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate Models,”
International Economic Review, 39(4), 949–968.
(1999): “Error Bands for Impulse Responses,” Econometrica, 67(5), 1113–1155.
(2006): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 96, 54–81.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2003): “Has the Business Cycles Changed? Evidence and Explanations,” in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing
Economy, pp. 9–56. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Taylor, J. B. (2007): “Housing and Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper 13682.
Zeldes, S. P. (1989): “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 305–346.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

25

Table 1. Prior and posterior distributions of structural parameters
Prior
Parameter

Distribution

a

γh

Beta(a,b)

γe

Beta(a,b)

Ω

Posterior
b

Low

High

Mode

Low

High

1.00 2.00 0.025

0.776

0.4976 0.4496 0.5621

1.00 2.00 0.025

0.776

0.6584 0.3392 0.8009

Gamma(a,b) 1.00 0.50 0.102

5.994

0.1753 0.1502 0.2406

100(gγ − 1) Gamma(a,b) 1.86 3.01 0.100

1.500

0.4221 0.2282 0.5029

100(λ̄q − 1) Gamma(a,b) 1.86 3.01 0.100

1.500

1.2126 1.0577 1.3297

β

Simulated

0.9563 0.9946

0.9855 0.9833 0.9909

λ̄a

Simulated

0.0000 0.0509

0.0089 0.0015 0.0119

ϕ̄

Simulated

0.0000 0.0697

0.0457 0.0395 0.0603

φ

Simulated

0.0655 0.0701

0.0695 0.0693 0.0700

δ

Simulated

0.0291 0.0485

0.0368 0.0354 0.0396

Note: “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for the prior
distribution.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

26

Table 2. Prior and posterior distributions of shock parameters
Prior

Posterior

Parameter Distribution

a

b

Low

High

Mode

Low

High

ρa

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.9055 0.8567 0.9291

ρz

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.4263 0.2728 0.5488

ρνz

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.0095 0.0095 0.4346

ρq

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.5620 0.4584 0.6631

ρνq

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.2949 0.0814 0.6062

ρϕ

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.9997 0.9987 0.9999

ρψ

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.9829 0.9752 0.9948

ρθ

Beta(a,b)

1.0000 2.0000

0.0256 0.7761

0.9804 0.9773 0.9917

σa

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.1013 0.0782 0.7223

σz

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0042 0.0033 0.0051

σνz

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0037 0.0033 0.0048

σq

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0042 0.0034 0.0050

σνq

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0029 0.0023 0.0037

σϕ

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0462 0.0431 0.0570

σψ

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0073 0.0067 0.0087

σθ

Inv-Gam(a,b) 0.3261 1.45e-04 0.0001 2.0000

0.0112 0.0102 0.0126

Note: “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for the prior
distribution.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

27

Table 3. Variance decompositions of aggregate quantities

Horizon Patience Ngrowth Nlevel Bgrowth Blevel Housing Labor Collateral
Land price
1Q

4.09

1.97

1.35

0.01

0.03

89.99

2.55

0.00

4Q

3.30

3.19

0.34

0.06

0.01

90.74

2.25

0.11

8Q

2.91

3.84

0.22

0.08

0.01

90.28

2.41

0.25

16Q

2.29

4.88

0.17

0.05

0.00

89.58

2.68

0.35

24Q

1.77

5.68

0.13

0.13

0.00

89.27

2.72

0.29

Investment
1Q

19.37

1.13

14.30

3.01

2.34

35.46

12.06

12.33

4Q

18.80

5.64

4.95

0.88

0.44

41.19

12.02

16.08

8Q

17.23

9.19

3.70

3.63

0.32

38.71

12.56

14.65

16Q

14.91

12.71

3.11

9.86

0.29

33.70

13.00

12.42

24Q

13.56

14.41

2.83

14.13

0.26

30.67

12.63

11.51

Output
1Q

12.28

6.92

16.07

5.34

0.57

27.82

21.85

9.17

4Q

11.22

17.14

4.73

1.75

0.11

31.80

21.13

12.12

8Q

9.68

25.20

3.19

0.99

0.07

28.32

22.22

10.32

16Q

7.43

35.70

2.29

1.47

0.06

21.82

23.85

7.38

24Q

5.97

42.82

1.84

2.35

0.05

17.37

23.87

5.74

Hours
1Q

12.46

0.43

1.48

6.40

0.35

44.87

20.20

13.82

4Q

11.88

0.61

2.69

2.61

0.11

44.94

24.08

13.09

8Q

10.72

1.27

2.25

1.84

0.12

42.50

29.75

11.56

16Q

9.29

1.49

1.95

1.95

0.11

37.54

37.68

9.99

24Q

8.68

1.42

1.81

1.96

0.11

34.75

41.45

9.83

Note: Columns 2 to 9 report the contributions of a patience shock (Patience), permanent
and transitory shocks to neutral technology (Ngrowth and Nlevel), permanent and
transitory shocks to biased technology (Bgrowth and Blevel), a housing demand shock
(Housing), a labor supply shock (Labor), and a collateral shock (Collateral).

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

28

Table 4. Contributions (in percent) to investment fluctuations from a housing demand shock
Horizon No patience Latent IST CoreLogic High vol Low vol
1Q

34.10

41.10

55.74

60.49

19.19

4Q

39.31

46.35

58.68

66.31

23.39

8Q

37.27

39.02

57.90

63.96

21.59

16Q

31.74

28.48

54.60

58.85

18.16

24Q

28.66

23.48

52.18

55.46

16.19

Note: The column “No patience” displays the results from the benchmark model with the
patience shock removed; the column “Latent IST” reports the results from the benchmark
model without fitting to the data on the relative price of investment goods; the column
labeled by “CoreLogic” displays the results from the benchmark model with the Core Logic
data on the land price; and the columns labeled by “High vol” and “Low vol” report the
contributions under the high and low volatility regimes from the regime-switching
benchmark model.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

29
7.5

0.5

0.4

7.45

0.3

7.4

0.2

7.35

0.1

7.3

0

−0.1
2006

7.25

2006.5

2007

2007.5

2008

2008.5

2009

2009.5

2010

2010.5

7.2
2011

Figure 1. The financial crisis episode: Log real land price and log investment.

Investment

Land price

Land price (left scale)
Investment (right scale)

30

4

8

Data

16
Quarters

20

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

Land price

Hours
−0.005

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

4

8

Data

16
Quarters

20

4

8

Data

16
Quarters

20

Land price

Consumption

Land price

Investment

Figure 2. Impulse responses from a recursive bivariate BVAR model with
the land price ordered first. Each column displays impulse responses to a
shock to the land price. Solid lines represent the estimated responses and
dotted-dashed lines represent the 68% posterior probability bands.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

31

ql

Le

Lh

E
C
B
A

Le

Lh

Figure 3. Dynamic financial multiplier: an illustration. Lh denotes the
household’s holding of land, Le denotes the entrepreneur’s holding of land,
and ql denotes the price of land.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

Land price

Permanent technology shock

32

Housing demand shock

0.015

0.045

0.01

0.04

0.005

0.035

0

0.03
−3

6
4

0.01

2
0.005

Investment

Consumption

0.015

x 10

0

0

−2

0.03

0.06
0.04

0.02

0.02

0.01

0
−0.02

0
−3

Hours

4

−3

x 10

15

x 10

10

2

5

0
−2

0

4

8

16
Quarters

24

−5

4

8

16

24

Quarters

Figure 4. Impulse responses to a positive (one-standard-deviation) shock
to neutral technology growth (left column) and to a positive (one-standarddeviation) shock to housing demand (right column). Thick solid lines represent
the estimated responses and thin dotted-dashed lines demarcate the 68% probability bands. Thick dashed lines represent the responses in the counterfactual
economy with fixed credit limit.

33

−2

0

2

4

6

8

12
0.016

10

0.02
0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

Consumption

0.08

x 10

4

−3

8

16 20
Quarters

Housing demand

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

0

0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

0.014

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

4

8

16 20
Quarters

Housing demand

Land price
Land price

0

0.01

0.02

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.03

Investment

0.1

4

8

16 20
Quarters

Housing dmeand

Hours

Land price

Figure 5. Impulse responses to a shock to the land price from a recursive
bivariate BVAR model based on the simulated data from the benchmark DSGE
model with estimated housing demand shocks only. Solid lines represent the
estimated responses and dotted-dashed lines represent the 68% probability
bands.

34

−2

0

2

4

12
0.014

6

0.02
0.02

8

0.03
0.03

10

0.04
0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

Consumption

0.08

x 10

4

−3

8

16 20
Quarters

Housing & collateral

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

0

0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

4

8

16 20
Quarters

Housing & collateral

Land price
Land price

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.025

Investment

0.08

4

8

16 20
Quarters

Housing & collateral

Hours

Land price

Figure 6. Impulse responses to a shock to the land price from a recursive
bivariate BVAR model based on the simulated data from the benchmark DSGE
model with estimated housing demand shocks and collateral shocks combined.
Solid lines represent the estimated responses and dotted-dashed lines represent
the 68% probability bands.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

35

7.45
0.4

7.4
0.3

Investment

Land price

7.35

0.2

7.3

7.25
0.1

7.2
0

7.15

−0.1
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

7.1
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 7. The financial crisis episode: Counterfactual paths of the land price
and investment, conditional on estimated housing demand shocks only. Each
graph shows the actual path in log value (thin line), counterfactual path from
the benchmark model (thick line), and the Great Recession period (shaded
area).

2011

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS
Data

36

Housing & Collateral

0.08

Land price

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02

0.03

Investment

0.02
0.01
0
−0.01
−0.02
−0.03

4

8

16
Quarters

20

4

8

16

20

Quarters

Figure 8. Impulse responses to a shock to the land price from a recursive
bivariate BVAR model. Solid lines represent the estimated responses and
dotted-dashed lines represent the 68% probability bands. The first column
is based on the actual data. The second column on the counterfactual data
generated with both housing demand and collateral shocks from the alternative
model.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

37
1

1

0.8

0

0.6

−0.5

0.4

−1

0.2

Land price

0.5

−1.5
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Probability of high volatility regime

Land price (left scale)
Regime probability (right scale)

0
2015

Figure 9. Log real land prices (left scale) and the posterior probability of
the high-volatility regime estimated from the regime-switching model (right
scale). The shaded area marks NBER recession dates.

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

38

Appendix A. Data Description
All data are either taken directly from the Haver Analytics Database or constructed by
Patrick Higgins at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. The construction methods are
described below.
The model estimation is based on six U.S. aggregate variables: the relative price of land
(qltData ), the inverse of the relative price of investment (QData
), real per capita consumption
t
(CtData ), real per capita investment in consumption units (ItData ), real per capita nonfinancial
business debt (BtData ), and per capita hours (LData
). All these series are constructed to
t
be consistent with the corresponding series in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997),
Cummins and Violante (2002), and Davis and Heathcote (2007). The sample period covers
the first quarter of 1975 through the fourth quarter of 2010.
These series are defined as follows:
LiqLandPricesSAFHFASplice
;
PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
Data
Qt
= GordonPriceCDplusES ;
CtData = (NomConsNHSplusND)/PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
;
LNNReviseQtr
(CD@USECON + FNE@USECON)/PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
Data
=
It
;
LNNReviseQtr
(PL10TCR5@FFUNDS + PL11TCR5@FFUNDS)/PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
Data
;
Bt
=
LNNReviseQtr
LXNFH@USECON
LtData = LNNReviseQtr .

• qltData =
•
•
•
•
•

The original data, the constructed data, and their sources are described below.
LNNReviseQtr: Civilian noninstitutional population with ages 16 years and over
by eliminating breaks in population from 10-year censuses and post 2000 American Community Surveys using the “error of closure” method. This fairly simple
method is used by the Census Bureau to get a smooth monthly population series to reduce the unusual influence of drastic demographic changes. The detailed
explanation can be found in http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/
methodology/intercensal\_nat\_meth.html. Source: BLS.
PriceNonDurPlusServExHous: Consumption deflator. The Tornqvist procedure
is used to construct this deflator as a weighted aggregate index from nondurables
consumption and services (housing services excluded). Source: BEA.
LiqLandPricesSAFHFASplice: Liquidity-adjusted price index for residential land.
The series is constructed in the following steps. We first adjust seasonally the FHFA
Home Price Index (USHPI@USECON) for 1975Q1-1991Q1, spliced to be consistent
with the Purchase Only FHFA Home Price Index (USPHPI@USECON) for 1991Q1 to
present. We then use this home price index to construct the land price series with the
Davis and Heathcote (2007) method (http://www.marginalq.com/morris/
landdata_files/2006-11-Davis-Heathcote-Land.appendix.pdf). The

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

39

adjustment methods of Quart and Quigley (1989, 1991) are used to take account of
time-on-market uncertainty. Finally, the CoreLogic land price index is constructed in
the same way except that the FHFA Home Price Index is replaced by the CoreLogic
Home Price Index. The CoreLogic home price index series provided by Core Logic
Databases is similar to the Case-Shiller (CS) Home Price Index but covers far more
counties than the CS series.
GordonPriceCDplusES: Quality-adjusted price index for consumer durable goods,
equipment investment, and software investment. This is a weighted index from a
number of individual price series within this category. For each individual price
series from 1947 to 1983, we use Gordon (1990)’s quality-adjusted price index. Following Cummins and Violante (2002), we estimate an econometric model of Gordon’s
price series as a function of time trend and several macroeconomic indicators in the
National Income and Product Account (NIPA), including the current and lagged values of the corresponding NIPA price series; the estimated coefficients are then used
to extrapolate the quality-adjusted price index for each individual price series for the
sample from 1984 to 2008. These constructed price series are annual. We use Denton
(1971)’s method to interpolate these annual series at quarterly frequency. We then
use the Tornquist procedure to construct the quality-adjusted price index from the
interpolated individual quarterly price series. Source: BEA.
NomConsNHSplusND: Nominal personal consumption expenditures: non-housing
services and nondurable goods. Source: BEA.
CD@USECON: Nominal personal consumption expenditures: durable goods. Source:
BEA.
FNE@USECON: Nominal private nonresidential investment: equipment & software.
Source: BEA.
PL10TCR5@FFUNDS: Nonfarm nonfinancial corporation business liabilities: credit
market debt. Source: BEA.
PL11TCR5@FFUNDS: Nonfarm noncorporate business liabilities: credit market
instruments. Source: BEA.
LXNFH@USECON: Nonfarm business sector: hours of all persons (1992=100).
Source: BLS.

Appendix B. Prior Description
We partition the model parameters into three subsets. The first subset of parameters
includes the structural parameters on which we have agnostic priors. This set of parameters,
collected in the vector Ψ1 = {γh , γe , Ω, , gγ , λ̄q }, consists of the habit persistence parameters

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

40

γh and γe , investment-adjustment cost parameter Ω, the growth rate of per capita output
gγ , and the growth rate of per capita investment λ̄q .
The second subset of parameters includes the structural parameters for which we use
the steady-state relations to construct informative priors. This set of parameters, collected
in the vector Ψ2 = {β, λ̄a , ϕ̄, ψ̄, φ, α, θ, δ}, consists of the subjective discount factor β, the
patience factor λ̄a , the housing preference parameter ϕ̄, the leisure preference parameter ψ̄,
the elasticity parameters in the production function φ and α, the average loan-to-asset ratio
θ, and the capital depreciation rate δ.
The third subset of parameters consists of those describing the shock processes.
For the first subset of parameters (i.e., those in Ψ1 ), we assume that the priors for γh and
γe follow the beta distribution with the shape parameters given by a = 1 and b = 2. Thus,
we assign positive density to γh = γe = 0 and let the probability density decline linearly
as the value of γh (or γe ) increases from 0 to 1. These hyper-parameter values imply that
a lower probability (5%) bound for γh and γe is 0.0256 and an upper probability (95%)
bound is 0.7761. This 90% probability interval covers most calibrated values for the habit
persistence parameter used in the literature (e.g., Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001) and
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)). The prior for the investment adjustment cost
parameter Ω follows the gamma distribution with the shape parameter a = 1 and the rate
parameter b = 0.5. These hyper-parameters imply that the probability density at Ω = 0 is
positive and that the 90% prior probability interval for Ω ranges from 0.1 to 6, which covers
most values used in the DSGE literature (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005),
Smets and Wouters (2007), and Liu, Waggoner, and Zha (Forthcoming)). The priors for the
steady-state growth rates of output and of capital follow the gamma distribution with the
90% probability interval covering the range between 0.1 and 1.5, corresponding to annual
growth rates between 0.4% and 6%. The prior distributions for the parameters in Ψ1 are
reported in the top panel of Table 1.
For the second subset of parameters (i.e., those in Ψ2 ), we fix the values of 3 parameters
and estimate the rest. In particular, we fix the value of α at 0.3, corresponding to an average

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

41

labor income share of 70%. We fix the value of θ̄ at 0.75, corresponding to an average loan-tovalue ratio of 0.75, as in the data for the nonfarm nonfinancial business sector.16 The value
of ψ̄ is adjusted so that the steady-state market hours are about 25% of time endowment.
To construct the prior distributions for the remaining 5 parameters in Ψ2 , we first simulate
the parameters in Ψ1 from their prior distributions and then, for each simulation, we impose
the steady-state restrictions on both Ψ1 and Ψ2 such that the model matches the following
moment conditions: (1) the average real prime loan rate is 4% per annum (Huggett, Ventura,
and Yaron, 2009); (2) the capital-output ratio is on average 1.15 at annual frequency; (3)
the investment-capital ratio is on average 0.209 at annual frequency; (4) the average ratio
of commercial land to private output is about 0.65 at annual frequency; and (5) the average
ratio of residential land to private output is about 1.45 at annual frequency.17
Since the prior distributions for the parameters in Ψ2 are of unknown form, the 90%
probability bounds, reported in Table 1 (the lower panel), are generated through simulations,
with the simulated prior distributions reported in Table 1 (the lower panel). As shown in the
table, the steady-state restrictions lead to informative probability intervals for the marginal
prior distributions of the parameters and thus help identify the structural parameters in
Ψ2 . Our method for constructing the prior distributions for Ψ2 is similar to the approach
studied by Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008), who combine the Baynesian approach and the
standard calibration approach for eliciting priors.
The third subset of parameters are summarized by Ψ3 = {ρi , σi } for i ∈ {a, z, νz , q, νq , ϕ, ψ, θ},
where ρi and σi denote the persistence parameters and the standard deviations of the eight
16We

measure business debt by the sum of credit market instruments for nonfarm nonfinancial corporate

businesses and those for nonfarm noncorporate businesses. We measure the assets for these firms by the
value of commercial land and equipment and software. Given the reported value of commercial real estate
in the Flow of Funds tables, we impute the value of land by multiplying the value of real estate by 0.5. This
calculation implies a ratio of business debt to tangible assets (i.e., land plus equipment and software) of
about 0.75. Since measures of land value are extremely fragmentary and noisy as we discuss in Supplemental
Appendix II, it is possible that our imputation overstates the land share in real estate and thus the actual
loan-to-value ratio might be higher than 0.75.
17Since we have a closed-economy model with no government spending, we measure private domestic
output by a sum of personal consumption expenditures and private domestic investment. Consumption is the
private expenditures on nondurable goods and non-housing services. Investment is the private expenditures
on consumer durable goods and fixed investment in equipment and software. These time series are provided
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) through Haver Analytics. Accordingly, we measure capital
stock using the annual stocks of equipment, software, and consumer durable goods. We measure the value
of land in the household sector based on annual stocks of residential assets. The commercial land-output
ratio corresponds to ratio of the nominal value of land input and the nominal value of output in the private
nonfarm and nonfinancial business sector for the period 1987-2007 taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS).

LAND-PRICE DYNAMICS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

42

structural shocks. We adopt agnostic priors for these parameters. Specifically, the priors
for the persistent parameters follow the beta distribution with the 90% probability interval
given by [0.0256, 0.7761]; the priors for the standard deviations follow the inverse gamma
distribution with the 90% probability interval given by [0.0001, 2.0]. We have examined the
sensitivity of our estimates by extending both the lower and the upper bounds of this interval
and found that the results are not sensitive.
Appendix C. What is a housing demand shock?
Given the central role that housing demand shocks play in our model, it is useful to
discuss what this type of financial shocks might represent. One interpretation is that a
housing demand shock simply represents an exogenous shift in the household’s taste for
housing services. Iacoviello and Neri (2010) present evidence that supports this view.
Another interpretation is that a housing demand shock in our stylized aggregate model,
like any shocks in the model including different technology shocks, is a reduced form representation of frictions or some “deeper” shocks that are outside of the model. In Liu, Wang,
and Zha (2009c), we present a theory of housing demand shocks. In particular, we consider
an economy with heterogeneous households who experience idiosyncratic and uninsurable
liquidity shocks and who face collateral constraints in borrowing. In the aggregated version
of that model, there is a term in the housing Euler equation that corresponds to housing
demand shocks in our current model. We show that this term is a decreasing function of
the tightness of the collateral constraints (i.e., the loan-to-value ratios) at the micro-level.
Thus, financial innovations or de-regulations that relax the households’ collateral constraints
and expand the households’ borrowing capacity in the disaggregated model would translate
into a positive housing demand shock at the aggregate level. This interpretation is consistent with the findings in Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Nieuwerburgh (2011), who report that
shocks to the loan-to-value ratios (which they interpret as changes in financial regulations)
are important for generating fluctuations in the house price-rent ratio.

