NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONEY AND HAPPINESS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE INDUSTRY WAGE STRUCTURE
Jörn-Steffen Pischke
Working Paper 17056
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17056

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

I thank Georg Graetz for excellent research assistance, and Andrew Clark, Larry Katz, Alan Manning,
Guy Mayraz, Guy Michaels, Andrew Oswald, Hannes Schwandt, Justin Wolfers, and seminar participants
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jörn-Steffen Pischke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Money and Happiness: Evidence from the Industry Wage Structure
Jörn-Steffen Pischke
NBER Working Paper No. 17056
May 2011
JEL No. D1,J31
ABSTRACT
There is a well-established positive correlation between life-satisfaction measures and income in individual
level cross-sectional data. This paper attempts to provide some evidence on whether this correlation
reflects causality running from money to happiness. I use industry wage differentials as instruments
for income. This is based on the idea that at least part of these differentials are due to rents, and part
of the pattern of industry affiliations of individuals is random. To probe the validity of these assumptions,
I compare estimates for life satisfaction with those for job satisfaction, present fixed effects estimates,
and present estimates for married women using their husbands' industry as the instrument. All these
specifications paint a fairly uniform picture across three different data sets. IV estimates are similar
to the OLS estimates suggesting that most of the association of income and well-being is causal.

Jörn-Steffen Pischke
CEP
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
s.pischke@lse.ac.uk

Money cannot buy you happiness, and happiness cannot buy you
money. That might be a wise crack, but I doubt it. Groucho
Marx

1

Introduction

Economists have taken an increasing interest in the study of life satisfaction
data during the past two decades (witness for example the surveys by Frey
and Stutzer, 2002 and Di Tella and MacCulloch, 2006). Much of this literature is interested in the impact of income on happiness (e.g. Easterlin, 1974;
Deaton, 2008; Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008a; Layard, Mayraz, and Nickell, 2008). One of the underlying questions is whether labor productivity
growth improves the well-being of individuals most if it translates (mostly)
into higher income rather than, say, more leisure or a cleaner environment.
Answering this question involves many steps.

Here I am concerned with

one of these steps: disentangling the causality between life satisfaction and
own income. Regressions of well being on income and other determinants
are also being used by researchers to value intangibles, see e.g. Luechinger
(2009).

This approach also requires knowledge of the causal e¤ect of in-

come. That this is di¢ cult has not escaped a keen observer of human nature
like Groucho Marx. But research is just beginning to make some progress
on the causality question to help Groucho out.
This paper tries to provide some evidence on the question of whether
“money can buy happiness”using industry wage di¤erentials as instruments
for family income. The motivation for these instruments stems from the literature on the reasons for industry wage di¤erentials. Many researchers
working in this area concluded that these wage di¤erentials most likely re‡ect rents rather than di¤erences in unobserved skills and worker sorting.
1

Workers in a high wage and a low wage industry may therefore not be very
di¤erent in terms of other characteristics but workers in high wage industries will generally have higher wages, earnings, and family incomes. This
approach follows Shea (2000), who has used industry a¢ liation as an instrument for income in regressions of intergenerational persistence. Using
surveys from various countries I …nd that workers in high wage industries
tend to be happier than those in low wage industries. IV estimates of the
e¤ect of income are of similar magnitudes as OLS estimates.
There are various complications with the interpretation of these results.
First, even if industry wage di¤erentials mostly re‡ect rents rather than
unobserved skills, there could still be sorting of workers into industries.
This could lead to the same type of reverse causality problem as when simply
regressing happiness on income. Secondly, there may be third factors which
a¤ect both industry a¢ liation and hence income, and happiness. A good
example are mission oriented industries. These industries o¤er low pay but
might attract relatively happy individuals. More generally, industries may
di¤er in job attributes in addition to the di¤erent wages they o¤er.

The

theory of compensating di¤erentials suggests that job attributes, which are
likely to a¤ect happiness directly, will be systematically related to wages. I
will discuss these problems in the next section.
In order to overcome these complications I o¤er various alternative approaches. I start by controlling for potentially omitted factors, like occupations. But this approach is also problematic as these controls all tend to be
choice variables of the individuals.

One particular conditioning approach

is individual …xed e¤ects, and studying industry switchers. I also contrast
results using life satisfaction and job satisfaction, since I would expect both
to be subject to similar biases. An alternative approach is to look at mar-

2

ried couples. Here, I instrument the family income of married women with
the industry a¢ liation of their husbands. With random mating, the wives
should not be a¤ected directly by the potential biases identi…ed above. Even
with assortative mating, these biases should be reduced in the wives sample.
Neither of these approaches suggests that the e¤ect of income on happiness
is overestimated in the simpler speci…cations.
An important theme in the happiness literature is the idea that life
satisfaction may depend on relative rather than absolute income.
have relatively little to say on this topic.

I will

As there is little existing work

on the causal e¤ect of income in any speci…cation of a happiness equation,
examining the simplest model with only own income seems like a natural
starting point. Expanding such an investigation to more complex models
will be an important next step.

In section 5 of the paper I discuss the

implications of a relative income speci…cation for my estimates. This is not
meant to provide a test of the relative income speci…cation against one with
only absolute income.

Nevertheless, it is important to consider because

comparison groups in a relative income speci…cation may well consist of
workers in the same industry.

In this case, my OLS and IV estimates

will be in‡uenced by the relative income coe¢ cient to di¤erent degrees. I
show that this leads to IV estimates which are lower than the corresponding
OLS estimates. Since I …nd relatively high IV estimates I conclude that
these …ndings are not simply due to the presence of omitted relative income
e¤ects.
While the happiness literature has investigated many aspects of the relationship between income and life satisfaction, there are only a handful of
papers which have tried to address the causality question. One approach is
to control for individual e¤ects as in Frijters, Haisken-DeNew, and Shields

3

(2004), who …nd positive income e¤ects for east Germans after uni…cation.
But individual …xed e¤ects are unlikely to be a complete solution as omitted factors may also be time varying. More promising are the attempts by
Gardner and Oswald (2007) and Apouey and Clark (2009) to use lottery
winners. Both papers …nd positive e¤ects. In order to produce reasonable
sized samples of winners, these studies have to rely on relatively small shocks
to income as most wins are small, so that results tend to be imprecise. In a
similar vein, Engelhardt and Gruber (2005) look at the e¤ect of the Social
Security notch on various variables, including income and happiness. Unfortunately, their estimates are too noisy to be informative. A concurrent
paper, Li et al. (2011) considers within twin pair estimates of Chinese twins
and also uses industry wage di¤erentials as instruments.

They …nd large

e¤ects of income.
The closest study to mine is Luttmer (2005), who instruments income
with industry x occupation interactions of the respondent and spouse, and
…nds IV estimates three times as high as corresponding OLS estimates.
Luttmer’s interest is primarily in comparison income of a reference group,
and the instrument for individual income in his paper is not particularly
strongly motivated. I will revisit his results below, showing that the occupation instruments are responsible for the high IV estimates. I argue that
industry is a more plausible instrument than occupation.
Clark (2003) investigates a somewhat di¤erent question. He studies how
industry and occupation e¤ects in job satisfaction are related to industry
and occupation e¤ects in wages. Clark thinks about these relationships as
telling us something about rents. His regressions essentially correspond to
the reduced forms I analyze. I …nd similar results to Clark (2003) when I
analyze job satisfaction but di¤erent results when analyzing life satisfaction.

4

Chevalier and Lydon (2002) directly regress job satisfaction on wages. They
instrument the wage with the wage of the spouse, …nding IV estimates about
twice the size of the OLS e¤ects.
The possibility of reverse causality running from happiness to income is
raised in a paper by Diener et al. (2002). Using the College and Beyond
dataset for a sample of elite college graduates, they correlate “cheerfulness”
at the time of college entry with income measured 19 years later. They …nd
a substantial positive association between the early a¤ect measure and later
income, particularly at below average levels of cheerfulness. I can replicate
this …nding in my data for income but early life-satisfaction does not predict
working in a better paying industry in ones …rst job.
Oswald, Proto, and Sgroi (2009) investigate more directly whether there
is a causal e¤ect from happiness to productivity by studying individual output in a laboratory setting. They use variation in happiness coming from
two sources. The …rst is a manipulation of mood by showing some of the
subjects a short comedy clip. These individuals report higher satisfaction
before starting a task which takes e¤ort. The second approach uses variation in life satisfaction which is due to adverse circumstances like bereavement or illness of family members. In both cases they …nd that individuals
who report higher satisfaction are more productive on the lab task. While
these results are intriguing, it is an open question to what degree they carry
over to settings outside the lab and alternative sources of di¤erences in life
satisfaction, like personality.

2

Motivating the instrument

I am interested in estimating regressions of the following form:
LSi =

+ yi + xi + ei
5

where LSi is a measure of life-satisfaction, yi is the logarithm of household
income, and xi is a set of possible covariates. This is a happiness equation
typically estimated in the literature on cross-sectional data. The worry is
that there may either be reverse causality or other factors which a¤ect both
life satisfaction and productivity and hence income.

Extreme examples

of this would be health problems or disability which limit the ability to
work.

But it is easy to think of less extreme examples, like not having

your life together, mid-life crisis, etc.

Alternatively, people who tend to

report themselves as more cheerful may also di¤er in their productivity. I
expect these omitted variables to a¤ect happiness and income in the same
direction, so the coe¢ cient on income in the happiness equation should be
biased up.
It is easy to imagine that these factors could be time varying, so individual …xed e¤ects would not solve the problem. Frijters, Haisken-DeNew, and
Shields (2004) look at income changes of east Germans after reuni…cation.
They argue that post-uni…cation income growth in east Germany was more
exogenous than other income changes. But they control for year e¤ects,
hence taking out any aggregate income growth. It is unclear why individual
level income changes for east Germans should be any more exogenous than
those for other individuals.
Finding an instrument for income is an obvious alternative.

There

are two big challenges in this undertaking. First, data sets with LS variables tend to be relatively small by today’s standards in …elds like labor
economics: a few 10,000 observations. This implies that any candidate instrument needs to move income a lot in order to give any reasonable level
of precision.

The second challenge lies in the fact that most candidate

instruments exploit some more aggregate information about individuals or

6

sub-groups of them. But lots of things including macroeconomic variables
could a¤ect life satisfaction directly.
Industry wage di¤erentials are a candidate instrument which has the
potential to overcome both problems. These di¤erentials are large: in the
US there is a 50 log point spread in household incomes between those working
in the top and bottom 2-digit industries. Despite this level of variation, my
IV estimates tend to be imprecise, and my instruments are close to the
weak instrument discomfort zone.

This suggests that much more re…ned

instruments, relying on smaller amounts of variation in the data, are unlikely
of much use.
My argument that income variation due to industry wage di¤erentials
is informative in this context rests on a series of assumptions.

The …rst

is that at least part of the variation in industry wage di¤erentials is due to
rents rather than employee characteristics. Many researchers in the 1980s
concluded that a large part of the industry wage structure is indeed due to
rents (e.g. Dickens and Katz, 1987; Katz and Summers, 1989; and Holzer,
Katz and Krueger, 1991; but see Murphy and Topel, 1987 and 1989, for
a dissenting view).

Even if industry wage di¤erentials only re‡ect rents,

there could be much sorting into industries. The best evidence on this issue
is probably the study by Gibbons and Katz (1992) who compare industry
switchers who lost their jobs in plant closings (and who are therefore likely
to choose their new industry more randomly than those who quit) to other
industry switchers. Their results are largely inconclusive, although they are
suggestive of some sorting.
As a result it is important to consider the possibility that the industry wage structure is correlated with unobserved skills. If happier workers
are also more productive this could imply that happier workers systemati-

7

cally sort into higher paying industries and my IV strategy does not solve
the reverse causality problem.

Even when there is no sorting on the ba-

sis of unobserved skill there could still be sorting into industries directly
on the basis of satisfaction, which turns out to be correlated with incomes.
Holzer, Katz, and Krueger (1991) demonstrate that jobs in high wage industries tend to attract longer job queues. As a result, the employers in
these sectors have more choice. Even if applicants look similar in terms of
their productive characteristics, employers may prefer to hire more cheerful
or happier workers. This would also invalidate the exclusion restriction.
A particular sorting story has to do with compensating di¤erentials.
The jobs in certain industries may be more pleasant than in others.

In-

dustry wage di¤erentials may, at least partly, re‡ect these compensating
di¤erentials. The theory of compensating di¤erentials in competitive labor
markets suggests that wages and amenities are negatively related in equilibrium. Since amenities should enter life satisfaction this would lead to a
downward bias of any income e¤ects on happiness in my IV estimates. Of
course, one premise of my investigation is that there are rents in the labor
market. Labor markets where …rms have wage setting power will generally
lead to a tendency of wages and amenities to be more positively correlated.
Firms will use both higher wages and more amenities to attract workers (see
e.g. Manning, 2003). This leads to a countervailing force to the standard
association between wages and amenities in compensating di¤erentials models. As a result, the equilibrium correlation between wages and amenities
may be positive or negative. If this correlation is positive, my IV estimates
would be biased upward.
I pursue a number of strategies to address these sorting issues. The …rst
is to control for occupation. The idea here is that occupation is a much more

8

deliberate and important choice individual make, as compared to industry
a¢ liation but the two are correlated, of course. For example, someone may
decide to become a lawyer, and many lawyers work in legal services.

On

the other hand, there are many occupations not tied to particular sectors,
like managers, secretaries, janitors, etc. Controlling for occupation means
relying primarily on the variation coming from the occupations which are
spread across sectors while controlling for those which are concentrated in
certain sectors. A similar strategy has been pursued in the industry wage
di¤erentials literature, see e.g. Katz and Summers (1989).
The second approach is to compare the estimates for life satisfaction to
similar estimates for job satisfaction. If the causality runs from happiness
to productivity I would expect the cheerful and productive workers also to
report higher job satisfaction. I would therefore expect to see similar e¤ects
of income, instrumented by industry a¢ liation, in equations for life satisfaction and job satisfaction. If the causality runs from income to satisfaction,
I would expect an e¤ect on life satisfaction but not job satisfaction if the
answers to the job satisfaction question only refer to non-wage aspects of
the job.1 I will show that there is no strong relationship between industry
income di¤erentials and job satisfaction. If anything, workers in high wage
industries tend to have lower job satisfaction. This seems to be more consistent with a story where the IV estimates truly work through income, and
income only a¤ects life satisfaction but not job satisfaction.
The job satisfaction results are also informative regarding biases resulting
from workplace amenities. The negative association between job satisfac1
The wording of the questions is not particularly informative on whether individuals
will think of the answers as including only non-monetary job attributes or wages as well.
The GSS question is: “On the whole, how satis…ed are you with the work you do?” while
the GSOEP question is: “How satis…ed are you today with the following areas of your
life? [...] How satis…ed are you with your job?”

9

tion and income di¤erentials across industries points towards the traditional
compensating di¤erentials story dominating (and this is more pronounced
in the US data than in the German data). As a result, it seems that the
IV estimates of income on happiness are more likely biased downwards than
upwards.
An example of compensating di¤erentials is mission oriented sectors.
Some individuals may both be relatively content and not care as much about
income but put a lot of emphasis on doing a meaningful job. They will tend
to work in mission oriented sectors, which tend to be low paying on average. One interpretation is that workers in these sectors pay a compensating
di¤erential for a particular amenity they value.
Figure 1 illustrates that this is likely an important issue in my data. IV
estimation with an exhaustive set of dummy variables, like industry dummies, is equivalent to grouping the data by industry (after partialling out
covariates) and regressing industry mean happiness on industry mean income. Figure 1 shows this “visual IV”graph (after removing e¤ects due to
education, age, and race). It shows clearly that higher paying industries are
associated with happier individuals on average (the slope of regression line
in this graph is 0.19 with a standard error of 0.10 and corresponds to the
estimate in column (1) of Table 1 below). One notable outlier on the top
left is “welfare and religious services”. Priests and social workers are among
the most content individuals despite the fact that they work in the lowest
income industry. Most other industries line up reasonably well around the
regression line. Mining and legal services are the highest income industries,
and they tend to have very happy workers. However, these two industries
are located much above the regression line as well.
Figure 2 repeats the same exercise for job satisfaction instead of happi-

10

ness. Higher income in industries is not related to higher job satisfaction.
In fact, the relationship is weakly negative. “Welfare and religious services”
are again an outlier. Workers in this sector are highly satis…ed with their
low paying jobs. This is in line with the competitive version of the compensating di¤erentials model. Ignoring “welfare and religious services,”there is
little relationship between income and job satisfaction. This suggests that
amenities and compensating di¤erentials probably do not play a large role
in biasing the estimates for income. To the extent there is a bias it will tend
to reduce my IV estimates.
The third strategy to address the sorting of individuals into particular industries is to look at estimates controlling for individual …xed e¤ects.
This is feasible in one of the data set I analyze, which is a panel spanning
24 years.

The …xed e¤ects estimates will improve on the cross-sectional

estimates if industry switches are more random than initial industry a¢ liation. Using …xed e¤ects in the IV context, where the identi…cation comes
of income changes induced by industry switching may be a much more plausible strategy than relying on …xed e¤ects in direct estimates relating life
satisfaction to income, as in Frijters, Haisken-DeNew, and Shields (2004).
It turns out that the …xed e¤ects results in the IV context are similar to the
OLS estimates. But clearly, this strategy is no panacea.
The …nal strategy I pursue is to consider married men and women. I …nd
similar e¤ects in the subsample of married men. Repeating the same exercise
for married women, using their husband’s industry a¢ liation as instruments
for their family income, again yields fairly similar results. Even if there is
assortative mating on the basis of happiness or if there are spillovers from
the happiness of the men on the happiness of the women, I would generally
expect these e¤ects to be weaker for the women than the direct e¤ects for the

11

men. The reverse causality stories would therefore suggest more attenuated
IV estimates, which is not what I …nd. This also seems to point towards
a story where income is causal. Neither of these approaches is necessarily
compelling on its own to rule out alternative explanations. Nevertheless, the
results fairly uniformly point towards an explanation where life satisfaction
is correlated with industry a¢ liation because of e¤ects running through
income.

3

Data

The data come from three sources: The US General Social Survey (GSS),
the European Social Survey (ESS) and the German Socio Economic Panel
(GSOEP). The GSS is a relatively consistent repeated cross-sectional survey. I use the 26 waves from 1972 to 2006. The basic life satisfaction
measure in the GSS asks “Taken all together, how would you say things
are these days-would you say that you are very happy, pretty happy, or
not too happy?”, i.e. it allows answers in three categories. Other measures I use are recorded on di¤erent scales. In order to make results from
these di¤erent measures comparable I follow the approach of van Praag and
Ferrer-i-Carbonell (2008), and transform the categories to the means implied
by an ordered probit …tted to the raw sample fractions. All regressions are
then run on the transformed values (van Praag and Ferrer-i-Carbonell refer
to this as probit-adapted OLS). This means that all the results can be interpreted in terms of standard deviation units of the satisfaction measures.
Other scalings give qualitatively very similar results. The question on job
satisfaction allows four answers, which I transform in the same way.
My second main regressor, family income, is also a bracketed variable. I
assign midpoints to the brackets as in Layard, Mayraz, and Nickell (2008).
12

I use Hout’s (2004) conventions for assigning values to the top bracket, and
use a value of $187,500 for 2006.
The main sample consists of employed men aged 20 to 64. I use a consistent sample without missing values for marital status, education, occupation, industry, happiness, or job satisfaction. Like Stevenson and Wolfers
(2008b), I delete the black oversamples and the Spanish language sample,
and I weight all regressions by the weight WTSSALL. The male sample has
12,121 observations.
I use the industry and occupation a¢ liation of the respondent. These
are coded in 3-digit codes following the 1970 and 1980 Census classi…cations.
In order to reduce the number of instruments and controls, I aggregated
the industries into 33 and the occupations into 22 consistent categories.
Details are given in the appendix. For the wives sample, I selected married
females aged 20 to 64 with employed husbands. The industry and occupation
variables I use in this sample refer to the husband, while other controls (age,
education, race) refer to the respondent.
The ESS is also a repeated cross-section survey which has been carried
out in 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2008 in 24 European countries.

The set of

countries di¤ers somewhat between waves of the survey so that there are
between 15 and 20 countries in each particular wave. One advantage of the
ESS is that it has two well-being questions, one on happiness and one on
life-satisfaction. The former is similar to the question in the GSS and the
latter to the one in the GSOEP. The happiness question is “Taking all things
together, how happy would you say you are?” while the life satisfaction
question asks: “All things considered, how satis…ed are you with your life
as a whole nowadays?” The answers to both questions are on an 11 point
scale.

13

Household income is also bracketed in the ESS. I follow Layard, Mayraz,
and Nickell (2008) again in assigning bracket midpoints.

For the lowest

bracket, I assign 2/3 of the bracket boundary, and for the highest 3/2 of the
bracket boundary. Industries in the ESS are classi…ed according to NACE
codes (revisions 1 and 1.1). I grouped the NACE categories into 30 sectors,
which are relatively commensurate with the GSS classi…cation, although a
precise correspondence is not possible.

Similarly, I grouped occupations,

which are classi…ed according to ISCO-88 into 22 groups commensurate with
the GSS. Details are in the appendix.
The GSOEP is a longitudinal survey of households in Germany that
started in 1984. The well-being question is similar to the life-satisfaction
question in the ESS: “How satis…ed are you with your life, all things considered?” Answers are on an 11 point scale, also as in the ESS. Unlike in the
GSS and ESS, household income is a continuous variable. I use the same
sample selection criteria as in the other data sets. I also restrict the sample
to west Germans (eliminating foreigners), drop the high income oversample,
and the East German respondents who were added after German uni…cation in 1991. Satisfaction for east Germans might have been in‡uenced by
many factors special to the transition period during the initial phase after
uni…cation.
Because of attrition, item non-response, and refreshments, the panels I
obtain are unbalanced. They consist of individuals aged 20 to 64 who were
interviewed between 1984 and 2007. The pooled male sample consists of
56,476 observation on 9,183 individuals. For the wives sample, I matched
employed husbands with their wives to obtain a sample of 5,997 married couples with 36,879 observations. Regressions are weighted by the individual
cross-sectional sampling weights PHRF. I use the two-digit CNEF equivalent

14

industry variable provided in the GSOEP which has 28 categories. Occupation is also coded according to ISCO-88, and I recode it similar to the ESS
into 22 categories.

4

Results

4.1

US General Social Survey

Table 1 displays the results for the sample of men from the GSS. Each column
shows a di¤erent speci…cation, and each speci…cation is estimated by OLS,
2SLS, and using Ackerberg and Devereux’s (2009) Improved Jackknifed IV
estimator (IJIVE). All estimates control for a basic set of covariates: age, age
squared, dummies for black and other race, eight education dummies, and 25
year dummies. Controlling for these variables is relatively innocuous as they
are not choice variables except for education. Controlling for education is
important as more educated workers are typically more satis…ed with both
their jobs and their life, and they tend to work in particular industries.
Oreopoulos (2007) uses compulsory schooling laws to investigate whether
the relationship between life satisfaction and education is causal. He …nds
little evidence for a bias. Hence, education appears to be a valid control in
this regression.
The dependent variable in columns (1) to (4) is the ordered probit scaled
trichotomous happiness variable. The OLS estimate of ln(family income) is
0.16, i.e. a 10% increase in income is associated with an increase of 1.6
percent of a standard deviation of happiness.2
The …rst stage of the IV regression involves running family income on 31
industry dummies as well as the covariates. This is a fairly substantial num2

Running an ordered probit model on the original happiness variable directly controlling for all the covariates yields a slightly higher estimate of 0.218.

15

ber of instruments. Although the industry wage structure predicts wages
and family incomes well, there is a concern about weak instruments in these
regressions. I present the F -statistic for the excluded instruments at the
bottom of each column. In column (1) the F is 13.3, which is somewhat
borderline (Stock, Yogo and Wright, 2002). I therefore repeat all the 2SLS
estimates using IJIVE. This estimator tends to have much better bias properties and coverage in small samples with weak instruments as illustrated
by Ackerberg and Devereux (2009). They …nd that the estimator performs
similar to LIML or better. I am using IJIVE instead of LIML here because
the estimator is linear, and speci…cally accommodates large covariate sets
and …xed e¤ects, which are di¢ cult to use in LIML. The IJIVE estimates
are generally very similar to the 2SLS estimates although standard errors
are slightly higher.
The IV estimates in column (1) are very similar to the OLS estimates,
slightly above 0.16. However, the IV estimates are not particularly precise
given the sample size and the strength of the instrument. While the 2SLS
and IJIVE estimates are signi…cantly di¤erent from zero, the con…dence intervals include both values substantially below and above the OLS estimate.
Column (2) controls for four marital status dummies, a covariate used
by many researchers in the happiness literature.
certainly a more dubious covariate.

But marital status is

There is a reverse causality problem

as happier men may be more attractive to women and hence more likely
to be married (Stutzer and Frey, 2006).

Moreover, higher earnings due

to a more favorable industry a¢ liation may a¤ect marriage prospects or
marital stability, so that marital status would be an endogenous variable.
I include this speci…cation for comparability with the previous literature.
I will also rely on subsamples of married individuals below, which are, of

16

course, subject to similar problems. While both the OLS and IV estimates
in column (2) are lower the main conclusion is that OLS and IV results are
still very similar.
The next set of controls entered in column (3) are 21 occupation dummies. The motivation for this is that industry may proxy for many personal
attributes beyond the basic regressors like age and education. Occupation
should pick up a lot of this variation. On the other hand, occupation is
a choice variable of the individual and similar concerns as for marital status apply. The OLS estimates are very similar to column (2) and the IV
estimates are somewhat larger again.

It is di¢ cult to know why the IV

estimates go up in this case. Some part is probably due to the fact that occupation controls for some of the e¤ects like happy social workers and priests
working in low paying industries. Since the precision of the estimates is not
that high some of this change may also be due to sampling variability. Most
importantly, there is no evidence that the previous IV estimates were too
high because of omitted attributes of the individuals or because of sorting
of individuals into industries.
Industry a¢ liation is an outcome of the matching process between workers and employers. As a result, the IV estimates may still be subject to reverse causality or third factors if industry a¢ liation is correlated with other
relevant attributes. For example, happier workers may be more productive,
and employers in high wage industries may be more likely to hire these more
productive workers (or, because they have a greater pick of the crop, they
may simply want to enjoy the more cheerful colleagues). If the IV results
are due to happier workers being more productive I would expect this e¤ect
also, or particularly, to reveal itself when I look at job satisfaction, rather
than life satisfaction.

17

Results for job satisfaction are in columns (5) to (7). These are very
di¤erent from those in columns (1) to (3). In particular, the OLS results
are similarly positive but the IV estimates are now negative, mirroring the
…ndings by Clark (2003). Although the …rst stage is the same, 2SLS and
IJIVE estimates are more dissimilar, often an indication for problems with
weak instruments. But IJIVE estimates should still be approximately unbiased. However, the IJIVE estimate in column (5) is strongly negative and
actually signi…cant (although even IJIVE standard errors may be too small
with weak instruments). Including occupation dummies in column (7), the
estimate remains negative but becomes insigni…cant. The picture painted
by these results is certainly very di¤erent from that emerging from the results for the happiness variable. Higher paying industries do not seem to be
associated with higher job satisfaction.
Under the assumption that job satisfaction summarizes job amenities
(but not wages), a simple way to deal with compensating di¤erentials is to
include job satisfaction as a control in the happiness regression.

This is

done in column (4) and is subject to the same caveats as with the earlier
covariates. Given that the industry level correlation between incomes and
job satisfaction is negative it is not surprising that using job satisfaction as
a control raises the income coe¢ cients in the happiness regressions, albeit
at most slightly from the speci…cation in column (3) which already controls
for occupation.

Basically, occupation and job satisfaction seem to play a

very similar role here.
The results so far mostly show a fairly consistent pattern and point
towards a story where income is indeed causal. But it is important to probe
further whether the association between higher income due to industry wage
di¤erentials and happiness is not driven by some other factor which a¤ects

18

both happiness and industry a¢ liation. I therefore turn to a sample of
married women with employed husbands in Table 2. Here, I instrument the
family income for these women by the industry a¢ liation of their husband.
Even if there is some relationship between the industry of the male and
that man’s happiness, this should not fully spill over to his wife. Even with
some spillovers, and with assortative mating I would expect any bias for the
women to be less than it is for the men. On the other hand, family income
is strongly in‡uenced by the husband’s earnings, and industry a¢ liation
continues to work as instrument in the female sample.
Table 2 starts by repeating the regressions for happiness from Table 1
for the subsample of married men. This sample is smaller and the instruments are slightly weaker now, with …rst stage F -statistics of around 6 to 9.
Consequently, IJIVE standard errors are quite large but the estimated coef…cients on income are not terribly di¤erent from Table 1. Columns (3) and
(4) display the results for wives. Notice that the GSS samples individuals,
so these are not the wives of the men in columns (1) and (2) but a random
sample of married women with working husbands. The instruments are actually slightly stronger in the wives sample, with F s of 9 to 12. The OLS
coe¢ cient on income for women is only about 60% the size of the coe¢ cient
for men. The IV coe¢ cients tend to be a bit lower yet.
The remainder of Table 2 splits the wives sample into those working,
and those not employed. I would like to rule out that any of the results for
women are driven by the employment pattern of the wives. For example, one
worry might be that couples are more likely to work in the same industry
as two random individuals, and even the results for wives still re‡ect some
other relationship between industry a¢ liation and happiness. In columns
(5) and (6), instead of controlling for covariates for the wives, I look at

19

the subsample of non-working wives. The instruments are yet weaker and
standard errors higher than before in this smaller sample. The IV results for
this particular subsample look close to zero, and are de…nitely much lower
than the OLS results (which are not changed much from columns (3) and
(4)).

This is one of the few speci…cations which suggests little e¤ect of

income on happiness.
Columns (7) to (10) in Table 2 look at the sample of employed wives.
Columns (7) and (8) replicate the speci…cations from columns (3) and (4)
on this subsample.

The results do not look fundamentally di¤erent from

those for the husbands in columns (1) and (2). Together with the results
for non-working wives this might actually suggest that the results could be
driven by marital sorting, the fact that couples work in similar industries,
and non-income industry attributes could be driving the results. However,
in the working wives’sample we can control for the wives’industry a¢ liation
directly. This is done in columns (9) and (10). F -statistics are remarkably
una¤ected by this (although they are very low); in fact only about 15 percent
of women work in the same two digit industry as their husband. The IV
estimates are higher than in columns (7) and (8), not lower. This suggests
a di¤erent story than the non-working women.

In fact, the result seems

more consistent with a causal e¤ect of income and the result for non-working
women simply di¤ering due to sampling variation.

4.2

European Social Survey

Table 3 presents similar results with data from the European Social Survey
(ESS). The ESS has two satisfaction variables, happiness and life satisfaction. Both are recorded on an 11 point scale, much …ner than in the GSS.
But the ESS has also many drawbacks. Income is recorded on the same 12

20

bracket scale for all countries. Because the sample countries di¤er in their
average income levels, and the brackets span the income scale across countries, there is not a tremendous amount of within country information on
income variation. Spouses’industry is not recorded, so the analysis here is
limited to the male sample.
Columns (1) to (3) in Table 3 present the regressions for happiness. The
OLS coe¢ cient is 0.22, a bit higher than in the US GSS. The IV coe¢ cients
in column (1) are slightly below the OLS result, the opposite as in the
GSS. The instruments here are yet weaker, with an F of only 9. While the
regressions control for country x wave e¤ects, I pool the estimates for all
countries and waves and only use one set of industry dummies to gain more
power. The rationale for this is the fact that the industry wage structure is
very similar across countries (see Katz and Summers, 1989).3 Despite the
low F , IJIVE is very close to 2SLS.
Controlling for occupation in column (3) further weakens the power of
the instruments and the IV estimates are lower than OLS. In addition to the
non-working wives in the GSS, this is yet another speci…cation where the
IV estimates are low. I would also discount this result somewhat because
it is not replicated with the life satisfaction variable instead of happiness in
columns (4) to (6). For life satisfaction, the IV estimates change relatively
little depending on the speci…cation. One likely explanation of the column
(3) results may simply be sampling variation.
3

The individual country samples are rather small, and using country speci…c industry
e¤ects would result in too large a number of instruments. There is not enough of a simple
pattern to industry wage e¤ects across countries which could be exploited for a more
parismonious speci…cation allowing for some heterogeneity across countries.

21

4.3

German Socio-Economic Panel

Table 4 presents results for west German men from the GSOEP. The German question refers to life satisfaction, and is most similar to the life satisfaction question in the ESS. The OLS estimate for Germany of 0.32 is
about a third higher than the ESS estimate.4 Yet more curious, the IV estimates are about twice the size of the OLS estimates in column (1) with the
baseline set of covariates. This pattern remains when other covariates are
added in columns (2) to (4). The F -statistic for the German data is very
low, in the range of 3 to 4, which sheds some doubt on the results.

One

reason for this might be the fact that industry wage di¤erentials tend to be
narrower in more regulated labor markets like Germany than in the US.
The pattern for job satisfaction is again di¤erent, just like in the GSS.
However, the IV estimates on job satisfaction are positive now rather than
negative, although they are much closer to zero than the life satisfaction
estimates. One explanation for this pattern of results is that frictions are
more important in the German labor market than in the US. Workplace
amenities and wages are therefore positively correlated, and the IV estimates
for life-satisfaction in Germany are biased up.

For the US, the standard

compensating di¤erentials story holds, and the income e¤ects for the US are
biased down. A puzzling aspect of this explanation is that Germany seems
to be di¤erent from the other countries in the ESS although other European
countries seem to have labor market institutions closer to those in Germany
than in the US.5
4

The OLS estimate on the ESS subsample for Germany is 0.352 (0.035), which is slightly
above the GSOEP estimate. The ESS estimate excluding Germany is 0.211 (0.017).
5
It is worth noting that the ESS includes a fair number of eastern European countries,
which tend to have relatively ‡exible labor markets, as well as the UK and Ireland. But
looking at subgroups of countries does not suggest any particular pattern according to
labor market institutions.

22

One of the main advantages of the GSOEP is the longitudinal nature of
the data. This allows the introduction of individual …xed e¤ects. While the
…xed e¤ects absorb a lot of variation in the life satisfaction variable, it is an
open question whether the remaining variation in industry a¢ liation due to
industry switchers is more random than the cross-sectional variation. In any
case, the …xed e¤ects estimates, shown in Table 5, are a useful comparison.
F -statistics are between 1 and 2, and standard errors are high. OLS results
for life satisfaction tend to be a bit lower than in the pooled estimates
in Table 5 while IV results are unchanged or even higher than in Table
5.

The results for job satisfaction change more: the IV coe¢ cient is now

negative. Curiously, the …xed e¤ects results for job satisfaction mirror the
cross-sectional GSS much more than the cross-sectional GSOEP results.
Table 6 turns to the results for husbands and wives. The speci…cations
are comparable to those for the GSS in Table 2, except that they now refer
to actual couples. The results on husbands look very much like those for all
men, and all the results for wives are very similar to those for husbands. In
particular, there is no evidence in the German data that the IV coe¢ cients
are low for non-working wives, as in the GSS. This suggests that the GSS
result is an outlier. I don’t show any …xed e¤ects estimates for these smaller
samples as these are simply too imprecise to be useful.
The panel nature of the GSOEP allows a …nal check on whether the
correlation between industry wage di¤erentials and life satisfaction is due to
income e¤ects or driven by reverse causality, sorting, or some other omitted
factor. Individuals who are still in school when they are …rst interviewed
themselves are asked about their life-satisfaction but only once they work
in their …rst job will they establish an industry a¢ liation. Hence, we can
check for these individuals whether their “early” life satisfaction measure

23

predicts their later industry wage di¤erential. One complication is that most
Germans complete a …rm based apprenticeship, and hence have an industry
a¢ liation as early as age 16 when they are …rst interviewed. The sample
here is limited to individuals …rst observed in school and without full-time
work experience. This sample is limited to individuals who stayed in school
longer and contains relatively many respondents receiving a higher school
leaving degree (Abitur), many of whom then attend university. Moreover,
the sample is small, so I pool men and women. Most women in this group
enter the labor market after completing their education.

Details on the

sample construction are given in the appendix.
Although I want to ask whether early life satisfaction predicts later income I regress life satisfaction on income, just as in the earlier analyses in
the paper, rather than the other way around. This facilitates comparison of
the magnitudes of the estimates to other results in the paper. It also makes
it straightforward to use industry wage di¤erentials: these are just the familiar IV speci…cations. Table 7 displays the results. Columns (1) and (2)
focus on a sample where life satisfaction is recorded for the …rst panel wave
where the individual reports it (either while in school or when …rst working).
This is a simple cross-section of indivduals.

Columns (3) and (4) use all

observations on life satisfaction for the same indivudals while they are in
school, and during their …rst job. Column (1) basically repeats the earlier
estimates regressing initial life satisfaction in the …rst job on income. The
OLS estimate for income is 0.14, lower than in the estimate for men in Table
4 (which was 0.32). As before, the IV estimates are substantially above the
OLS estimates.
Column (2) replaces the life satisfaction measured commensurately with
income and industry in the …rst year of the …rst job with the …rst life satis-

24

faction measure recorded in the data while the individual is still studying.
The OLS estimate is a bit lower at 0.11, and borderline signi…cant at the 5%
level. This mirrors the …nding of Diener et al. (2002) that early well-being
predicts later income. The IV estimates using industry as an instrument,
are smaller than before but larger than the OLS. However, IJIVE standard
errors indicate that these estimates are poorly identi…ed.
In order to gain more precision, columns (3) and (4) add all observations
for individuals in their …rst job (column 3) and while in education before
their …rst full time employment (column 4).

The results in column (3)

closely mirror those in column (1) and elsewhere in the paper. The pattern
in column (4) is di¤erent: it suggests that early life-satisfaction predicts
income but does not predict working in a high paying industry. The IV
coe¢ cients are basically zero now (and standard errors, though still large
are more in line with those elsewhere in the paper).
While the precision of these estimates limits the information that can be
gleaned, this exercise should not be overinterpreted as it also has substantive
limitations.

To the degree that individuals can predict the industry they

will be working in and if permanent income matters for life satisfaction
there should be a positive relationship between early life-satisfaction and
the pay level in the later industry. Hence, even …nding a positive e¤ect for
the IV results is not necessarily evidence against a causal e¤ect of income.
Although I would expect this to be more of an issue the closer an individual
is to taking a job the point estimates in the sample in column (4) do not
point in this direction.
In summary, a somewhat consistent story does emerge from the di¤erent
samples and speci…cations. IV results are typically similar to OLS or larger.
The few cases which are di¤erent seem to be outliers rather than systematic

25

deviations, something that is fully expected given the sizeable con…dence
intervals.

5

Discussion and other instruments

The results presented in the previous section suggest that the OLS estimate
might indeed be close to the causal e¤ect of income on happiness. In this
section I will explore whether this interpretation is consistent with other
…ndings in the literature, consider other potential instruments, and alternative explanations for the IV results.
I consider four main issues.

First, I investigate some alternative in-

struments for income. I start by comparing my results to those obtained
by Luttmer, who used industry and occupation as instruments.

Other

employer wage di¤erentials are also prime candidates for instruments, particularly those due to union status and …rm size (union status is also part of
Shea’s, 2000, instrument set). I will discuss results using these instruments
in the GSS, which are noisy but in line with the earlier industry results.
Another possibility is to exploit the changes in wage inequality which have
taken place in the US over the past 40 years. These changes have also been
exploited in the literature on intergenerational transmission, see Acemoglu
and Pischke (2001), while Stevenson and Wolfers (2008b) document inequality trends in the GSS happiness data. I link these trends to income, and
try to argue that it is more di¢ cult to learn anything on the question at
hand from the GSS data.
The second issue is the relationship between the results presented here,
and those found in the literature using cross-country regressions, or the
within country time series evidence. I will argue that aggregating to the
country level is IV, and hence these results should form a comparison for
26

the IV estimates presented here.
The third issue is that permanent income may matter more for life satisfaction than transitory income. The IV estimates isolate relatively permanent di¤erences in income, and this may lead to larger estimates. I address
this issue directly by using income over multiple years in the GSOEP, which
is a panel.
Finally, I will take up the issue of how to interpret the IV results presented earlier if relative, rather than absolute income matters, as has been
argued in much of the literature on happiness. While it is beyond the scope
of this paper to disentangle the e¤ects of own income and that of comparison groups, I will show that the presence of relative income in a happiness
equation does not lead to an upward bias in the estimates I present.

5.1

Comparison with Luttmer (2005)

How are the results with industry dummies as instruments related to the
…ndings by Luttmer (2005)? Luttmer used industry and occupation interactions as instruments, and found large e¤ects of income. Table 8 replicates
these types of results with the GSS data.
line results from Table 1.

Column (1) repeats the base-

Column (2) replaces industry with occupation

as instruments. The occupation instruments generate IV estimates about
twice the size of OLS. This is may be not surprising in light of the …ndings
by Krueger and Schkade (2008) that higher earnings occupations tend to be
more pleasant. But it seems unlikely that this re‡ects the causal e¤ect of
income rather than simply the sorting of workers into occupations. Column
(3) uses the actual Luttmer instrument, the interaction of industry and occupation. One problem here is that there are a lot of industry-occupation
cells, and hence a lot of instruments.

27

As a result of the large degree of

overidenti…cation, the instruments tend to be very weak. While the 2SLS
estimate is lower than in column (2), this is less true for the IJIVE estimate, indicating that 2SLS may be biased downward. The conclusion from
this exercise is that it is occupation which causes the higher estimates. I
consider occupation a much more dubious instrument than industry.

5.2

Other instruments: Firm size, union status, and changing
wage inequality

Next turn to income di¤erentials due to union status and …rm size. I have
argued that individuals end up in di¤erent industries at least to some degree
by chance. The same argument can be applied to …rms of di¤erent size and
union status. Hence, these variables have as much claim as valid instruments
as industry. The GSS asks about union status and …rm size in some but not
all years. As a result an analysis with these variables has to rest on much
smaller samples. Union status and …rm size, although they predict income
well, are not quite as powerful as industry. Consequently, standard errors
tend to be about twice the size of those in Table 1. Results are displayed
in Table 9. Although the estimates are more variable across speci…cations,
the estimates are also clustered around the OLS value, corroborating the
previous …ndings using industry a¢ liation.6
The changes in wage inequality in the US have led to pronounced changes
in the family income distribution.

There are di¤erent ways of exploiting

these changes in the present context. One way would be to use the changing
returns to education as an instrument for family income, controlling for
6

IV estimates in the sub-sample using both union and …rm size instruments (cols. (5)
to (8)) tend to be signi…cantly larger than the OLS estimates, and larger than IV estimates
in the union or …rm size only samples (cols. (1) to (4)). This basically seems to be due
to the fact that the sample with both union and …rm size information is di¤erent. IV
estimates are also higher in this sub-sample than in cols. (1) to (4) when just one of the
instruments is used in isolation.

28

education and year main e¤ects. But much of the change in wage inequality
happened within narrow groups.

An alternative is therefore to exploit

the changes in overall wage inequality: Acemoglu and Pischke (2001) show
that this is most easily done by controlling for families’rank in the income
distribution.
The paper by Stevenson and Wolfers (2008b) on happiness inequality
essentially provides the reduced forms for both these exercises, and the literature on wage inequality the …rst stages. As a result, it is simple to put
together what to expect from these exercises. Stevenson and Wolfers …nd
that overall happiness inequality has decreased since the 1970s, while education di¤erentials have widened. This suggests that using changing returns
to education as an instrument would lead to positive estimates of the income
e¤ect, while using overall inequality would rather lead to zero or negative
estimates (the latter has also been noted by Layard, 2003).
For completeness, I report results of these two exercises in Table 10.
The …rst line simply reports the standard OLS estimate. The second line
reports OLS estimates controlling for rank in the income distribution. This
is e¤ectively the same as using the interaction of income rank and year as an
instrument for income. The estimates are positive but much smaller than
OLS. Of course, the happiness literature has long stressed the potential importance of relative income comparisons (e.g. Luttmer, 2005). No student
of this literature will therefore be surprised to …nd rank to do most of the
heavy lifting in these regressions, with less of an e¤ect left for the level of income. Nevertheless, the point estimates are still small and positive, maybe
surprising in light of the Stevenson and Wolfers (2008b) …ndings. They
do a more careful job in making sure the GSS satisfaction measure is consistent over time, something that might matter for this particular exercise

29

exploiting time series variation.
The next two rows show the estimates using the interaction of survey
year and years of schooling as an instrument for income. As expected, this
yields estimates larger than the OLS ones. Nevertheless, it works poorly in
the GSS data because there is basically no existent …rst stage here.

The

GSS annual samples are small, returns to schooling bounce around from
year to year in these samples but don’t show a pronounced upward trend.
One could presumably make some headway on this by using better data on
income, for example from the CPS in conjunction with the GSS reduced
form.

I don’t pursue this particular avenue here since the main point

of this exercise is to illustrate that wage inequality trends are di¢ cult to
exploit in this context, and one can obtain di¤erent answers depending on
the component of inequality used. Clearly, in order to pursue either of these
strategies it is also necessary to think more carefully about the potential role
of relative income.

5.3

The literature on country level estimates

A large literature discusses country level correlations between income (or
GDP) and happiness, and similar estimates for single countries over time,
most notably a series of papers by Richard Easterlin (1974, 1995).

Ag-

gregating income to the country level is the same as instrumental variables
estimation with a set of country dummies as instruments.

A similar ar-

gument applies to the within country time series regressions.

Arguably,

country dummies (or year dummies) are useful instruments in this context.
I would expect most of the reverse causality or omitted variables bias issues
to operate at the level of the individual.
variation.

Aggregating will …lter out that

Di¤erences in GDP per capita seem unlikely to be due to the

30

fact that some countries have happier and hence more productive citizens,
although this possibility cannot be ruled out completely. Hence, country
level studies form another natural comparison for my results here.
The most comprehensive and thorough analysis of the currently available
cross-country data is Stevenson and Wolfers (2008a).

They …nd that the

income coe¢ cients using individual level micro data are remarkably similar in size to the estimates from the cross-country regressions. In a large
sample of countries, including poorer ones, they also …nd that the within
country time series relationship mirrors the cross-country and micro data
estimates. They also analyze a number of single country experiences, particularly Japan and the US. Taking account of breaks in the Japanese data,
they conclude, unlike previous authors, that the period of high growth in
Japan was mirrored by increasing life-satisfaction, followed by a leveling o¤
in both variables after 1980, and a decline in life-satisfaction recently. Like
others, they conclude that there was no increase in happiness in the US over
the past 35 years. Stevenson and Wolfers (2008a) point out that standard
errors for single country time series estimates are large. As a result, they
do not want to draw strong conclusions from the US time series evidence
alone.
Other authors, e.g. Layard, Mayraz, and Nickell (2010) argue strongly
for the value of the US experience, and debate some of the conclusions to
be drawn from the evidence for European countries. This argument focuses
on a few small subsamples because these are particularly pertinent for the
debate about the relevance of relative income comparisons. Easterlin and
Angelescu (2009) …nd little evidence of a time series relationship of income
and happiness in a sample of 37 countries with relatively long time series.
They stress the di¤erence between the impact of long run income growth and

31

‡uctuations due to the business cycle and argue that the long run growth
seems to bear little relation with happiness while the business cycle does, a
point also raised by Layard, Mayraz, and Nickell (2010). Nevertheless, most
of the macro evidence also seems fairly consistent with my results.

The

main deviation, just as in the inequality case, may be due to some of the
time series variation.

Whether this implies that happiness is related to

relative income is an issue which remains open to debate.

5.4

Permanent versus transitory income

Instrumental variables estimates invariably isolate more permanent components of income. Consumption smoothing by forward looking individuals
implies that the distinction between current, permanent, and transitory income may be quite pertinent for the evaluation of income di¤erences.

It

is also unclear exactly what time horizon survey respondents use when answering well-being questions.

Most happiness questions actually mention

that they refer to “these days” or “nowadays.” Some of the psychology
literature also raises issues as to whether the answers to these questions are
actually unduly in‡uenced by current circumstances and mood (Schwarz
and Clore, 1983, Schwarz, 1987). Whether transitory or permanent income
matters more for life-satisfaction, at the end of the day, is an open empirical
question.
Stevenson and Wolfers (2008a) also worry about the permanent income
issue.

They look at results using education as instrument for income in

large cross-country samples, arguing that education will proxy for permanent income.

They …nd IV results which are about 50-100% higher than

OLS in the Gallup World Poll and Pew Global Attitudes Survey.

In the

World Value Survey, on the other hand, IV results are about the same size

32

as OLS estimates.

Of course, it is far from clear whether education is

a useful instrument in this context as education may possibly a¤ect lifesatisfaction directly (I use it as a control variable instead!). It is di¢ cult to
know whether the education e¤ect works through income, and permanent
income is more important than transitory, or whether there is a direct role
of education in a¤ecting happiness.
Oswald and Powdthavee (2008), using panel data from the British Household Panel Survey, instead instrument income with lagged income, which
seems preferable to education. Similar to Stevenson and Wolfers (2008a),
they …nd a 50-70% increase in the income coe¢ cient. I follow a similar approach with the GSOEP data by using averages of income over three years
as the instrument.
main rows.

Table 11 presents the results.

The …rst row shows OLS results.

This table has three

The second rows shows

2SLS estimates, using three year average income as instrument for current
income.

The third row shows 2SLS estimates using industry dummies as

instruments for income as before.

I repeat these estimates because the

sample here is smaller than before (only men with three consecutive observations contribute). The upshot from the table is simple: OLS and 2SLS
results using either average income or industry dummy instruments are all
very similar now. The IV results are hardly above OLS in either case, with
the exception of column (2) where the 2SLS results using industry dummies
is 40% above the OLS estimate while the 2SLS results using average income
as instruments is only 10% higher. There is little evidence in the GSOEP
data that permanent income matters more for life satisfaction than current
income.

33

5.5

IV estimates when relative income matters

Much of the debate in the happiness literature centers around the importance of relative income, as this is one of the possible explanations for the
absence of a secular increase in happiness in the most advanced economies.
The empirical evidence I have presented here is not particularly well suited
to speak to this issue.

Nevertheless, it is important to consider how the

presence of relative income concerns might a¤ect the interpretation of the
IV estimates.
Suppose we are interested in the following regression
LSig =

+ yig + y g + wig + "ig

(1)

where g 2 G denotes some group, y g is average group income, and wig is a
confounder. Our conjecture is
satisfaction, and

> 0, i.e. income has a causal e¤ect on life-

< 0, relative income comparisons matter. The regression

I run is instead
LSig = a + byig + eig :

(2)

So the question arises, if we are interested in regression (1) and we run (2),
what does this imply for the comparison of OLS and IV applied to (2)? Or
to put it di¤erently, could my IV results be biased up because of relative
income concerns?
There are two sources of the OLS - IV di¤erence.

The …rst is the

presence of y g in regression (1). That is the confounder we are interested
in here. The second is wig , the standard omitted variables bias problem.
While this is the focus of the current paper, I will shut down this channel
by setting

= 0 for the following discussion in order to highlight the e¤ect

of relative income.

34

Start with the OLS regression. The population regression coe¢ cient
from running (2) is
bOLS =

cov y g ; yig
< :
var (yig )

+

Also note that
cov y g ; yig
< 1:
var (yig )
This comes from the fact that individual i is member of group g, so that
cov y g ; yig = var y g < var (yig ) :
Compare this to the IV estimator using an instrument zs which varies
at an aggregate level s 2 S possibly di¤erent from g. The population IV
coe¢ cient is
bIV =

cov y g ; zs
:
cov (yig ; zs )

+

In order to analyze this, consider two cases. In case 1 the partition S is the
same or a coarser set than G. In this case cov (yig ; zs ) = cov y g ; zs and
hence
bIV =

+

< bOLS :

This result is just the familiar resolution of the Easterlin paradox in aggregate time series data with the presence of relative income e¤ects when
.
Now consider case 2 that S is …ner than G. For simplicity, I will also
assume that S partitions G. Then we have cov y g ; zs
cov (yig ; zs ) / var (y s ) so that
bIV =
With

+

var y g
:
var (y s )

< 0, and since
var y g
var y g
<
< 1;
var (yig )
var (y s )
35

/ var y g

and

it follows that bIV < bOLS :
As a result bIV < bOLS independent of whether S or G is coarser. In
either case, IV a¤ects the covariance involving yig in the denominator more
than the already smaller covariance involving y g . Hence, if relative income
matters, my IV estimate should be smaller than the OLS estimate. Moreover, both will be underestimates of . Finally, the di¤erence between OLS
and IV should be large when the comparison groups are larger groups and
vice versa.7
Mayraz, Wagner, and Schupp (2009) analyze data from the GSOEP
where individuals were asked directly whom they compare themselves with.
They …nd that average income of the same sex, individuals in the same profession, and co-workers are the main comparison groups. Clark and Senik
(2010) similarly …nd that co-workers are the main comparison group using
data from wave 3 of the ESS. Since my regressions are for either men or
women, and include (country-) year e¤ects, any comparison group at the national level would be absorbed. The …ndings by Mayraz et al. (2009) imply
that comparison groups may be relatively broad (which should correspond
to case 1 above). As a result, if

is large in absolute value I should …nd IV

results which are substantially smaller than OLS. This is not systematically
the case. I conclude that relative income comparisons alone do not explain
the pattern of the IV results particularly well.
7

The case where the groups G and S are not partitions of each other is more di¢ cult
to analyze formally but the general result should remain the same. Consider the extreme
case where G and S are orthogonal partitions. Then cov y g ; zs = 0, and IV exactly
estimates without bias. Any other case is in between this one and the one where G and
S partition each other. Throughout it remains true that bIV
bOLS :

36

6

Conclusion

This paper attempts to provide some evidence on whether the cross-sectional
association between well-being measures in survey data (happiness or life
satisfaction) and family income is causal or not.

Compelling and viable

instrumental variables for income are hard to come by in this setting because
the data sets with life satisfaction questions are small, and the idiosyncratic
variation in happiness is large. As a consequence, the results presented here
are suggestive at best.
I have used industry wage di¤erentials as predictors for family income.
While industry di¤erentials are large, particularly in the US, they are also
far from ideal as an instrument in this context.

This is highlighted, for

example, by the outlier industry “welfare and religious services” which is
poorly paid but has very happy workers. This combination is likely due to
the sorting of a very particular group of individuals into this sector. The
approach in this paper rests on the assumption that sorting of this type is
the exception, and industry a¢ liation is to a large part actually more or
less random. In order to probe this assumption, I push the data in various
directions: with the comparison of life satisfaction versus job satisfaction
results, using individual …xed e¤ects, and looking at the life satisfaction of
the wives, using husbands’industry as the instrument. While IV standard
errors are large, and the results bounce around to some degree, to me at
least, they seem to be pointing in a remarkable consistent direction. The
IV results tend to be very similar to the OLS results, and for the most part
not smaller.
Of course, the similarity of 2SLS and OLS estimates could simply stem
from the fact that overidenti…ed 2SLS estimators with weak instruments are
biased towards OLS. However, IJIVE estimates, which tend to be much
37

better behaved point in the same direction.

The results are also fairly

consistent with the existing literature on this topic, including the crosscountry studies, which I argue can be interpreted as useful IV studies in this
context. The results are also not simply explained with the IV estimates
proxying for relatively permanent income, or by the presence of relative
income comparisons.
None of the individual IV estimates presented in this paper are very precise. But it is important to keep in mind that the estimates stem from four
or …ve independent data sets (men and women in the GSS, men in the ESS,
and men and women in the GSOEP, although the latter are actual couples
and hence may not be independent). Treating husbands and wives as in the
GSOEP as independent, the meta estimate across the IJIVE estimates for
the baseline cross-sectional speci…cations from the …ve samples is 0.181 with
a standard error of 0.046. This compares to an OLS meta estimate of 0.186
with a standard error of 0.008. Moreover, the 95% con…dence interval for
the IJIVE meta estimate is 0.09 to 0.27, ruling out both very low and very
high estimates. Overall, the provisional evidence presented here points in
the direction that the income-life satisfaction relationship is mostly causal
rather than driven by reverse causality or omitted factors.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Jörn-Ste¤en Pischke (2001), “"Changes in the
Wage Structure, Family Income, and Children’s Education," European
Economic Review, 45, (May), 890-904.
[2] Ackerberg, Daniel A., and Paul J. Devereux (2009), “Improved JIVE
Estimators for Overidenti…ed Linear Models with and without Het-

38

eroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91, No. 2 (May),
351-362.
[3] Apouey, Bénédicte and Andrew Clark (2009), “Winning Big but Feeling No Better? The E¤ect of Lottery Prizes on Physical and Mental
Health,” mimeographed, PSE (December).
[4] Chevalier, Arnaud and Raymonn Lydon (2002), “Estimates of the Effect of Wages on Job Satisfaction,” CEP Discussion Paper 531 (May).
[5] Clark, Andrew (2003), “Looking for Labour Market Rents Using Subjective Data,” mimeographed, PSE (September).
[6] Clark, Andrew and Claudia Senik (2010), “Who compares to whom?
The anatomy of income comparisons in Europe” Economic Journal,
120, N0. 544 (May), 573-594.
[7] Deaton, Angus (2008), “Income, Health and Wellbeing Around the
World: Evidence from the Gallup World Poll,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 22, No. 2 (Spring), 53-72.
[8] Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2006), “Some Uses of Happiness Data in Economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, No. 1
(Winter), 25-46.
[9] Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz (1987), “Inter-Industry
Wage Di¤erences and Industry Characteristics,” in: Kevin Lang and
Jonathan Leonard, editors, Unemployment and the Structure of Labor
Markets, New York: Basil Blackwell, 48-89.

39

[10] Diener, Ed, Carol Nickerson, Richard E. Lucas, and Ed Sandvik (2002)
“Dispositional A¤ect and Job Outcomes,” Social Indicators Rsearch,
59, 229-259.
[11] Easterlin, Richard A. (1974), “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical Evidence,” in: David, Paul A. and Reder,
Melvin W., Editors, Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honour of Moses Abramovitz, Academic Press, Inc., New York.
[12] Easterlin, Richard A. (1995), “Will raising the incomes of all increase
the happiness of all?”Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
27, No. 1, (June), 35-47.
[13] Easterlin, Richard A., and Laura Angelescu (2009), “Happiness and
Growth the World Over: Time Series Evidence on the HappinessIncome Paradox,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4060.
[14] Engelhardt, Gary V. and Jonathan Gruber (2005), “Social Security and
Elderly Well-Being in the United States,” mimeographed, MIT (May).
[15] Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer (2002), “What Can Economists Learn
from Happiness Research?” Journal of Economic Literature, 40, No. 2
(June), 402-435.
[16] Frijters, Paul, John P. Haisken-DeNew, and Michael A. Shields (2004),
“Money Does Matter! Evidence from Increasing Real Income and Life
Satisfaction in East Germany Following Reuni…cation,”American Economic Review, 94, No. 3 (June), 730–740.
[17] Gardner, Jonathan and Andrew J. Oswald (2007), “Money and mental
wellbeing: A longitudinal study of medium-sized lottery wins,”Journal
of Health Economics, 26, No. 1 (January), 49-60.
40

[18] Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence F. Katz (1992), “Does Unmeasured
Ability Explain Inter-Industry Wage Di¤erentials?” Review of Economic Studies, 59, No. 3 (July), 515-535.
[19] Holzer, Harry J., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger (1991), “Job
Queues and Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, No. 3 (August), 739-768.
[20] Hout, Michael (2004), “Getting the Most Out of the GSS Income Measures,” GSS Methodological Report 101 (July).
[21] Katz, Lawrence F., and Lawrence H. Summers (1989), “Industry Rents:
Evidence and Implications,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics, 209-290.
[22] Krueger, Alan B. and David Schkade (2008), “Sorting in the Labor
Market: Do Gregarious Workers Flock to Interactive Jobs?”Journal of
Human Resources, 43, No. 4, 859-883.
[23] Layard, Richard (2003), “Happiness: Has Social Science A Clue?” Lionel Robbins Memorial Lectures delivered at LSE on March 3-5, 2003.
[24] Layard, Richard, Guy Mayraz, and Stephen Nickell (2008), “The marginal utility of income,”Journal of Public Economics, 92, No. 8-9, (August), 1846-1857.
[25] Layard, Richard, Guy Mayraz, and Stephen Nickell (2010), “Does Relative Income Matter? Are the Critics Right?” in Ed Diener, John F.
Helliwell, and Daniel Kahneman, editors, International Di¤ erences in
Well-Being, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

41

[26] Li, Hongbin, Pak Wai Liu, Maoliang Ye, and Junsen Zhang (2011),
“Does Money Buy Happiness? Evidence from Twins in Urban China,”
Working Paper, Tsinghua University (April).
[27] Luechinger, Simon (2009), “Valuing Air Quality Using the Life Satisfaction Approach,”Economic Journal, 119, No. 536 (March), 482–515.
[28] Luttmer, Erzo F. P. (2005), “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings
and Well-Being,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, No. 3 (August),
963-1002.
[29] Manning, Alan (2003), Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition
in Labor Markets, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[30] Mayraz, Guy, Gert G. Wagner, and Jurgen Schupp (2009), “Life Satisfaction and Relative Income: Perceptions and Evidence,”CEP Discussion Paper 918, LSE (March).
[31] Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (1987), “Unemployment, Risk
and Earnings: Theory and Evidence from a Model of Equalizing Wage
Di¤erentials,” in: Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, editors, Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets, New York: Basil Blackwell, 103-140.
[32] Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (1989), “E¢ ciency Wages Reconsidered: Theory and Evidence,”in: Yoram Weiss and Gideon Fishelson, editors, Advances in the Theory and Measurement of Unemployment, London: The Macmillan Press, 204-240.
[33] Oreopoulos, Philip (2007), “Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth,
health and happiness from compulsory schooling,” Journal of Public
Economics, 91, No. 11-12 (December), 2213-2229.
42

[34] Oswald, Andrew J., and Nattavudh Powdthavee (2008), “Death, Happiness, and the Calculation of Compensatory Damages,” Journal of
Legal Studies, 37 (June), S217-S251.
[35] Oswald, Andrew J., Eugenio Proto, and Daniel Sgroi (2009), “Happiness and Productivity,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4645 (December).
[36] Schwarz, Norbert (1987) Stimmung als Information: Untersuchung zum
Ein‡uss von Stimmungen auf die Bewertung des eignenen Lebens, Lehrund Forschungstexte Psychologie, Vol. 24, Berlin: Springer Verlag.
[37] Schwarz, Norbert and Gerald L. Clore (1983), “Mood, misattribution,
and judgments of well-being: Informative and directive functions of
a¤ective states,”Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, No.
3, (Sept), 513-523.
[38] Shea, John (2000) “Does parents’ money matter?” Journal of Public
Economics, 77, No. 2, (August), 155-184.
[39] Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2008a), “Economic Growth and
Subjective Well-Being: Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1-87.
[40] Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers (2008b), “Happiness Inequality
in the United States,” Journal of Legal Studies, 37 (June), S33-S79.
[41] Stock, James H., Jonathan H Wright, and Motohiro Yogo (2002), “A
Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak Identi…cation in Generalized
Method of Moments,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
20, No. 4 (October ), 518-529.

43

[42] Stutzer, Alois, and Bruno S. Frey (2006), “Does Marriage Make People Happy, or Do Happy People Get Married?” Journal of SocioEconomics, 35, No. 2 (April), 326-247.
[43] van Praag, Bernard M.S. and Ada Ferrer-i-Carbonell (2008) Happiness
Quanti…ed: A Satisfaction Calculus Approach, revised edition, Oxford:
Oxford University Press

44

Appendix

Coding of industries in the GSS and ESS

Sector
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Agriculture, forestry, fishery
Mining
Construction
Lumber, wood, furniture
Stone, clay, glass
Metal
Machinery, exc. electrical
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment
Professional equipment
Food and tobacco
Textile, apparel, leather
Paper
Printing
Chemicals
Petroleum and rubber
Other manufacturing
Transportation
Communication
Utilities
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Finance, insurance, real estate
Business services
Repair services
Personal services
Recreation services
Health
Legal services
Education
Religious and welfare services
Other services
Public administration

GSS
1972 – 1988
1989 – 2006
1970 Census codes
1980 Census codes
17-28
10-31
47-57
40-50
67-77
60
107-118
230-242
119-138
250-262
139-169
270-301
177-198, 258
310-332
199-209
340-350
219-238
351-370
239-259
371-382
268-299
100-130
307-327, 388-397
132-152, 220-222
328-337
160-162
338-339
171-172
347-369
180-192
377-387
200-212
259, 398
390-392
407-429
400-432
447-449
440-442
467-479
460-472
507-588
500-571
607-698
580-691
707-718
700-712
727-748
721-742
749-759
750-760
769-798
761-791
807-809
800-802
828-848
812-840
849
841
857-868
842-860
877-879
861-871, 880
869, 887-897
872, 881-892
907-937
907-937

45

ESS
NACE
codes
1-5
10-14
45
20, 36
26
27-28
29-30
31-32
34-35
33
15-16
17-19
21
22
24
23, 25
37
60-63
64
40-41, 90
51
50, 52
65-71
72-74
95-97
92
85
80
91, 93
75, 99

Coding of industries in the GSOEP

Sector
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Agriculture, forestry
Fisheries
Energy, water
Mining
Chemicals
Synthetics
Earth, clay, stone
Iron, steel
Mechanical engineering
Electrical engineering
Wood, paper, print
Clothing, textile
Food industry
Construction
Construction related
Wholesale
Other trans.
Financial inst.
Insurance
Restaurants
Services industry
Trash removal
Education, sport
Health services
Other services
Volunt., church
Private household
Public administration

46

SOEP
CNEF
equivalent
codes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
30
31
32
33

Coding of occupations

Occupation
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Administrative and
managerial
Engineers
Math and computer
scientists
Natural scientists
Health professionals
Health treatment
occupations
Post-secondary teachers
Teachers, exc. postsecondary
Counsellors, librarians,
archivists
Social scientists, urban
planners
Social and religious
workers
Lawyers and judges
Writers, artists, athletes
Technicians and
support occupations
Sales
occupations
Clerical and admin.
support occupations
Private household
workers
Protective services
workers
Service workers, exc.
17 and 18
Farming occupations
Crafts and repair
workers
Operators and laborers

GSS
1972 – 1988
1989 – 2006
1970 Census codes 1980 Census codes

ESS, GSOEP

1, 56, 201-246

3-37

2, 6-26

43-63

ISCO-88 codes
1000-1319, 2400, 24102419, 2470, 3440-3449
2000-2100, 2140-2149

2-5, 34-36, 55

64-68

2120-2139

42-54
61-73

69-83
84-89

74-76

95-106

102-140

113-154

2110-2114, 2210-2213
2200, 2220-2222
2223-2230, 3220-3223,
3230-3232
2310

141-145

155-159

2300, 2320-2359

32-33, 174

163-165

2430-2432

91-96

166-173

2440-2445

86-90, 100, 101

174-177

2446, 2460, 3460, 3480

30-31
175-194

178-179
183-199

2420-2429
2450-2455, 3470-3478

80-85, 150-173

203-235

3000-3213, 3224-3229

260-296

243-285

301-396

303-389

980-986

403-407

5121, 5131, 5133

960-976

413-427

3450, 5160-5169

901-954

433-469

801-846

473-499

5100-5120, 5122-5130,
5132, 5139-5149
6000-6154

401-586

503-699

7000-7442

601-796

703-889

8000-9330

47

3400-3429, 5000, 52005220
3300-3340, 3430-3434,
4000-4223

Sample construction for the estimates in Table 7
I construct a sample of individuals who are in school or university and had zero work experience in
their first panel observation in the GSOEP, and later, upon finishing education, became employed. To
select individuals in this sample, I record whether an individual has ever been observed to be in
education, and only keep observations for which this applies. I define an education spell as a period
during which the individual is in school, university, etc., and has zero fulltime work experience (this
includes years in which the individual is doing a firm based apprenticeship as this involves a
schooling component—excluding apprenticeship does not qualitatively change the results). Next, I
define the start of the first fulltime working spell as the first year in which the individual is employed
fulltime and not in education. For the cross-sectional sample, I record life satisfaction and baseline
controls (age, sex, nationality, state of residence, year) in the first year of the education spell, as well
as life satisfaction, log of family income, highest education obtained, industry affiliation, and baseline
controls in the first year of the working spell. Finally, I combine this information. For the panel
sample, I record life satisfaction and controls in each year of the education spell, and life satisfaction,
the log of family income, and age in each year of the individual remains in the first industry recorded
(the other covariates are the same in each year of the working spell).

48

.3

Figure 1
Visual IV
Happiness Against ln of Family Income for Men, GSS, 1972 – 2006

mean happiness in industry
0
.1
.2

legal services
welfare and religious services

-.1

mining

-.4

-.2

0
industry income differential

mean happiness

49

.2

Fitted values

.4

.4

Figure 2
Visual IV
Job Satisfaction Against ln of Family Income for Men, GSS, 1972 – 2006

-.4

mean job satisfaction in industry
-.2
0
.2

welfare and religious services

-.4

-.2

0
industry income differential

mean job satisfaction

50

.2

Fitted values

.4

Table 1
Regressions of Happiness on ln of Family Income for Men
General Social Survey, 1972 – 2006
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Dependent Variable
Happiness
Estimation method

Job Satisfaction

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

OLS

0.163
(0.014)

0.119
(0.014)

0.114
(0.014)

0.089
(0.014)

0.121
(0.014)

0.115
(0.014)

0.099
(0.014)

2SLS

0.192
(0.069)

0.112
(0.072)

0.208
(0.088)

0.210
(0.085)

-0.150
(0.069)

-0.189
(0.073)

-0.046
(0.089)

IJIVE

0.196
(0.075)

0.111
(0.079)

0.222
(0.100)

0.239
(0.096)

-0.174
(0.075)

-0.219
(0.081)

-0.066
(0.101)

13.29

12.20

8.02

8.05

13.29

12.20

8.02





























First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls
4 marital status dummies
21 occupation dummies





4 job satisfaction dummies

Weighted regressions using GSS sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline controls are age, age squared,
dummies for black and other non-white race, eight education dummies, and 25 year dummies. Instruments are 32 industry dummies. Number of
observations is 12,121. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.

51

Table 2
Regressions of Happiness on ln of Family Income for Married Men and Women
General Social Survey, 1972 – 2006
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Sample
Husbands
Estimation method

Wives

Wives, working

Wives, not working

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

OLS

0.159
(0.021)

0.153
(0.022)

0.095
(0.017)

0.089
(0.018)

0.105
(0.025)

0.095
(0.026)

0.090
(0.025)

0.086
(0.026)

0.092
(0.026)

0.086
(0.026)

2SLS

0.121
(0.101)

0.256
(0.122)

0.056
(0.077)

0.097
(0.094)

0.035
(0.097)

0.028
(0.123)

0.098
(0.107)

0.168
(0.119)

0.147
(0.122)

0.194
(0.132)

IJIVE

0.118
(0.114)

0.278
(0.143)

0.052
(0.083)

0.098
(0.104)

0.019
(0.114)

0.008
(0.153)

0.100
(0.124)

0.186
(0.141)

0.160
(0.147)

0.222
(0.164)

9.46

6.49

12.18

9.13

6.41

4.80

7.61

6.30

5.98

5.16





















First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls



21 occupation dummies







32 industry dummies (wives)
Number of observations

7,737

7,737

8,450

8,450

3,505

3,505

4,945

4,945






4,945

4,945

Weighted regressions using GSS sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline controls are age, age squared,
dummies for black and other non-white race, eight education dummies, and 25 year dummies. Instruments are 32 industry dummies for husband’s
industry affiliation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.

52

Table 3
Regressions of Satisfaction on ln of Family Income for Men
European Social Survey, 2002 – 2008
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Dependent Variable
Happiness
Estimation method

Life Satisfaction

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

OLS

0.215
(0.016)

0.180
(0.015)

0.169
(0.016)

0.243
(0.015)

0.219
(0.015)

0.204
(0.016)

2SLS

0.135
(0.091)

0.098
(0.091)

0.081
(0.115)

0.155
(0.090)

0.131
(0.090)

0.179
(0.113)

IJIVE

0.124
(0.102)

0.085
(0.102)

0.060
(0.136)

0.145
(0.101)

0.118
(0.102)

0.172
(0.133)

9.40

9.25

6.80

9.40

9.25

6.80





















First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls
4 marital status dummies



21 occupation dummies



Weighted regressions using the product of the population and design weights as sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is
displayed. Baseline controls are age, age squared, six education dummies, and a full set of interactions of wave and country dummies. Instruments
are 29 industry dummies. Number of observations is 27,740. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses.

53

Table 4
Regressions of Life Satisfaction on ln of Family Income for West-German Men
German Socio-economic Panel (GSOEP), 1984 – 2007
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Dependent Variable
Happiness
Estimation method

Job Satisfaction

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

OLS

0.324
(0.025)

0.283
(0.024)

0.283
(0.024)

0.169
(0.019)

0.260
(0.024)

0.250
(0.024)

0.239
(0.023)

2SLS

0.538
(0.207)

0.512
(0.219)

0.564
(0.206)

0.507
(0.163)

0.098
(0.193)

0.102
(0.203)

0.125
(0.207)

IJIVE

0.550
(0.219)

0.526
(0.233)

0.585
(0.221)

0.534
(0.176)

0.083
(0.204)

0.088
(0.215)

0.113
(0.223)

3.66

3.81

3.86

3.97

3.66

3.81

3.86





























First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls
4 marital status dummies
22 occupation dummies





10 job satisfaction dummies

Weighted regressions using GSOEP sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline controls are age, age squared,
dummies for nationality, nine education dummies, nine state dummies, and 23 year dummies. Instruments are 27 industry dummies. Number of
observations is 56,476. Robust standard errors, clustered by individual, in parentheses.

54

Table 5
Fixed Effects Regressions of Life Satisfaction on ln of Family Income for West-German Men
German Socio-economic Panel (GSOEP), 1984 – 2007
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Dependent Variable
Life Satisfaction
Estimation method

Job Satisfaction

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

OLS

0.182
(0.028)

0.166
(0.027)

0.163
(0.027)

0.125
(0.023)

0.122
(0.025)

0.128
(0.025)

0.125
(0.025)

2SLS

0.617
(0.346)

0.606
(0.362)

0.489
(0.393)

0.577
(0.365)

-0.116
(0.427)

-0.153
(0.450)

-0.299
(0.479)

IJIVE

0.722
(0.467)

0.729
(0.501)

0.606
(0.597)

0.775
(0.561)

-0.238
(0.590)

-0.297
(0.631)

-0.546
(0.741)

1.63

1.58

1.32

1.35

1.63

1.58

1.32





























First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls
4 marital status dummies
22 occupation dummies





10 job satisfaction dummies

Weighted fixed effects regressions using GSOEP sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline controls are age
squared and 23 year dummies. Instruments are 27 industry dummies. Number of observations is 56,476, number of individuals is 9,183. Robust
standard errors, clustered by individual, in parentheses.

55

Table 6
Regressions of Life Satisfaction on ln of Family Income for Married Men and Women (West-Germany)
German Socio-economic Panel (GSOEP), 1984 – 2007
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Sample
Husbands
Estimation method

Wives

Wives, working

Wives, not working

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

OLS

0.305
(0.038)

0.298
(0.037)

0.291
(0.033)

0.256
(0.034)

0.296
(0.055)

0.221
(0.056)

0.301
(0.037)

0.295
(0.039)

0.285
(0.037)

0.281
(0.039)

2SLS

0.574
(0.297)

0.625
(0.270)

0.717
(0.192)

0.707
(0.241)

0.715
(0.263)

0.442
(0.317)

0.563
(0.206)

0.657
(0.256)

0.516
(0.217)

0.617
(0.277)

IJIVE

0.591
(0.321)

0.652
(0.295)

0.735
(0.199)

0.742
(0.258)

0.759
(0.288)

0.494
(0.368)

0.581
(0.223)

0.687
(0.276)

0.534
(0.235)

0.649
(0.304)

3.44

3.27

6.88

4.36

5.12

2.99

5.44

4.90

4.94

4.09





















First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls



22 occupation dummies







27 industry dummies (wives)
Number of observations

36,879

36,879

36,879

36,879

13,879

13,879

21,694

21,694






21,694

21,694

Weighted regressions using GSOEP sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline controls are age, age squared,
dummies for nationality, nine education dummies, nine state dummies, and 23 year dummies. Instruments are 27 industry dummies. Robust
standard errors, clustered by individual, in parentheses.

56

Table 7
Regressions of Current and Early Life Satisfaction on ln of Family Income for Men and Women
German Socio-economic Panel (GSOEP), 1984 – 2007
(Standard errors in parentheses)
Sample
First obs. when working or studying

All obs. when working or studying

Dependent Variable

Dependent Variable

LS when working

LS when studying

LS when working

LS when studying

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OLS

0.142
(0.055)

0.113
(0.052)

0.214
(0.040)

0.122
(0.039)

2SLS

0.360
(0.268)

0.219
(0.284)

0.364
(0.224)

-0.028
(0.232)

IJIVE

0.435
(0.532)

0.108
(0.638)

0.378
(0.262)

-0.070
(0.277)

2.79


1.97

3.70


1.76

Estimation method

First stage F-statistic
Controls for highest level of education obtained
Controls for age, age squared, and year when first working
No. of obs.

1,405


1,405

7,502


4,592

Weighted regressions using GSOEP sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Results in columns (1) and (2) are based
on a (repeated) cross section of individuals. Results in columns (3) and (4) are from multiple observations on the same individuals as in the crosssectional sample. Independent variable is current ln(family income) in columns (1) and (3), and ln(family income) at time when first working in
columns (2) and (4). Baseline controls include age, age squared, a dummy for female, dummies for nationality, nine state dummies, and 23 year
dummies. Instruments are 27 industry dummies for industry affiliation in the current job (columns (1) and (3)) or industry affiliation in the first job
(columns (2) and (4)). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered at person level in columns (3) and (4), in parentheses.

57

Table 8
Comparison with Luttmer (2005)
Men, General Social Survey, 1972 – 2006
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Estimation method

(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

0.163
(0.014)

0.163
(0.014)

0.163
(0.014)

2SLS

0.192
(0.069)

0.332
(0.065)

0.261
(0.044)

IJIVE

0.196
(0.075)

0.347
(0.069)

0.306
(0.063)

13.29

24.06

3.51

Industry

Occupation

Ind*Occ

First stage F-statistic
Instruments

Weighted regressions of happiness on ln(family income) using GSS sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. All
regressions include controls for are age, age squared, dummies for black and other race, eight education dummies, and 25 year dummies.
Instruments are 32 industry, 21 occupation dummies, or their interactions. Number of observations is 12,121. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors in parentheses.

58

Table 9
Alternative Instruments Using Employer Differentials
Men, General Social Survey, 1972 – 2006
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Instruments
Union status
Estimation method

Firm size

Union and firm size

Union, firm size
and industry
(7)
(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

OLS

0.169
(0.017)

0.122
(0.017)

0.169
(0.021)

0.108
(0.022)

0.163
(0.026)

0.101
(0.026)

0.163
(0.026)

0.101
(0.026)

2SLS

0.083
(0.158)

0.130
(0.121)

0.144
(0.142)

0.131
(0.151)

0.262
(0.153)

0.251
(0.137)

0.333
(0.097)

0.297
(0.106)

IJIVE

0.081
(0.160)

0.129
(0.122)

0.146
(0.153)

0.136
(0.164)

0.274
(0.166)

0.259
(0.145)

0.384
(0.121)

0.354
(0.137)

88.06

148.55

14.28

8.34

11.31

14.51

6.37

4.76

















First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls
4 marital status and
21 occupation dummies
Number of observations


8,418

8,418


4,987

4,987


3,467

3,467


3,467

3,467

Weighted regressions of happiness on ln(family income) using GSS sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline
controls are age, age squared, dummies for black and other non-white race, eight education dummies, and 25 year dummies. Instruments are a
dummy for union status, six dummies for firm size categories, and/or 32 industry dummies. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in
parentheses.

59

Table 10
Alternative Instruments Using Changes in Wage Inequality
Men, General Social Survey, 1972 – 2006
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Estimation method

(1)

(2)

OLS

0.163
(0.014)

0.119
(0.014)

OLS controlling for rank

0.071
(0.035)

0.034
(0.034)

2SLS

0.258
(0.219)

0.167
(0.233)

IJIVE

0.329
(0.771)

0.128
(1.081)

1.10

0.93





First stage F-statistic
Baseline controls



21 occupation dummies

Weighted regressions of happiness on ln(family income) using GSS sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline
controls are age, age squared, dummies for black and other non-white race, eight education dummies, and 25 year dummies. Instruments is a linear
indicator for years of schooling interacted with 25 year dummies. Number of observations is 12,121. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in
parentheses.

60

Table 11
Role of Permanent Income: Regressions of Life Satisfaction on ln of Family Income for West-German Men
German Socio-economic Panel (GSOEP), 1984 – 2007
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Pooled
Estimation method

Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OLS

0.331
(0.032)

0.342
(0.030)

0.204
(0.032)

0.203
(0.032)

2SLS, IV: 3 year avg. inc.

0.358
(0.037)

0.373
(0.034)

0.210
(0.041)

0.207
(0.042)

2SLS, IV: ind. dummies

0.338
(0.245)

0.492
(0.228)

0.207
(0.391)

0.239
(0.369)

2.93

3.07

1.68

1.12









First stage F-statistic (ind.)
Baseline controls



22 occupation dummies



Weighted regressions using GSOEP sampling weight. The coefficient on ln(family income) is displayed. Baseline controls are age, age squared,
dummies for nationality, nine education dummies, nine state dummies, and 23 year dummies. Number of observations is 31,891. Robust standard
errors, clustered by individual, in parentheses.

61

