NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE AGE AT LEAVING HOME IN
THE EARLY NINETEENTH CENTURY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE LIVES OF
NEW ENGLAND MANUFACTURERS

David W. Galenson

Working Paper No. 1706

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1706
September 1985

On the Age at Leaving Home in
the Early Nineteenth Century:
Evidence from the Lives of
New England Manufacturers

ABSTRACT

Much recent research has focussed on some decisions that affected
family composition in the past, including the determination of the age of

marriage and the timing of fertility. This paper considers another such
decision that has been relatively neglected, the determination of the age at

which children left the parental home. Observations drawn from a collection
of biographies of successful New England manufacturers, most of whom depart-

ed from their parents' homes in the first half of the nineteenth century,
indicated that their age of departure was concentrated In the late teen ages

and early twenties, with a median of 18 years. Multivariate analysis suggested that the age at which these men had left home varied directly with

family income or wealth and inversely with the opportunity cost of their
retention at home. Sons whose fathers had died tended to leave home earlier

than otherwise, as did those whose first job away from home was in the
employ of a relative, while those whose families invested more in their
formal education appear to have stayed home longer.

David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL
60637

I.

Oductjon

Recent years have witnessed an intensification of Interest in research on family behavior. Economists have increasingly turned their atten-

tion to analysis of the determinants and consequences of family decisions,
and historians have become more concerned with charting trends in the com-

position and behavior of families in the past. Considerable attention has
been devoted to some key decisions in the life—cycle of individuals that

affect the family, including the determination of the age at marriage and
the timing of fertility. Another such decision that has been recognized but

has received relatively little direct attention is that of when children
departed from the parental home.1

Departure from the parents' home is of course only one of the transitions that resulted in a child's eventual independence from the parents; the
family economy would be affected not only by the child's place of' residence,
but also by any flows of income that continued from parents to child.2 Yet
the residential cecision is an interesting one for a number of reasons, with
implications for migration as well as family composition. This paper will

extend our knowledge of this aspect of the history of family behavior by
suggesting an analytical approach to the determination of the age at leaving

home and adducing empirical evidence on this decision for a sample of
individuals from nineteenth—century New England.

II. An Economic Interpretation of'
The age
process
the

the

Age at Leaving Home

at leaving home can be seen as

of orajnins

irn

family's resources.

one outcome of an implicit

family memsers that determines

the

allocation

of

As a first approach, it might be posited as a

working hypothesis that within the relevant range of children's ages, both

parents and children derive utility from the continuing presence of the

children in the parental hcrne, end that this

retentIOn

is a normal gooa.

Increases in total family income would therefore tend to be associatec with

increases in the age at which children leave their parents' households.
Economic analysis of family behavior has recently ceveloped a number

of implications of the fact that parents must determine not only how many
children they will have, but also the amount of resources they will devote

to each child. One analytical approach to this decision has been a formula-

tion in which parents derive utility from the quality, as well as the
quantity, of their children. This view assumes that the quality of a child
can be influenced by the family in a number of ways, principally through
investment in the child's health and education.

An economic interpretation

of the age at which children leave home can be based in part on this
formulation. In part, the amount of time a child spends in the parental
home will serve as an index of investment in the child's quality, with a

later age at leaving home indicating a larger investment. This was
particularly true in the past, when sending children away to school was

relatively uncommon; until quite recently, most children were likely tO
attend school only if they were living with their parents.3 In addition to

formal education, nlneteenthcentUrY parents coula choose to teach their
children a variety of occupational skills. Still other investments in
children retained at home might have been significant, for parents could be

expected to maintain more control over other aspects of their ctailOrefl's

lives if the children continued to live in the parental none than if they
had moved away.

In the presence of any of these forms of investment by parents in
their children, the length of time a child spent in the parental home would

3

tend to be a useful index of the

quality of the child, with a later age of

departure signalling a longer period, and generally a greater amount, of

investment. The higher the rates of return to these investments in the
children's human capital, the stronger the association would tend to be

between family wealth and the length of time the child spent at home, for
poorer families would lack the capital to finance

desirable investments in

the education of their children.5

Yet the age at leaving home in the nineteenth century cannot be
interpreted solely in this way, for another set of forces also affected the
timing of the child's departure from home. The premise that retention of a

child at home is a normal good for both parents and children also implies
that an increase in family income due to the ability of the child to con-

tribute while remaining at home would tend to result in a later age for the
child's departure. Therefore if employment opportunities existed near the

parents' home, the child might take a job and begin earning wages while
remaining at home, thus allowing some families to be able to afford to
retain their children that might otherwise have been unable to do so. Work
within a family business, or on a family farm, would of course constitute

such an employment opportunity just as much as would wage labor elsewhere;

families with businesses or farms large enough to employ the labor of
workers ir addition to the parents could substitute their children for hired
laborers, thereby gaining income from this employment that would allow the
family to retain its children at home longer.6

Relatives outside the nuclear family also affected the age at which

children left home in the past. Grandparents or aunts and uncles played an
important role when the death of a father left a widow unable economically

to provide a home for the children. Even in cases in which both parents

14

survived, extended families were a potential source of employment or
economic help at an early stage of a child's career, and a move to the
household of a relative might be seen as a special case of departure from

home, in which the resources of the extended family provided a way for the
child

to leave the parental home but to retain in some degree the economic

security of residence with adults likely to have some altruistic interest in

his

welfare.

One way to place the preceding discussion within a unified framework
is to consider the child's departure from home as a migration decision. A

behavioral assumption underlying a standard economic analysis of migration
is that an individual moves in order to maximize net personal gain, with the

latter often represented in empirical studies by

the present value of future

real income. An extension of this approach to the migration of families
composed of husbands and wives has assumed that the movement of households
is motivated by net family gain rather than the net personal gain of either

spouse. Choices of location made by couples create the possibility of
positive costs for either or both individuals, in the form of a real income

less than that which would be available to the same individual unencumbered
by the family relationship. These costs are borne by the family as long as
the benefits from marriage are greater than the pecuniary losses; otherwise
the husband and wife separate, and independent migration of the individuals
7

This analysis of the migration decisions of spouses can be extended
to include those of children. The assumed behavioral motivation of' the
maximization of net family gain can be maintained, and the costs to children

of the family's location can be measured as the difference between the

5

income available to the child at tne family's chosen location and the max!—

mum income available to the child elsewhere. Positive levels of earnings
foregone by the chile due to remaining with his or her parents do not necessarily imply the child's departure, for these losses might be compensated by
some combination of the child's nonpecuniary gains from residence with the
family and income transfers from other family members.
In this formulation, investment by the family in the education of a

child living at home is a benefit to the child which, ceteris paribus,
lowers the net gains to leaving the family during the period in which
investment continues. The availability of work in a family business, or in
a business near the family home, will similarly tend to lower the net income

gains from leaving the family. On the other hand, the better the
opportunities available elsewhere, the greater the potential gains to the
child from leaving the family. The ability of relatives living elsewhere to
offer jobs to the child creates one case in which good opportunities might
be available to the child at a relatively early age, because of the possible

willingness of relatives to discriminate in hiring in favor of family
members.

Changes in the composition of the family can clearly affect the
family's choice of' location. A relatively common instance in the past might

have been the death of a parent. In the case of a husband's death, a wife
who did not remarry might often have had to sell the family farm or business
and move elsewhere to find employment; her new location might then be less

desirable for the children, resulting in their departure from home.8 The
father's death would of course not invariably have caused the family to
relocate, for even if the wife did not remarry, she might have continued to

operate the family business with the help of her children or hired labor.

6

Indeed in some cases the absence of the father could have increased the
productivity of a child on the family fa'rn or business, and could therefore

have delayed the child's departure from home.

The migration framework offers a relatively straightforward explana-

tion of when, and why, children leave home. Apart from time spent in consumption, the time of children can broadly be divided into that devoted to

investment in human capital and that spent in production. The relative
amounts of time spent in these two activities are influenced by family
wealth, as well as such other factors as the quality of local educational
and work opportunities. The typical pattern is for the child's time to be

spent relatively more in investment at young ages and tnen, at varying
rates, to shift progressively toward production as the child grows older.

types of investment can be done at lower cost while the child is at
home, and this was probably true to an even greater extent in the past than
Many

today.

Under such conditions, the larger the share of the child's time

spent in investment, the greater the cost advantages from residence with the

family, and the more likely the child would be to remain with his parents.

The same is not true for time spent in production. Productivity in most

occupations

varies considerably across space, due to differences in local

factor endowments and past investment

patterns.

If

the location of a

child's family is not that in which his productivity in his chosen
occupation is greatest, the cost in earnings foregone due to remaining with

his parents will rise as the child shifts a larger share of his time into
production. He will leave home when this cost becomes larger than the total
benefits of remaining, with the latter comprised of nonpecuniary benefits as
well as investment and other income transfers from the family.

7

III. The Van Slyck Sample
Relatively little is known about the age at which children typically

home at most times and places in the past. In part this is due to a
lack of sources that yield quantitative information, for the departure of a
child from home did not attract the attention from such institutions as the
left

state or the church that was afforded to such other events in the experience

of families as marriages, births, and deaths. This investigation will rely
on an unusual source of evidence that provides direct observation of the age

at leaving home and a number of possible influences on it for a limited but
interesting sample of individuals.
In 1879, a Bostonian named J.D. Van Slyck published a two—volume work

entitled New England Manufacturers and Manufactories.9 In a brief introduc-

tion, the author criticized the neglect of the histories of "the great
manufactorjes of New England, showing the rise, the marvelous growth, the

products of each," and argued that the success of these

industrial

enter-

prises was due so largely to individual enterprise that "to withhold from

their histories the personal lives of those who planted and fostered them,

would be little more than to exhibit the form without the spirit." Van

Slyck

undertook to remedy this neglect by writing short histories of the

leading

manufacturing firms of New England, including in

"life—sketches"

them what he called

of their founders or current chief executives. The capsule

biographies included in his two volumes provide the evidence for this
investigation.

Van Slyck did not describe how the information for

these biographies

was gathered, commenting only that "no effort or expense has been spared to
make this a work of real value." The detail and accuracy of the biographi-

cal sketches support Joseph Kett's judgment that these were normally based

8

orientation
on autobiographical data submitted by the subjects. The factual

of the biographies is also consistent with Van Slyck'S stated intention to
. . avoiding much
.
restrict himself to "simple, concise and true narrative
use of that eulogistic 'ornamentation' so often degraded to fulsomeness."

The format of the biographies is not

standard, and the amount of

information varies considerably across individuals. Yet sufficient
information was available on a number of potentially

important variables to

allow their inclusion in the data set analyzed here. A full listing of
definitions of the variables included ann a description of the practices

followed in coding them is provided in

the appendix. The age of the in-

dividual upon leaving home can be obtained from most of the biographies,

from either direct statements or indirect inferences. Most biographies
provide information on the occupations of the subject's fathers, and many

devote close attention to the early education and work experience of the
future manufacturers.

Table 1 presents the sample means of

the variables coded in this

investigation, and indicates the number of biographies containing
information on each variable. The mean date of birth was 1815; nearly nine—
tenths of the sample members left their parental

homes during the first half

of the nineteenth century.

The mean age at leaving home for 233 sample members was 18 years.
Table 2, which presents the full distribution of this variable, shows that

18 was also the median age. Sample members began leaving home in
significant numbers around the age of 10, and the pace accelerated sharply
in the early teens: whereas less than 5 percent had left home before the age

of 10, and less than 10 percent by age 12, more than a quarter had left by
the age of 16. Half the sample members had left home by 18, and more than

8a
TABLE
SUMMARY

STATISTICS, VAN SLICK SAMPLE

Variables

Year of birth

1

N

Mean

a

Age at leaving horneb

290

8H.8

233

17.91

297

0.90

Employed by father while
at home

286

0.63

Employed by non—family
member while at home

281

0.26

First employed by relative
away from home

291

0.11

First move to school

291

0.10

Attended boarding school before
final departure from home

297

0.12

Apprenticeship

293

0.17

Parents' nativity

297

0.007

Father alive when subject
left home

Age at first marriagec

87

26.16

Birth order

102

0.16

Father' s occupation
Agriculture only

235

0.33

235
235

Q•14Q

235

0.10

235

Q•Q14

235

0.004

235

0.02

Manufacturing only
Services only
Agriculture and
Manufacturing
Agriculture and
Services
Manufacturing and
Services
Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services

0.11

Notes; For definitions of all variables, see appendix.
a. Year of birth was coded as last three digits of year.
Standard deviation
15.8 years.
b. Standard deviation = 4.68 years.
c. Standard deviation
5.81 years.
Source: J.D. Van Slyck, New England Manufacturers and Manufactories
(Boston: Van Slyck and Company, 1879), 2 volumes. For references to supplemtary sources, see appendix.

8b

TABLE 2

FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF AGE AT LEAVING HOME, VAN SLICK SAMPLE

Number

Cumulative
Percentage

7

2

0.9

8

3

2.1

9

14

3•9

10

14

5.6

11

6

8.2

12

7

11.2

13

5

13.3

114

20

21.9

15

114

27.9

16

21

36.9

17

28

148.9

18

21

57.9

19

18

65.7

20

20

711.2

21

18

82.0

22

6

814.5

23

8

88.0

214

10

92.3

25

14

914.0

26

14

95.7

27

1

96.1

28

11

97.9

30

3

99.1

33

1

99.6

1

100.0

Age

314

Total

Source: See Table 1.

233

100.0

9

80 percent had left by the age of majority. Nearly 95 percent had left by
the age of 25, and virtually all had left by the age of 30.

Most of the sample members' fathers (90 percent) were still alive

when their sons left home. Nearly two—thirds of the sample members had
worked for their fathers sometime before leaving home. Just over a quarter
of all sample members had worked locally outside the family before leaving

home. One in ten first worked for relatives after leaving home, 12 percent

attended boarding school and returned to their families sometime before
their final departure from home, and one in ten attended school immediately
after leaving home and did not subsequently return home.

There was no immediate link for most sample members between departure

from home and marriage. The mean age at marriage for 87 sample members for

whom this information is available was 26.2 years, more than eight years
greater than the sample mean age at leaving home.11 Information on both age
at leaving home and age at marriage is available for 72 sample members: the
mean interval between these events for those individuals was more than nine
years. Only eight of the 72 (11 percent) married in the same year they left
home, while 80 percent of them waited at least four years to marry, and half
married fully nine or more years after leaving home.

The distribution of fathers' occupations provides one opportunity to

compare the sample to larger contemporary populations. Only 49 percent of
the sample members were sons of farmers. In contrast, as late as 1830 more

than 70 percent of the American labor force remained in agriculture. Two—
fifths of the sample members were sons of men who earned their living exclusively in manufacturing activities, whereas Stanley Lebergott estimated
that in 1840 less than 10 percent of the national labor force was engaged in

manufacturing.12 Since Van Slyck's sample was composed of successful

10

facturers, it is hardy

surprising

that sons of manufacturers are dispropor

tionately represented in it, or that sons of farmers are underrepresented.
Yet

in view of the existence of major regional differences in the

distribution

of economic activity in the early nineteenth century, a con-

centration of manufacturers in a sample of New England residents might also

appear unsurprising. In fact, estimates of the sectoral distribution of
occupations in nineteenth—century Massachusetts suggest that the members of

Van Slyck's sample might have come from backgrounds not far from a representative sample in this respect. Mans VinovskiS estimated that the share
of Massachusetts' labor force in agriculture fell from 58 percent in 1820 to
42 percent in 18140, while manufacturing accounted for 30 percent in 1820 and

141 percent in 18140.13 The fathers of Van Slyck's sample members appear to

have been somewhat more heavily concentrated in manufacturing, with 140
percent identified exclusively as in that sector and a total of 52 percent
mentioned

with 33

as having some connection, and less oriented toward agriculture,

percent

exclusively

in the sector and 149

percent

engaged at least

part—time. Yet depending on how the fathers described as engaged in more

than one activity in the biographies would have been categorized by the

federal census, the real differences in the distribution of activities

between the fathers of sample members and the working population of

Massachusetts

at the time might actually have been quite small. The occupa-

tions mentioned by Van Slyck can of course tell us

other

nothing

of the wealth or

important characteristics of these families relative to the general

population, but it is of interest to know tnat the sample members might have

come from families distributed among economic activities in proportions
similar to the general population of the region where they lived.

11

Pending further research on the age at leaving home among other
groups, little can be said of the representativeness of the experiences of
the members of this sample. While the members of Van Slyck's sample might

have come from backgrounds similar to those of many of their peers, their
inclusion in his survey was premised on considerable eventual economic success, and therefore their actions cannot simply be assumed to have resembled

those of other youths of their time. Van Slyck's sample furthermore contains only men; parallel information for women would be of obvious interest.

For these reasons, the results presented below can be interpreted Only as
statements about the behavior of the sample members; they might also be seen

as a source of hypotheses to be tested when the analysis of other data
allows comparisons with other groups.

IV. Regression Results
Table 3 presents the results obtained from estimation of a regression
equation in which the age at leaving home was specified as a linear function

of a number of independent variables on which information was available in
the biographies, and which the analysis outlined above suggested might be

relevant to the cetermination of the age at leaving home.1 Overall, the
explanatory variables account for one third of the variance in the age at
leaving home, and their joint effect is highly significantly related to the
dependent variable.

A number of the independent variables individually appear to have had

a major impact on the age at leaving home. Sons with living fathers
remained at home 2 years longer on average than those sample members alike
in other respects whose fathers had died prior to the sons' departure from

home. That the plight of nineteenth—century children whose fathers died was

1 1a

TABLE 3
REGRESSION RESULTS, VAN SLYCK SAMPLE
DEPENDENT VARIABLE: AGE AT LEAVING HOME (Years)

Estimated
Coefficient

Independent variable

Standard
Error

Significance
Level

Father alive

2.149

1.02

0.02

Employed by father
while at home

14.30

0.97

0.0001

Employed by non—family
member while at home

2.63

0.70

0.0002

Employed by relative in
first job away from home

—2.61

0.91

0.005

First move to school

—0.61

1.011

0.56

Attended boarding school before
final departure from home

1.96

0.88

0.03

Apprenticeship

0.05

0.80

0.95

0.0211

0.99

0.0001

—0.0003

Year of birth
1

Father's occupatiOn:
Agriculture only
Services only
Agriculture and
Manufacturing

0.914

0.83
1.20

—1.89

1.12

0.09

MiscellaneouS2

-2.09

1.30

0.11

3.37

0.143

114.25

Intercept

0.328
7.08

F

187

n

Notes: 1The excluded category for occupational analysis is "manufacturing
only."

2"Miscellaneous" includes the following combinations of sectors:
agriculture and services; manufacturing and services; agriculture,
manufacturing and services.
For definitions of all other variables, see appendix. Method of estimation
was ordinary least squares.

12

a sorry one, likely to throw them prematurely upon the mercy of the cold

world outside their homes, would come as no surprise to readers of Charles
Dickens; the result obtained here appears to indicate that for those in the

sample the father's death tended to break up the residential unit of the
family.15

The effect of the son's employment by the father prior to the son's
departure from home is positive and highly significant statistically, in-

dicating that sons who worked for their fathers remained home an average of
more than four years longer than those who did not. It should be noted that

the negative coefficient associated with a father in agriculture cancels
most of this effect, however, so that a large net impact is present only for

Sons of fathers in the other two sectors (3.!! years for fathers in the
service sector, and !!.3 for fathers in manufacturing). The direction and

large size of the effect of home employment for Sons of fathers employed in
the nonagricultural sectors are consistent with several effects noted in the

discussion earlier in this paper. First, the son's employment by the father
could have raised the family's income sufficiently to enable the son to re-

main at home considerably longer than he would have in the absence of this
employment. Second, a son's employment by his father might in many cases

have contained a large training component. This variable would then mdi—

cate continuing investment by the family in the child, raising the ad—

vantages to him of remaining at home. This is also consistent with the
differential estimated effects of the fathers' occupational categories, for

the men in this sample who grew up on farms left their parents considerably
earlier than sons of fathers employed in the other sectors; a son growing up

on a farm in nineteenth—century New England would have had to leave home to
gain access to the training and work experience that would help make him a

13

successful

manufacturer. A third possible source of the effect is that the

ability of the father to offer the son a job could have been positively
correlated with the father's wealth. Fathers with larger businesses might
have

been better able to offer employment to their sons, and consequently

this

variable might serve in part to identify wealthier families. The

higher mean age of their Sons at leaving home would then be consistent with

the view that the retention of children at home is a normal good, with age
at leaving home positively related to family wealth.16 Although the impact

of each of these effects cannot be identified from the evidence available
here, they are not mutually exclusive.

Another variable with a large positive impact on the age at leaving

home is that of the child being employed locally but outside the family

prior to leaving home. Sons who had held such jobs left home on average
more than 2 years later than those who had not. That children who found

local employment tended to remain at home longer than those who didn't
points to the probable importance of the contribution of the child to the
family's income as a factor in keeping the child at home.

Sample members whose first job away from home was in the employ of a

relative left home an average of more than 2 years earlier than others.
This is consistent with the presence of some nepotism in hiring practices,

as employers might have been willing to offer jobs to relatives at younger
ages than to other workers. For some youths the extended family therefore
provided employment, and often also a place of residence, that constituted a

status intermediate between living at home and independence as an adult.
Not surprisingly, this was much more likely for children whose fathers had

died, as 29 percent of those whose fathers had died prior to the son's
departure from home found their initial employment away from home with a

14

relative,

compared to only 9 percent of those whose fathers were living when

the son left home.17 The extended family therefore appears to have provided

insurance to a significant extent. Yet the large estimated effect of
initial employment by a relative on the age at leaving home does not derive
primarily from cases in which sons moved to the care of relatives after the

deaths of their fathers. This is apparent from Table I, which presents the
results for a similar regression estimated for the subsample of individuals

who left home before the deaths of their fathers. The estimated coefficients for nearly all the variables remain similar to those of Table 3; of
particular interest here is that the coefficient obtained for the effect of

employment by a relative upon first leaving home indicates that on average
this was associated with a departure from home of still more than two years

earlier than otherwise. The economic effect of the extended family was
therefore not limited to cases in which sons were forced to leave home by
the deaths of their fathers.1

Sample members who attended boarding schools at some time before
leaving home eventually left home an average of nearly two years later than
others, while those whose first move away from home was to attend school did

not leave home at an age significantly different from others. There is
abundant evidence that basic education in the early nineteenth century was
commonly obtained by youths in the time they spared from work. Van Slyck's

biographies frequently include such statements as: "His father was a
blacksmith, and Charles was, in early life, called upon to assist him in the

shop, meanwhile attending school at irregular intervals," and: "His father
was a small farmer, and Loring assisted him on the farm, attending school,
meanwhile, a few months in the winter."19 Yet at a time when schooling was

typically obtained locally at minimal cost in terms of both cash

14a
TABLE 14

REGRESSION RESULTS, VAN SLYCK SAMPLE
DEPENDENT VARIABLE: AGE AT LEAVING HOME (Years)

Estimated
Coefficient

Standard
Error

Employed by father
while at home

3.62

1.05

0.0007

Employed by non—family
member while at home

1.90

0.75

0.01

1.01

0.03

—0.55

1.07

0.61

1.914

0.91

0.03

—0.27

0.85

0.75

0.0217

0.80

0.85
1.23

0.0003

1.15

0.10
0.06

Independent variable

Employed by relative in
first job away from home

First move to school
Attended boarding school before
final departure from home
Apprenticeship
Year of birth
Father's occupation:
Agriculture only
Services only
Agriculture and
manufacturing
Miscellaneous

Intercept

O.00514

-3.18
'-1.145

'1.92
—2.57

1.314

Significance
Level

0.214

21.65
0. 2314

F

n

14.27

166

Notes: The sample for this regression was restricted to sons whose fathers
were alive at the time of the Sons' departure from home.

Source: See Table 1.

15

expenditures and time costs, those families that did go to the expense of
sending their sons away to academies or colleges for formal education were

probably members of the wealthier segment of society; while some of the
biographies mention attendance only at small schools near home, a number of

the subjects attended such schools as the academies at Andover and
Worcester, and such colleges as Brown, Dartmouth, Harvard, Princeton, and

Yale. That attendance at boarding schools tended to increase the age at
leaving home for some might therefore point to one way in which greater
family wealth caused a later departure from home.
Several other independent variables yield insignificant and generally

small coefficients. The lack of effect of apprenticeship on the age at
leaving home might be due to the increasing informality of that institution

in the nineteenth century, as a number of sample members served terms of
only two or three years rather than the traditional seven; these shorter
periods of training apparently did not significantly disrupt the timing of

the child's departure from home.2° The year of birth of the subjects,
included to check for a possible secular trend in the age at leaving home,
does not indicate the presence of significant change over time.21

V. Conclusion
Knowing when children departed from their parental homes in the past,

and what variables influenced the timing of this departure, is important to

historians and economists for a number of reasons. This paper has focused
on the departure from home from an interest in understanding when and why
individuals became independent actors in determining their own geographic
mobility. The paper first suggested some elements of an economic approach

to the determination of the age at leaving home. A data set drawn from

16

short biographies of New England manufacturers collected in the mid—nineteenth century was then used to provide information both on the typical age
at which those in the sample left their parental homes and on some economic
and demographic correlates of this age.

The empirical results obtained from this sample do appear to suggest

a coherent view of the process by which children left home in the early
nineteenth century. The age of departure was concentrated in the late teen

ages and early twenties, as the sample median age was 18 years, and four—

fifths of those in the sample left home between the ages of H and 2'4.
Those with living fathers, and those who worked prior to leaving home,
tended to remain at home longer than others; those whose first jobs outside

the home were in the employ of relatives tended to depart earlier. These

effects appear to be consistent with an economic analysis in which the
family's retention of its children within the relevant range of ages is
considered as a normal good; although measures of family wealth or income

are not available in the data set analyzed here, the most important vanables in the empirical results appear to represent potentially significant

influences on either family income or the opportunity cost of the child's
retention at home.

It should of course be recognized that the results obtained here

eliminate some other possible interpretations of the relationships
observed in the sample. Yet they do cast doubt on some. For example, it
cannot

might plausibly be argued that a number of the effects that appear in Tables
3 and I were consequences, rather than determinants, of the length of a

child's stay at home; thus perhaps the longer children remained at home, the

greater the likelihood that they would work locally, either for their
parents or others, and the more likely they would be to attend boarding

17

school before finally leaving their families. Yet children who stayed home
longer would also have been more likely to depart after the deaths of their

fathers. That Table 3 shows the opposite to have been the case suggests

that the correlations observed here are not simply the consequences of
differences in the duration of children's residence with their parents, but
do point to some underlying economic influences on those durations.
As noted earlier, the degree to which results from this sample can be

generalized to other groups remains to be determined by future research.

One interesting piece of comparative evidence can be offered here. The
distribution of the age at leaving home for the sons of farm families in two
rural New York counties in the early twentieth century is presented in Table

5. The New York distribution has a considerably higher central tendency
than that shown in Table 2 for the Van Slyck sample, with its median age of

21 three years greater than the median age of 18 found for the earlier
sample. The later distribution is also more skewed toward higher ages, as
more than a quarter of the New Yorkers had not left home by the age of 30,
compared to less than 1 percent of Van Slyck's subjects.22 These contrasts
are intriguing, for they not only call attention to the possibility that the
New England manufacturers left home on average earlier than others, but they

also serve to point out that the industrialists may have been unusual in
that all had left home by early adulthood.

The considerable differences between these samples in time and place

make it unwise to place much weight on this comparison. Yet the men who
pioneered the American industrial revolution may in fact have differed from

their less successful contemporaries as much in their early migration and

labor market experiences as in their later careers. More research on the

1 7a

TABLE 5

DISTRIBUTION OF AGES OF MALES AT LEAVING HOME, JEFFERSON
AND TIOGA COUNTIES, NEW YORK, 1920

Number

Age

Cumulative
Percentage

15

5

2.3

16

7

5.5

17

12

11.0

18

37

28.0

19

3

29.4

20

32

1414.0

21

23

54.6

22

9

58.7

23

3

60.1

24

5

62.14

25

8

66.1

26

1

66.5

27

3

67.9

28

2

68.8

29

3

70.2

30—314

12

75.7

35—39

5

78.0

1401414

17

85.8

145 +

31

100.0

218

Total
Median Age

21

Source: E.C. Young, The Movement of Farm Population, (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Agricultural Experiment Station, 19214), Bulletin No.
1426, Table 140, pp. 36-7.

18

early lives and careers of this as well as other groups can help to establish what patterns were typical in the past, and how the age at leaving home
was related to other aspects of people's lives.

19

FOOTNOTES

I am

grateful

to Andrew Abel, Gary Becker, Stanley Engerman, Robert

Fogel, Robert Gailman, Richard Hellie, Charles Kahn, Joseph Kett, Morgan
Kousser, David Lam, Daniel Levy, Robert Michael, Douglass North, Walter 01,
Jonathan Pritchett, Sherwin Rosen, Theodore W. Schultz, Daniel Scott Smith,

Peter Temin, Robert Topel, James Walker, and Harry Watson for suggestions
and discussions of the issues treated in this paper; none bears any respon'

sibility for its contents.

I am also very grateful to Joseph Kett for

bringing Van Slyck's biographies to my attention as a source of evidence for

this investigation. Brendan Henry and David Augustin provided capable
research assistance. Financial support for the research was provided by the

University of Chicago and an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. Earlier

versions of the paper were presented at a meeting of the Program on the

Development of the American Economy of the National Bureau of Economic
Research in Cambridge, and at seminars at the University of Chicago, the
University of Michigan, the National Opinion Research Center in Chicago, and
Washington University.

11n his recent survey of family history, Michael Anderson commented

that "leaving home to go into service, setting up in lodgings, living with
kin, and continuing to live at home with parents can be seen as alternatives
f or young people in the early stages of the life cycle. One of the problems

for future research is to try to discern who 'chose' which option and why;"

Approaches to the History of the Western Family, 15OO—191 (London:
MacmIllan, 1980), p.26. For examples of historical studies that discuss the
age at leaving home, see Richard Wall, "The Age at Leaving Home," Journal of

20

Family History, Vol. 3, No. 2 (Summer, 1978), pp. 181202; and Michael B.
Katz, Michael J. Doucet, and Mark J. Stern, The Social Organization of

Early

Industrial Capitalism (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1982), Chapter

7. Other recent economic treatments of the age at leaving home include

Marjorie McElroy, "The Joint Determination of Market Work and Household
Membership of Youth," (unpublished paper, University of Illinois, 1982);

Robert T. Michael, "Youths' Independence from Parents: Very Preliminary
Evidence," (unpublished paper, University of Chicago, 1982); Julie DaVanzo

and Frances E. Kobrin, "Leaving the Nest and the Transition to Adulthood,"
(unpublished paper, Hand Corporation, 1982); and Claudia Goldin and Donald

0. Parsons, "The Adolescent, Intrafamily Relations, and the Industrial
Revolution," (unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania, no date).

2For a discussion of the importance of continuing parental economic

assistance to children after the departure of the latter from home in
nineteenth—century New England, see Hal S. Barron, Those Who Stayed Behind:

Rural Society in Nineteenth—Century New England (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 198)4), pp. 99—109.

3For example Lee Soltow and Edward Stevens found few boys ten
through nineteen living away from home and attending school in the mid—
nineteenth century United States; The Rise of Literacy and the Common School

in the United States: A Socioeconomic Analysis to 1870

(Chicago: University

of Chicago Press, 1981) p. 120. This is implicit in such statements as
Ulysses S. Grant's recollection that because of his father's great concern
that his children receive an education, Grant "never missed a quarter from

school from the time [he] was old enough to attend till the time of leaving
home;" quoted in ibid., p. 93.

21

1For some evidence on the apparent substitution of the training of

children by their fathers for formal education in nineteenthceflturY
Philadelphia, see All Saad, "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in
Nineteenth Century America," (dissertation in progress, University of
Chicago).

5For evidence on the positive association in the nineteenth century
between children's school attendance and family wealth or income, see Soltow

and Stevens, The Rise of Literacy and the Common School in the United
States, pp. 128—30, and David L. Angus and Jeffrey E. Mirel, "From Spellers

to Spindles: Work—Force Entry by the Children of Textile—WOrkers, 1888
1890," Social Science History, Vol. 9, No. 2 (Spring 1985), pp. 12343.
6This discussion assumes that the earnings of a child living at home

will be spent in the same way as other family income. This assumption
appears consistent with the nature of the ineteenthcefltUry family; thus

Joseph Kett stated, concerning nineteenth—century

families, that "in the

quasi—contractual relationship between father and sons, the obligation to
work lay heavily on the son;" Rites of Passage: Adolescence fl America, 1790

to the Present (New York: Basic Books, 1977), p. 29. In some cases the

wages of children employed outside the family were paid directly to the
parents; the biography of Philip Corbin, one of the subjects of this
investigation, notes that "From the age of fifteen tO

that

of nineteen

years, he was employed in farm—labor away from home, performing the full

work of a man, and earning a man's wages, which were, however, received by

his father;" J.D. Van Slyck, New England Manufacturers and Manufactories

(Boston: Van Slyck and Company, 1879), Vol. 1, p. 187. Different
assumptions about the control and expenditure of children's income are of

course possible, not only for the period during which the child remained at

22

home, but also for that after his departure;

indeed, the passage just quoted

is ambiguous on the question of where Corbin was actually living during the
period in which his wages were being paid out to his father.

7jacob Mincer, "Family Migration Decisions," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 86, No. 5 (October 1978), pp. 7A9_73 Mincer explicitly

considers only husbands and wives; the following discussion extends his
analysis to children.

8The definition employed here, as in the balance of this paper. is
that the child's parental home is that of the surviving parent if either
parent dies before the child's departure from his parents.
9(Boston: Van Slyck and Company, 1879), 2 volumes.

10Ibid., Vol. 1, Introduction; Kett, Rites of Passage, p. 2. In
some cases Van Slyck mentions the use of journals or other memoirs provided

by the subjects of biographies. Some of the subjects were dead at the time
Van Slyck wrote, and in these cases his information appears to have come

from a variety of sources, including relatives, business associates, and
papers of the subjects.

Van Slyck's compilations appear to have been quite accurate. Of
the first 73 principal subjects named in the Table of Contents to Volume I,

22 are listed in the Dictionary of American Biography (New York: Charles
Scribrier's Sons, 1928). In all 22 cases, the month and year of birth are

the same in both sources. The same is true for date of death for nine of
the ten cases of subjects who had died prior to the publication of Van

Slyck's books; in one case the date of death differed by two years. The
state named as the place of the subject's birth was the same in both sources
in all cases.

23

Sample members appear to have married at ages similar on average to

those of other men in New England at the time. The average age at first

marriage for Massachusetts males was 26 years in the middle of the
nineteenth century; Mans A. Vinovskis, Fertility in Massachusetts from the
Revolution to the Civil War (New York: Academic Press, 1981), pp. 148—19.
1

'The figure of 149

percent

is an upper bound obtained by including

all men listed jointly as farmers together with any other occupation as
engaged in agriculture. On the sectoral composition of the national labor

force, see Stanley Lebergott, Manpower in Economic Growth: The American
Record Since 1800 (New York: McGraw Hill, 19614), p. 510.

13Vinovskis, Fertility in Massachusetts from the Revolution to the
Civil war, Table E.8, p. 220. It should be emphasized that virtually all of
the fathers of sample members described here as manufacturers were in fact
engaged in artisanal crafts on a small scale.

second version of the same equation was estimated, for which ages

at leaving home greater than 21 were recoded and set equal to 21.

The

motivation for this lies in the interest of this investigation in the age of

independence of the child for purposes of determining such actions as
migration; it might be argued that a child who remained in the parental home

past majority had nonetheless probably become independent of his parents in

this respect, and remained in the parental home for different reasons, and

with different implications, than did younger children. Limiting the
dependent variable to a maximum of 21 allows a comparison of the results to
the unrestricted version, reported in Table 3, to check whether the behavior

of those children who did remain with their parents after reaching majority

significantly affected the results obtained here. The two versions of the
equation estimated produce results that are the same qualitatively, with a

24

general tendency for the absolute magnitudes of coefficients to be somewhat
larger in the first, unrestricted version. The differences in magnitude are
not great, however, and no separate discussion

appears necessary.

151f each of the two effects of the father's death hypothesized
had

been present in a significant number of

cases, the net impact might be

expected to have been to raise the variance of the age at leaving home for

Sons of deceased fathers above that for Sons of living fathers, for the
father's death might have caused some Sons to leave home very young —

those

whose homes were broken up by the father's death — and caused others to stay

home considerably longer than otherwise — those who took over family
businesses. The net impact on the mean of the distribution would depend on

the relative frequency of these two effects.

A comparison of the two

distributions indicates that the mean age at leaving home for Sons of
deceased fathers (1LL7) was considerably below that of sons with living

fathers (18.3), and that there was some difference between the respective
standard deviations (5.9 and )4.J4)

The father's death therefore appears to

have lowered the mean of the age of Sons at leaving home and raised its
var lance.

16Other studies report a positive relationship between the
age of

children at leaving home and family wealth; Michael B. Katz and Ian E.
Davey, "Youth and Industrialization in a Canadian City," in John Demos and
Sarane Spence Boccock, eds.,, Turning Points: Historical and Sociological

Essays on the Family (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), p. S102;

Katz, Doucet, and Stern, The Social Organization of Earl1 Industrial
Capitalism, p. 262.
17The correlation of 0.28 between the father's death and the son's

initial employment by a relative is significant at the .0001 level. As

25

might be expected, the probability that a son whose father had died before
the child left home would go to work for a relative declined considerably as

the child's age increased: whereas 58 percent of such sons who left home
before the age of 1!I went to work for relatives, only 9 percent of those who

left home at 14 or older ages were first employed by relatives.

l8Joseph Kett stressed this importance of the supervision of other
relatives in addition to parents in the early careers of Van Slyck's subjects, noting that "dependency and residence at home were not interchangeable concepts before the middle of the 19th century;" Rites of Passage,
p. 27.

9Van Slyck, New England Manufacturers and Manufactories, Vol. 1,

pp. 96, 178. On the seasoriality of school attendance in the mid—nineteenth

century, and the relationship between the timing of children's work and

attendance, see Soltow and Stevens, The Rise of Literacy and the Common
School in the United States, pp. 110—11, 121—22.

20Lawrence A. Cremin, American Education: The National Experience,

1783—1876 (New York: Harper & Row, 1980), pp. 342—52; Kett, Rites

of'

Passage, p. 26.
21

More elaborate regression specifications using additional independ-

ent variables designed to test for the presence of differences in the age at
leaving home by birth cohort failed to reveal any significant or consistent
pattern.

It might be noted that a similar regression equation was also
estimated after adding one other variable, the son's birth order. That
variable yielded a small and insignificant coefficient, and its inclusion

26

did not have important effects on the estimated values of other coefficients. Inclusion of birth order reduced the sample size to less than 70
observations; the results obtained are not presented here.
22For another study that indicates ages at leaving home similar
to

those shown in Table 5, for a different rural New York county a decade
later, see W.A. Anderson, Mobility of Rural Families, II: Changes in

Residence and in Occupation of Sons and Daughters in Rural Families in
Genesee County, New York (Ithaca, N.Y.:

Cornell University Agricultural

Experiment Station, 1935), Bulletin No. 623, Table I, p. 6. It might be
noted that inclusion in the tabulation presented here as Table 5 was
premised upon having left a farm in one of the two counties studied by
Young; like Table 2, an age at leaving is therefore given for everyone
included.

27

Appendix: The Coding of the Van Slyck Biographies

The quantitative evidence for this investigation was drawn primarily

from the biographies of New England manufacturers contained in J.D. Van
Slyck, New England Manufacturers and Manufactories, 2 volumes (Boston: Van
Slyck and Company, 1879). This appendix provides a listing of the variables

on which information was taken from the biographies, and a description of
the practices followed and definitions used in coding them.

All principal subjects of chapters were included in the sample
analyzed if information on a reasonable number of variables was available in

their biographies; missing information on particular variables obviously

causes a number of these to be omitted from parts of the quantitative
analysis of this paper. In addition, other individuals mentioned in the
course of descriptions of manufacturing firms have been included in the

sample whenever information was available on the age at which they left
home; varying amounts of other information about these individuals of course

again means that some are omitted from the sample for particular empirical
specifications.

The variables coded from the biographies are the following:
1.

Year of subject's birth: coded as the last three digits of the year.
________________________

2.

Nativity of subject's parents: coded as 0 for parents born in America,
_____________________________

and as

1

for foreign—born parents. Foreign—born subjects were excluded

from the sample.

3. Age of subject at leaving home: coded as the age at which the subject
left his parents, or his surviving parent if only one was alive.
possible this variable refers to the

final

Whenever

departure from home, for those

28

cases

in which children had left and returned. Therefore a child who went

away to school and then returned home directly from school was not deemed to

have left home for the purposes of coding this variable. If a child went
away to school but did not return home afterward, the age at the time of' his

departure to school was taken as the age at leaving home. These conventions
are aimed at distinguishing between departures from home that indicated the

child would subsequently be an independent agent, for example for purposes
of determining whether to migrate, and those in which the child remained
tied to the parental household, with a return to his parents assumed at the

time he left. Attendance at school appears to account for most cases that
fall into the latter category.
LI.

Father alive when subject left home: coded as 0 if father was dead

when child left home, or as

if father was alive. Orphans were excluded

1

from the sample.

5—7. Father's occupation:

5. Agriculture: coded as I if the father was a farmer, or

as 0

if he was not.

6. Manufacturing: coded as

1

if the father engaged in

manufacturing, or as 0 if he did not.

7. Services: coded as

1

if the father was engaged in commerce or

a profession, or as 0 if' he was not.
In coding variables 5—7, fathers' occupations were not constrained to be in

only one of the three categories; a father who operated a farm and had a

shed on it where he did carpentry for a local market would be coded as
engaged in both agriculture and manufacturing.
8.

Subject employed by father or

family before leaving home:

coded as

1

if the biography mentioned that the child had worked for his father or

29

another family member while at home, and as 0 otherwise. The one excep-

tion to this was for the childred of farmers, for whom this variable was
always coded as 1. The biographies commonly mention that children who grew

up on farms worked for their parents on these farms from early choidhood.
Although such mentions were omitted in a small number of cases, children of

farmers are assumed here always to have done some work on the farm while
they remained at home. For some evidence consistent with this assumption,

see Lee Soltow and Edward Stevens, The Rise of Literacy and the Common
School in the United States: A Socioeconomic Analysis to 1870 (Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 110—11, 121—22; Max George
Schumacher, The Northern Farmer and His Markets During the Late Colonial
Period (New York: Arno Press, 1975), pp. 14O-1, 148-49.

9.

Subject's first move to school: coded as

1

if the subject's departure

from home was made in order to attend school, and as 0 if it was not.
This variable was coded as

1

only if the attendance at school was not

followed by an immediate return to the parental home, or as 0 if it was
immediately followed by such a return; for the reasons for this practice,
see the discussion of variable 3, above.

10. Attended boarding school before final departure from home: coded as

1

if the subject attended school away from home and returned home immediately

thereafter, and as 0 otherwise.

11. Apprenticeship: coded as

1

if the subject is described as having

entered or served an apprenticeship, or as 0 otherwise.

12. Subject employed by non—family member while at home: coded as

1

if

the subject worked for an employer other than a member of his family before

leaving home, or as 0 otherwise.

30

13. Subject first employed by a relative after leaving home: coded as

1

if the subject's first employment after leaving home was for a relative, or

as 0 if it was not.
114.

Birth order: coded as

1

if the subject was the oldest son in the

family, or as 0 if he was not.

15. Age at first marriage. The information on this variable available in
Van Slyck's two volumes was supplemented through the use of the Dictionary

of American Biography (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1928) and the
National Cyclopaedia of American Biography (New York: James T. White & Co.,
1898) for sample members listed in the latter two sources.

