                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ISOLATING THE EFFECT OF MAJOR DEPRESSION ON OBESITY:
                           ROLE OF SELECTION BIAS

                                          Dhaval M. Dave
                                          Jennifer Tennant
                                         Gregory J. Colman

                                        Working Paper 17068
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17068


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We are grateful to Susan Averett and Liz Peters for helpful comments and discussion. The authors
would also like to thank their respective universities for research support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Dhaval M. Dave, Jennifer Tennant, and Gregory J. Colman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Isolating the Effect of Major Depression on Obesity: Role of Selection Bias
Dhaval M. Dave, Jennifer Tennant, and Gregory J. Colman
NBER Working Paper No. 17068
May 2011
JEL No. I1,I12,I18

                                               ABSTRACT

There is suggestive evidence that rates of major depression have risen markedly in the U.S. concurrent
with the rise in obesity. The economic burden of depression, about $100 billion annually, is under-estimated
if depression has a positive causal impact on obesity. If depression plays a causal role in increasing
the prevalence of obesity, then policy interventions aimed at promoting mental health may also have
the indirect benefits of promoting a healthy bodyweight. However, virtually the entire existing literature
on the connection between the two conditions has examined merely whether they are significantly
correlated, sometimes holding constant a limited set of demographic factors. This study utilizes multiple
large-scale nationally-representative datasets to assess whether, and the extent to which, the positive
association reflects a causal link from major depression to higher BMI and obesity. While contemporaneous
effects are considered, the study primarily focuses on the effects of past and lifetime depression to
bypass reverse causality and further assess the role of non-random selection on unobservable factors.
There are expectedly no significant or substantial effects of current depression on BMI or overweight/obesity,
given that BMI is a stock measure that changes relatively slowly over time. Results are also not supportive
of a causal interpretation among males. However, among females, estimates indicate that past or lifetime
diagnosis of major depression raises the probability of being overweight or obese by about seven percentage
points. Results also suggest that this effect appears to plausibly operate through shifts in food consumption
and physical activity. We estimate that this higher risk of overweight and obesity among females could
potentially add about 10% (or $9.7 billion) to the estimated economic burden of depression.


Dhaval M. Dave                                        Gregory J. Colman
Bentley University                                    Pace University
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                            41 Park Row, 11th Floor
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                                New York, NY 10038
and NBER                                              and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu                                     gcolman@pace.edu

Jennifer Tennant
Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
292 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
jrt229@cornell.edu
I.        Introduction

          Until recently obesity in the U.S. was a fairly rare occurrence. However, between 1980

and 2000, the prevalence of obese adults doubled to 34%, and the prevalence of obesity for

children almost tripled to 17%. Recent data indicate that obesity appears to have reached a

plateau at these high rates (Flegal et al. 2010). Obesity is a significant public health concern due

to the high level of morbidity, premature mortality and related economic burden. It has been

identified as a contributing factor to approximately 100,000-400,000 deaths and imposes an

economic burden of $140-$215 billion in direct (healthcare expenditures) and indirect

(productivity losses) costs (Hammond and Levine 2010; Wolf and Colditz 1998).

          Coincident with the rise in obesity, there is suggestive evidence that rates of major

depression have also risen markedly, with increases noted for most socio-demographic

subgroups of the U.S. population. From 1991–1992 to 2001–2002, past year prevalence of major

depression among adults has approximately doubled (Compton et al. 2006). Major depression

affects almost one out of every five adults in their lifetime, and has been linked to increased risk

of stroke and of heart failure, reduced bone density among the elderly, higher rates of substance

abuse, and higher mortality in general.1 Its economic burden is correspondingly large. Recent

estimates place the current cost of major depression in the U.S. due to lost productivity and

increased healthcare expenditures at approximately $100 billion per year (inflation adjusted),

being surpassed by only hypertension and heart disease (Greenberg et al. 2003).

          These costs of depression are under-estimated if depression has a positive causal impact

on obesity, which in turn would further adversely affect productivity and raise healthcare

spending. If depression plays a causal role in increasing the prevalence of obesity, then policy

interventions aimed at promoting mental health may also have the indirect benefits of promoting
1
    See, for instance, Jonas and Mussolino (2000), Robbins et al. (2001), and Saffer and Dave (2005).

                                                                                                        4
a healthy bodyweight. One of the targets of the Healthy People 2010 initiative of the U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services was to reduce the adult obesity rate to 15% and the

childhood obesity rate to 5% by 2010. These goals were unmet, and Healthy People 2020 aims

at a 10% improvement in the adult and childhood obesity rates.2 Assessing the link between

depression and obesity can be informative when measuring the effectiveness of mental health

policy interventions in reducing obesity.

         However, virtually the entire existing literature on the connection between the two

conditions has examined merely whether they are significantly correlated, sometimes holding

constant other factors, such as health status, exercise, and social isolation. No prior study has

directly addressed potential endogeneity bias due to reverse causation and unobservable

individual heterogeneity. The U.S. Surgeon General’s report on mental health (U.S. Department

of Health and Human Services 1999) summarizes estimates of the economic burden of

depression and mental illness, though none of these reference any potential effects on obesity.

Even the most recent studies (Greenberg et al. 2003, for instance), which attempt to quantify how

depression affects health care spending and related costs, do not account for the effects of

depression on obesity because no credible estimates of a causal effect are available. The gap in

knowledge with respect to the potential causal role of depression in affecting obesity casts some

doubt on the estimated economic burden of depression, limits our understanding on the various

determinants of obesity, and thus limits the design of effective public interventions that may

directly or indirectly stem the rise in obesity prevalence.

         The aim of this study is to address this gap. We apply alternate methodologies to

individual records from three large-scale, nationally-representative datasets, both cross-sectional

and longitudinal, in order to evaluate whether and the extent to which the observed association
2
    http://www.healthypeople.gov/hp2020/Objectives/TopicAreas.aspx
                                                                                                    5
reflects a causal link from depression to obesity. We focus on the effects of past and lifetime

depression to bypass reverse causality and assess the role of non-random selection on

unobservable factors. The estimated marginal effects are used as inputs in deriving the first

estimates of how much the increased risk of overweight and obesity adds to the economic costs

of depression.

II.    Background and Literature

       A number of prior studies in the public health and epidemiology literature have explored

connections between obesity and mental health. Several of these studies are based on small

samples that focus on very specific questions or diseases. Solaroli et al. (1999), for instance,

administer a questionnaire to obese patients, and conclude that eating disorders are common

among obese individuals, especially in patients with poor health-related quality of life. McElroy

et al. (2002) assess the prevalence and clinical correlates of overweight status, obesity, and

extreme obesity in a sample of bipolar patients and find that current body mass index (BMI) and

bodyweight were each correlated with the number of weight gain-associated psychotropics to

which patients had been exposed. They also find that the prevalence of obesity was common in

their sample of bipolar patients, but are inconclusive about whether or not these rates were higher

than the rates in the general population.

       There has also been some previous research based on general population surveys.

Onyike et al. (2003) utilize data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey

(NHANES) to examine how obesity affects the risk of depression. They compare risks of

depression in obese (BMI >= 30) and normal-weight (BMI 18.5 – 24.9) people as well as

individuals stratified by the severity of obesity. This study finds that obesity is associated with

depression mainly among persons with severe obesity (BMI >= 40). Ma & Xiao (2010) also use



                                                                                                      6
the NHANES to study the link between obesity and depression in women. They find that BMI is

positively associated with depressive symptoms, and severely obese women are at especially

high risk for depression. Carpenter et al. (2000) examine the relationship between relative body

weight and depression or suicidal tendencies, and also find differences across gender. While

obesity is associated with an increased risk of depression among females, it is associated with a

decreased risk of depression among males. Using the National Comorbidity Survey – Replication

(NCS-R), Simon et al. (2006) find that obesity is significantly associated with increases in

lifetime diagnosis of major depression, bipolar disorder, and panic disorder. They find that the

association between obesity and mood disorder was strongest among non-Hispanic whites and

college graduates. However, unlike some other studies, they find no difference in these

associations between men and women.

       Looking at this question in a more international context, Scott et al. (2008) analyzed

thirteen cross-sectional, general population surveys of the adult households in order to determine

whether or not there was an association between obesity and mental disorders in various

countries. They found that obesity and mental conditions had significant yet modest

associations, particularly for females and those with severe obesity. However, they noted that

the findings did not “clarify the direction or nature of the relationship observed”.

       While these studies highlight that there is a link between obesity and depression, and also

point to significant differences across gender, this is a typical conclusion in that they do not

inform on the nature of this link. Several of the reviewed studies are based on small condition-

specific samples (that is individual who are overweight or obese), which limits their external

validity. In addition, virtually all of the studies based on large population-based samples have

considered how obesity (or overweight status) affects depression, rather than how depression



                                                                                                    7
impacts obesity. All of the previous studies have also focused on associations or correlations,

and most do not control for other confounding factors that may be driving both the risk of

obesity and depression. All of these studies have discussed the need for further research to

clarify causal mechanisms.

       Our study addresses this knowledge gap and uses alternate econometric methods and

nationally-representative datasets with various strengths in order to assess whether, and the

extent to which, there is a plausible causal link from depression to obesity. It should be noted

that establishing causality from depression to obesity is not feasible with experimental or clinical

data, and can only be evaluated with secondary data. The use of multiple, nationally-

representative, individual-level datasets, combined with well-established methods, adds to their

credibility and adds to the weight of the evidence bearing upon the question of how depression

affects obesity.

III.   Analytical Framework

       There are several reasons to expect that major depression may be a significant input into

the production of bodyweight and obesity. Weight gain is a relatively common problem during

both acute and long-term treatment with antidepressants (Fava 2006; McElroy et al. 2002). In

addition, numerous studies have documented associations between depression (and other mental

disorders) and binge eating, weight loss efficacy, and other eating disorders (Bulik et al. 2002;

Cargill et al. 1999; Smith et al. 1998; Frost et al. 1982), though the net-effect on caloric intake is

not always clear. While earlier studies had suggested that weight-loss is a symptom of

depression, more recent studies have suggested that people can gain rather than lose weight when

depressed (Frost et al. 1982). Gluck et al. (2001) for instance find that individuals with night-

eating syndrome had higher rates of depression and conclude that increased caloric intake later in



                                                                                                     8
the day may be a contributor to poorer weight-loss outcomes. Epel et al. (2001) study stress-

response among women in a laboratory setting and find that women exposed to greater levels of

stress consumed more calories on a given day relative to a control set of women.

        Depression is also associated with exercise, physical activity, and caloric expenditure,

though the direction of causality is not well-established and is often confounded by its link with

obesity. Several studies show that exercise and physical activity can have a protective effect on

the risk of depression and mental disorders (Strohle 2009; Strawbridge et al. 2002). Depression

and mood disorders are also significant determinants of physical activity. Bauman et al. (2002)

review available research on the determinants relating to the adoption and maintenance of

physical activity, and note several studies showing that mood disorders and poor psychological

health reduce the likelihood of engaging in exercise and physical activity.

        Given that depression is correlated with the proximate causes of obesity -- caloric intake

and caloric expenditure -- the objective of this study is to assess the extent to which depression

impacts measures of obesity. Empirically identifying the causal effect of depression on obesity

is complicated by two issues. First, depression may be structurally endogenous to obesity, that

is, in addition to depression affecting obesity, the causality may also run in the other direction.

Our focus on the effect of lifetime and past depression on current measures of obesity bypasses

this simultaneity problem. Second, what we refer to as statistical endogeneity, wherein the risk

of depression and obesity may depend on a common set of unobserved factors (for example, life

history, early health investments, time and risk preference, divorce), is a more relevant concern

for this study. Consider linear specifications of the structural productions function for body mass

index (BMIit) and depression (Dit-1):3


3
  Both productions functions are based on the physical health production function specified in Grossman
(1972); see, specifically, Chou, Grossman, and Saffer (2004) for a specification of the BMI production

                                                                                                          9
(1)     BMIit = α1Dit-1 + α2Xit + α3μi + εit

(2)     Dit-1 = λ1BMIit-1 + λ2BMIit-2 + λ3Xit-1 + λ4μi + νit-1

Equation (1) is a production function for body mass index, with past depression as an input.

BMI is also a function of observable characteristics (X), such as age, gender, race/ethnicity,

educational attainment, and unobservable characteristics (μ) pertaining to the individual, such as

family background, tolerance towards risk, and the rate of time preference. While BMI is a

stock, accumulated through past excess caloric intake, and therefore has a persistent element,

past BMI is not included in equation (1) since one of the channels through which past depression

(Dit-1) may impact current BMI is through its contemporaneous effect on past BMI. Similarly,

equation (2) specifies a mental health production function, with contemporaneous and past BMI

as inputs along with observable characteristics pertaining to the individual. The vector μ denotes

unobserved determinants of BMI that may also influence mental health. The error terms are

denoted by ε and ν, representing potential unobserved time-varying influences of BMI and

depression, respectively. Subscripts refer to the ith individual observed in time period t.

        Our objective is to estimate α1 in order to assess the existence and strength of a possible

causal impact of past depression on BMI (and measures of obesity and overweight). While we

also employ measures of current and lifetime depression in alternate models, we focus on past

depression for three reasons. First, this bypasses the structural endogeneity (reverse causality)

issue permitting us to address the remaining selection bias stemming from statistical

endogeneity. Second, since body mass index and obesity are stock measures, accumulated

through prior excess caloric intake over expenditure, it is expected that the impact of past

depression on current BMI would be more reflective of a long-term effect. Indeed, we can use

function, and Saffer and Dave (2005) for a specification of the mental health production function. In
alternate specifications, we also employ an indicator for overweight or obese defined as having a BMI of
25 or greater.

                                                                                                       10
this as a specification check since, if depression causally affects obesity, the impact of past

depression on current BMI should be larger than the contemporaneous impact. Third, the

parameter α1 captures the more policy-relevant net reduced-form effect of past depression on

current obesity, operating through all potential pathways. This includes any channels operating

through the persistence of depression and obesity over the life cycle – for instance, past

depression may impact current obesity by 1) affecting past obesity, which in turn affects current

obesity, 2) raising current obesity directly, and / or 3) raising the likelihood of current

depression, which in turn affects current obesity

       Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation of Equation 1 yields biased estimates of α1

however, due to unobserved non-random selection into both past depression and current obesity

– that is, correlation between μi and Dit-1 (λ4 ≠ 0). We refer to this problem as selection on

observables and selection on unobservables (Altonji et al. 2005). These terms denote that

respondents are not randomly sorted into past depression and current obesity. Selection on

observables refers to observed factors (such as age, gender, and race) that are correlated with

both outcomes. Selection on unobservables refers to possible factors that are not available in our

dataset, and will therefore influence the effect of past depression on obesity.

       Our estimation strategy proceeds in a stepwise fashion to address this selection bias and

conforms to the strengths of each dataset. The National Comorbidity Survey (NCS-R) is cross-

sectional, but has detailed information on the lifetime and current prevalence of major depressive

disorder based on clinical guidelines set by the latest Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental

Disorders (DSM-IV) published by the American Psychiatric Association. The NCS-R also

contains extensive information on the respondent’s life history, parental investments, and other

risk-related behaviors, which are typically unobserved in other studies. The degree of selection



                                                                                                  11
on unobservable factors can be indirectly assessed by gauging the robustness of the estimated

parameter α1 as these typically-unobserved factors are included in the model.

        Initially, we therefore begin with a parsimonious set of covariates, and then estimate

models with an extended set of covariates including family history, parental characteristics,

health investments, life shocks, proxies for risk tolerance, use of prescription medications and

anti-depressants, and factors which are typically unobserved in other studies. Estimating both

the basic and extended models allows us to evaluate how much of the association between past

depression and obesity appears to be driven by selection on unobservables. If the magnitude of

the effect of past depression on current obesity is highly sensitive to the inclusion of the

additional covariates and typically-unobserved factors, then it is likely that factors which remain

unobserved also play some role in this relationship.4

        The degree of selection on the unobserved characteristics cannot be measured directly

with non-experimental data. As a next step, we therefore rely on a novel approach proposed by

Altonji et al. (2005) to bound this latter effect, allowing us to draw inferences regarding the

unbiased relationship between past depression and obesity. This involves obtaining estimates of

the effect of past depression on obesity from a bivariate probit regression model in which the

correlation between unobserved variables is fixed at various levels. This part of the analysis

allows us to assess the sensitivity of the estimated effect of depression to the potential problem of

additional selection on unobservables.

        Specifically, we apply a bivariate probit methodology to equations (1) and (2), under

which the disturbance terms (ε and ν) in both equations are distributed bivariate normally with a




4
  The direction and magnitude, however, is unknown, depending on the nature of the joint distribution of
the observed and unobserved characteristics.

                                                                                                       12
correlation of ρ.5 First, we estimate the bivariate probit model without any identifying

assumptions but with a constrained correlation coefficient, ρ. We constrain ρ to be 0.10 initially

and then examine the effects of increasing ρ in increments of 0.10 to 0.20, 0.30, 0.40 and 0.50.

Since it is also plausible that unobserved factors common to both past depression and obesity are

negatively correlated, we then constrain ρ to be -0.10, -0.20, and -0.30. In this way, we impose

on the model increasingly greater amounts of (positive and negative) correlation between

unobservables and examine whether or not the effect of past depression on obesity is robust to

such changes. This analysis allows one to determine the threshold of selection on unobservables,

if any, at which depression no longer has a statistically significant effect on obesity.

          The second step of this constrained-selection methodology computes the amount of

selection into past depression and obesity based on observed variables, and obtains estimates of

the effect of past depression under the assumption that the degree of sorting on unobserved

variables is equal to the degree of sorting on observed variables. Altonji et al. (2005) note that if

the observable determinants of an outcome are truly just a random subset of the complete set of

determinants, selection on observable characteristics should be equal to selection on

unobservable characteristics. This assertion of equal selection is unlikely to be true, and in fact,

given the specialized nature of the NCS-R where we are able to observe an extended set of

individual and family characteristics, we would expect selection on observable factors to be

greater than selection on unobservable factors. Thus, the causal effect of past depression is

expected to be bounded between estimates obtained from the single-equation extended model

(that assumes no additional selection on unobservable variables) and the constrained-selection

model (that assumes additional selection on unobservable variables equals the selection on

observables).
5
    The model is estimated using maximum likelihood (Evans and Schwab 1995; Goldman et al. 2001).

                                                                                                    13
        The advantage of the Altonji et al. (2005) procedure is that it allows researchers to assess

the possible existence and strength of a causal relationship without requiring the use of

identifying assumptions that are often not credible – for example, the existence of valid

instruments in an instrumental variables context or other ad hoc exclusion restrictions.6 As a

result, without any other identifying assumptions, researchers can estimate the degree of sorting

on unobservable factors using the observed data, and identify bounds on the causal parameter

estimate.

        In addition to the NCS-R, we also utilize individual records from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth-1979 (NLSY79) and apply panel-data methods to examine how

depression impacts obesity. With the NLSY79, our goal is to estimate a regression model of the

form

(4)                                                                          ,


where Xiw represents observed time-varying characteristics of respondent i in survey wave w, μi

represents observed and unobserved time-constant person-specific variables, and εiw is the error

term, which includes, among other things, unobserved time-varying influences on BMI. The

parameter of interest is β, which represents the impact of past depression on BMI. We denote

survey wave with w rather than with time period t to emphasize that they are distinct, as

depression is measured at alternate points in time for different individuals (described in the next

section). The distinction between age and year allows us to control for both.7




6
  See Rashad and Kaestner (2004) for a discussion of identification issues with respect to instruments
and exclusion restrictions in the bivariate probit framework.
7
  Also note that, if year effects are included, age is identified when equation (4) is estimated with person-
specific fixed effects because the change in age between surveys varies among respondents. For
example, someone who turns 40 in 1998 answers the CES-D questions 4 years after the 1994 survey,
while someone who turns 40 in 2006 answers them 12 years later (see data description).


                                                                                                           14
       As a comparison with our later fixed-effects estimates, and to see what a pure cross-

sectional regression would reveal, we collapse equation (4) by respondent and estimate equation

(5), the between-effects regression.

(5)                                                            ,


As noted with respect to equation (1), this will be consistent for   as long as                is

uncorrelated with either    or   . We then estimate equation (4) using a person-specific fixed

effects model, which treats the μi as parameters to be estimated rather than as part of the error

term. This controls for all person-specific time-invariant influences on BMI that may also be

correlated with depression, such as family background, genetic predisposition to both obesity and

depression, and traumatic events that occurred before the first observed wave. We also estimate

equation (4) with first-differences to purge the unobserved time-invariant person-specific factors.

One limitation of using person fixed effects and first-differences is that a respondent’s BMI and

depression status may not change much between waves of the survey, providing too little

variation to identify the parameters. Therefore, we also estimate equation (4) using family fixed-

effects, which is possible because about half of the respondents in our analysis sample are

siblings to another NLSY79 respondent. The advantage of sibling or family fixed-effects is that

there tends to be more (though perhaps still not sufficient) variation in BMI and depression

among siblings than for a single person over time. The disadvantage is that important unobserved

personal characteristics may possibly remain in the error term after the unobserved family

characteristics have been removed by the family fixed effects model. We test whether our

estimates of   in equation (4) using fixed-person-effects differ significantly from those estimated

from equation (5). We interpret a rejection of the equality of coefficients as evidence that




                                                                                                    15
Depressedi is correlated with μi, and that therefore the fixed effects estimator is more likely to

provide consistent estimates of .

       Finally, any plausible causal effects of depression on obesity must necessarily operate

through shifts in eating habits and physical activity – the proximate causes of obesity. We utilize

multiple years of the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), a cross-sectional

individual-level nationally-representative dataset, to assess whether depressive symptoms are

associated with consumption of healthy and unhealthy foods and with physical activity. Due to

the cross-sectional nature of the data, only a contemporaneous relationship can be examined.

However, while obesity and BMI are long-term outcomes, changes in behaviors related to caloric

intake and expenditure are expected to be more responsive in the short-term (Dave and Kelly

2010). Furthermore, if data from the NCS-R and NLSY79 indicate an effect of depression on

obesity, but depressive symptoms are not associated with changes in eating or physical activity,

then this casts some doubt on a causal interpretation of the results. The use of these multiple

datasets, samples, and methods, in addition to an exploration of proximate mechanisms, allows

us to gauge robustness based on potentially reinforcing (or competing) results.

       All models are estimated separately for males and females since prior studies point to

significant gender differences in the prevalence of depression and its association with eating

disorders and coping mechanism. Reported standard errors are corrected for arbitrary correlation

within the appropriate cells: robust standard errors for models based on the NCS-R, clustered at

the family level for models based on the NLSY79, and clustered at the state-year level for

models based on the BRFSS. Probit models are estimated for dichotomous outcomes, and OLS

models are estimated for continuous outcomes.

IV.    Data



                                                                                                     16
National Comorbidity Survey - Replication

       The National Comorbidity Survey, fielded from 1990-1992, was the first nationally

representative mental health survey in the U.S. to use a fully structured research diagnostic

interview to assess the prevalence and correlates of DSM-III-R disorders (NCS, 2010). The

National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R) was conducted in 2001-2002 on a new

sample of 10,000 respondents, with diagnoses of mental disorders, including major depressive

episode, based on DSM-IV guidelines and representing the most accurate and detailed indicators

of mental health available in any nationally-representative study. In addition, the NCS also

includes extensive information on parental history, health investments, family background, and

life events, which are typically unobserved in other datasets. We restrict the analyses to adults

between the ages of 21 and 64.

       In addition, to the conventionally observed socio-demographic factors, the NCS-R also

contains rich information on 1) parental history (for instance, parental education, history of

depression and substance abuse, paternal occupation); 2) family background (for instance,

number of siblings, living arrangements when growing up, whether family received

governmental assistance, number of times family moved when respondent was a child); 3)

parental investments (for instance, parental supervision, parental effort into upbringing); 4) risk-

taking (for instance, own alcohol and drug abuse, proxies for a risk-taking personality); 5)

traumatic life events (for instance, being a victim of rape or sexual abuse, affected by the death

of a parent or relative, etc); and 6) use of anti-depressants and other prescription drugs, the latter

being a proxy for health status and chronic health conditions. These measures (described in

Table 1) are typically unobserved in other datasets; thus, comparing models with and without




                                                                                                    17
these factors allows us to assess the extent of the bias due to selection on these typically

unobserved (but in our case, observed) factors.8

        Table 1 presents weighted means for individuals who have been diagnosed with major

depression at any point in their lifetime versus individuals with no lifetime diagnosis, across

gender. The prevalence of major depression over one’s lifetime is significantly higher among

females (34.9%) relative to males (21.6%). Approximately 43.1% (39.9%) of females (males)

with lifetime depression have a current or past-year diagnosis, and approximately 56.9% (61.1%)

are not currently depressed but have had a diagnosis at some point beyond the past year. Women

with lifetime depression are also more likely to be overweight or obese by about 5.1 percentage

points (56.3% among women with lifetime depression versus 51.2% among women with no

lifetime depression). In contrast to women, there are no significant differences in BMI or the

prevalence of overweight/obesity among males by lifetime depression status. The figures further

show that lifetime depression among females is correlated with other observed and typically-

unobserved characteristics. For example, women with lifetime depression are less-educated,

have lower household income, less likely to be married and more likely to be divorced, and less

likely to be have a religious affiliation. They are also more likely to have had parents who were

depressed, had substance abuse issues, received governmental assistance, and relocated more

when the respondent was a child; women with lifetime depression also reported reduced parental

investments in the form of supervision and effort into their upbringing. Lifetime depression

among women is also associated with other proxies for risk-taking and risky behaviors (smoking,

drinking, illicit drug use, a more risk-taking personality), and as expected, both males and

females with lifetime depression report greater use of anti-depressants and prescription

8
  We exclude the traumatic life events from our sample in order to maximize sample size and statistical
precision since information on these life events is missing for about 20% of the sample. Incorporating
these measures into our analyses does not materially affect the results or conclusions.

                                                                                                          18
medications. Thus, individuals who have an episode of major depression in their lifetime are not

a random sample. They are also more likely to differ along characteristics that generally are

associated with higher or lower bodyweight. The multivariate analyses account for these

differences.

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth – 1979

       The NLSY79 is a nationally representative sample of 12,686 young men and women who

were 14-22 years old when they were first surveyed in 1979. Participants were interviewed

annually from 1979 to 1994, and biennially since then. The primary variables of interest for this

study are respondents’ body-mass index (BMI) and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies

Depression Scale (CES-D). Data on weight were collected in the surveys of 1981, 1982, and

every survey from 1985 onwards, except 1987 and 1991. Data on height were collected in five

surveys: 1981, 1982, 1985, 2006, and 2008. To compute BMI we use the average of the reported

heights in 1985 and 2006, which for almost all respondents were identical.

       Respondents were asked questions from the CES-D four times, the surveys of 1992,

1994, and as part of the Over-40 and Over-50 health modules. As all respondents had turned 40

by 2006 but only a few had turned 50 by 2008, we exclude the latter responses from our analysis.

In 1992, respondents were asked all 20 CES-D questions, in 1994, 7 questions, and in the post-40

interview, 9 questions. Since we want to compare respondents’ mental state over time, we use

the overlapping 7 questions asked in 1994. This should not compromise our analysis as a subset

of 5 CES-D questions, all of which are included in our group of 7, has been found to capture

almost all of the information in the full set (Bohannon et al. 2003).

       The seven CES-D questions we use relate to poor appetite, trouble keeping one’s mind on

tasks, feeling depressed, feeling that everything takes extra effort, sleeping poorly, feeling sad,



                                                                                                      19
and feeling that one could not get going. The respondent was asked how often he or she

experienced each problem. The answers are scored as zero for “Rarely or none of the time”, 1 for

“Some of the time”, 2 for “A moderate amount of the time”, and 3 for “Most or all of the time.”

The sum of the responses for each condition gives the CES-D score. Thus scores can range from

zero to 21. For comparison with the NCS-R, we compute a dichotomous indicator for depression

if the score is 10 or greater (Pandya et al. 2005). Alternately, models (not reported) which utilize

the continuous CES-D score yield similar patterns of results and conclusions.

       Other continuous variables include age and family size. Dichotomous indicators are

defined for marital status, highest grade completed, and region of residence. Since net family

income is missing for many respondents (and preliminary analysis suggests that missing values

are not missing at random), we include a variable indicating the dollar value of food stamps the

respondent’s family received in the previous calendar year. This variable has few missing values

compared with poverty status and family income, and reflects the income of the whole family.

       We organize the NLSY79 data into three waves. Wave 1 is 1992, Wave 2 is 1994, and

Wave 3 is the year in which the respondent took part in the over-40 Health Module. Since fixed-

effects models require at least two periods, our potential sample size is the number of

respondents who contributed data to at least two of the three waves. Excluding respondents who

were pregnant at the time of the surveys, 8,875 participants took part in at least two waves. Of

these, 8,732, or 94 percent, have valid data for BMI and CES-D for at least two waves. After

accounting for missing information on additional covariates, the “analysis sample” has 21,365

observations across three waves. When the analysis sample is further restricted to respondents

providing valid data for all variable for all three waves, which we denote the “balanced sample”,

the sample size drops to 17,538.



                                                                                                   20
       We assess the external validity of the analysis and balanced samples, that is whether the

smaller samples give the same results as would the full sample had not observations been lost to

missing values. We gauge the importance of losing observations by regressing BMI on lagged

CES-D depression status in all three samples and comparing the coefficients. We find that the

coefficients are practically and statistically indistinguishable. The fixed effects coefficients are -

0.15 (0.1) in the full sample,0.21 (0.11) in the analysis sample, and -0.28 (0.1) in the balanced

sample. None of these pairs of coefficients is statistically significantly different at conventional

levels, adding a level of confidence that the estimates and conclusions are not affected across the

alternate samples.

       Table 2 shows means and standard errors of our analysis sample by wave. Note that time-

constant variables such as gender and race change slightly from wave to wave because the

analysis sample is unbalanced. The means, as well as regressions discussed below, are calculated

with probability weights supplied by the NLSY.

       The figures show that on average BMI rose and the sum of CES-D responses declined

slightly over the time period of the study. Thus a simple fixed-effects regression will find a

negative correlation between the two variables. But since the respondents also aged and became

less healthy, identification of the effect of mood on BMI depends on there being a significant

proportion of respondents whose CES-D sum moved in the opposite direction to age and health,

that is, whose CES-D sum rose over the sample period. Identification should therefore be

possible since the CES-D sum rose from one wave to the next for about a third of the sample,

and the average increase for these respondents was over 20 percent.

Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System




                                                                                                    21
        The Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) is an individual-level data set

representative of the population of the United States. As the largest telephone-based health

survey available, the BRFSS has tracked health conditions and risk behaviors for adults 18 years

of age and older in the U.S. The survey is conducted by state health departments in collaboration

with the Centers for Disease Control. While only 15 states participated in 1984, the number

grew to 33 in 1987, to 45 in 1990, and to all 51 states (including the District of Columbia) in

1996. More than 350,000 adults are interviewed each year, with response rates hovering around

50%.9 The average number of interviews per state ranged from approximately 800 in 1984 to

around 3,500 in more recent years. These data are publicly available from the Centers for

Disease Control at http://www.cdc.gov/brfss, and provide information on a variety of personal

characteristics, including gender, age, education, marital status, family income, and state of

residence.

        Measures of food consumption are included, although not consistently. Moreover, these

variables are occasionally ‘module’ variables, asked of only a limited number of respondents,

rather than ‘core’ variables, asked of all respondents. Consumption of carrots, fruit, fruit juice,

green salad, and vegetables are asked consistently in years 1990-2007, with the exception of

2004 and 2006. The survey questions are generally phrased as follows: “How often do you eat

(FOOD)?” Options are given for the respondent to record his/her answer in times per day, week,

month, or year. Answers are converted to times per year for the purposes of this paper. While

nutritionists caution using the terms ‘healthy’ and ‘unhealthy’ regarding foods in order to avoid

classifying foods per se in preference for a focus on a balanced diet, we use the term healthy for

the aforementioned foods as the food pyramid stresses their consumption. Moreover, most

9
  Survey weights are included in the BRFSS to ensure that those included in the survey are reflective of
the U.S. population. In addition, the study shows that means for those responding and the general
population are comparable. (See http://www.cdc.gov/brfss.)

                                                                                                       22
Continuing Surveys of Food Intakes by Individuals show consumption of fats, oils, and sweets,

meant to be consumed sparingly, to be higher than recommended.10 Consumption of snacks,

hamburgers, hot dogs, French fries, and fried chicken is not as frequently observed in the

BRFSS, yet we also analyze these outcomes in order to compare these results with those of our

healthy food outcomes.

          Physical activity is measured in the BRFSS based on reported activities, their intensity as

measured by the metabolic equivalent (MET), and duration. Individuals are classified as: 1)

physically inactive, if they report no physical activity; 2) engaging in irregular activity, if they

participate in any physical activity or pair of activities done for less than 20 minutes, or less than

3 times a week; 3) engaging in regular activity if they report any physical activity of pair or

activities done for 20 or more minutes, 3 or more times per week, less than 50 percent of

capacity; and 3) engaging in vigorous activity, if they report any physical activity or pair of

activities that requires rhythmic contraction of large muscle groups at 50% functional capacity

for 20 or more minutes, three or more times per week. Based on this classification, we define a

dichotomous indicator for whether the individual currently engages in regular or vigorous

physical activity during an average week.

          Relative to the NCS-R and the NLSY79, which measure major depression based on

clinical guidelines and a tested scale, the BRFSS includes only a single variable probing whether

the individual’s mental health, including stress, depression, and emotional problems, was “not

good” during the past 30 days. We utilize a dichotomous indicator for whether the individual

reported at least one day in the past month when mental health was not good, as indicative of

depression symptoms, with the caveat that this measure may be more reflective of milder mental



10
     See http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=14392.

                                                                                                       23
health issues such as daily stress and short-term depression than major depression.11 As shown

in Table 3, the mean number of days in the past month that respondents report feeling depressed,

stressed, or experiencing emotional or mood problems is 3.4, and 32.8% of the BRFSS sample

reports some mental health issues during the past month.

V.      Results

        Tables 4 and 5 present estimates of the effects of current, past, and lifetime depression on

BMI and the probability of being overweight or obese (BMI ≥ 25), separately for males and

female respectively, using data from the NCS-R. As reported in Table 4 (Panel A), we do not

find any significant effects of current, past, or lifetime depression on the body mass index of

males. In Panel B, current depression is negatively associated with the probability of being

overweight or obese in the basic specification. Some prior studies, based on clinical samples,

have reported that weight-loss may be a symptom of depression particularly among males

(Glassman et al. 1990; Barrett-Connor et al. 1999; Angst et al. 2002), noting that males may cope

with depression differently than females, sometimes by raising their sports activity, raising

smoking or alcohol use, and being affected more in their ability to work. However, this effect

drops to zero and becomes insignificant in the extended specification. Similarly, neither lifetime

nor past depression is significantly associated with the probability of being overweight or obese.

The inconsistency of the estimates between the basic and extended models suggests the selection

bias may be driving any observed association between depression and obesity among males.

        Table 5 presents estimates for females. In the basic specifications, current depression is

associated with a higher BMI and a higher probability of being overweight/obese (4.4 percentage

11
  Results are not sensitive to using the continuous measure of the number of days in the past month that
mental health was not good. Utilizing multiple indicators (0 days, 1-5 days, 6-10 days, 11-15 days, 15+
days) also indicates a dose-response relationship; greater frequency of mental health issues in the past
month has larger effects on food consumption and physical activity. Results are available upon request.


                                                                                                     24
points). However, these diminish substantially and become statistically insignificant in the

extended specifications, suggesting that the association between contemporaneous depression

and obesity is not very likely to be reflective of a causal relationship. This is to be expected

given that bodyweight changes slowly over time, and if depression does raise bodyweight then

this should be more apparent in the longer-term. This is indeed the case for females, where we

find that past depression is more strongly associated with higher BMI (relative to males). Being

diagnosed with depression at some point beyond the current year raises current BMI by about

one point. Given that the effect of current depression is very small, the effect of lifetime

depression mostly reflects the impact of past depression – raising BMI by about the same

magnitude.

       Past depression is also associated with a significant 5.5 percentage points increase in the

probability of being overweight or obese. This represents an 11% increase in the probability

relative to the mean prevalence of overweight/obesity among individuals with no lifetime

depression. Also note that this estimated effect is slightly larger than the effect suggested by the

simple difference in means (5.1 percentage points) reported in Table 1. Indeed, controlling for

the typically unobserved factors in the extended specification raises the effect magnitude even

further from 5.5 to 6.6 percentage points (13% increase relative to the mean prevalence). This is

suggestive of negative selection. That is, there are several factors in our models that raise the

likelihood of depression but reduce the likelihood of obesity and vice versa -- for instance being

single, non-Black, religious preference, household income, current smoker, maternal depression,

parental suicide attempt, lived with both biological parents when young, and use of prescription

drugs other than anti-depressants.




                                                                                                    25
       The effects of the other covariates on BMI and on the likelihood of being overweight or

obese are consistent with those reported in the literature (see Chou, Grossman, and Saffer 2004).

The BMI-age profile is quadratic, with BMI (and the probability of being overweight or obese)

generally increasing with age up to the mid-50s and then declining, consistent with a loss in

muscle mass after late adulthood. BMI is higher among individuals who are black or married

and are low-educated. The latter is consistent with evidence suggesting that education has a

causal protective effect on health, operating partly through educated individuals being more

allocatively efficient and consuming healthier inputs (Grossman and Kaestner 1997). Higher

household income is also associated with a lower BMI among females, but not males. Being a

current smoker also reduces BMI among both sexes. Among the extended covariates (not

reported), maternal depression, living with both biological parents, having more educated

parents, being a current smoker or abusing alcohol and/or drugs in one’s lifetime, and taking

prescription medications (other than anti-depressants) are associated with a lower probability of

being overweight/obese. In contrast, paternal substance abuse, parental suicide attempt, moving

more times when the respondent was a child, and having a risk-taking personality raise the

probability of being overweight/obese. Also, as expected, the use of anti-depressants raises BMI

and the probability of being overweight/obese.

       While results among females consistently show a significant impact of past and lifetime

depression on obesity after accounting for these extended covariates, the possibility of additional

selection on unobservables remains. Table 6 presents estimates from constrained-selection

bivariate probit models to assess the sensitivity of the estimated effects from imposing additional

amounts of selection on unobservables. Model 1 reports the single-equation probit estimates for

baseline comparison, which assumes that correlation in the disturbance terms between the



                                                                                                 26
obesity and depression equations (equations 1 and 2) is zero. Models 2-6 constrain Rho

incrementally from 0.1 to 0.5 in order to assess how the estimated effect of depression on obesity

changes with increasingly positive selection on unobservable factors. That is, if there are

additional unobserved factors that positively affect both the probability of depression and

obesity, how would this impact the estimated effect of depression on obesity?

       Estimates from models 2-6 suggest that even small amounts of additional positive

selection eliminate any positive impact of depression (both lifetime depression and past

depression) on obesity. For instance, while the single-equation estimates suggest that lifetime-

and past-depression raise the probability of being overweight/obese by about 6.5 percentage

points, if additional unobserved factors are slightly positively correlated with the probability of

both depression and obesity (Rho = 0.1) then these effects become essentially zero (-0.001 to -

0.002) and insignificant. Additional amounts of positive selection (Rho = 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5)

results in stronger negative effects of depression on the probability of being overweight or obese.

       Models 7-9 impose additional amounts of negative selection by constraining Rho to be -

0.1, -0.2, and -0.3. These models assess how the estimated impact of depression on obesity

behaves if there are additional unobserved factors that raise (reduce) the probability of

depression but reduce (raise) the probability of obesity. With additional amounts of negative

selection on unobservables, the positive effect of depression on obesity remains robust and

becomes increasingly stronger.

       The last column (model 10) in Table 6 uses selection on observable factors (including all

the observed socio-demographic factors plus the typically unobserved factors that are available

in the NCS-R) to inform on potential selection on unobserved factors. Specifically, Altonji et al.

(2005) note that if the observed factors are a random subset of all factors affecting the outcome,



                                                                                                   27
then selection on unobservable factors should equal selection on observed factors. Model 10

applies this constraint and finds some evidence of negative selection (Rho = -0.07 to -0.14).

Under this assumption of equal selection, past (lifetime) depression raises the probability of

being overweight or obese by 15.6 (10.9) percentage points. Note that these effects are larger

than those estimated by the single-equation probit models since the single-equation models do

not account for selection on unobservables, and as the constrained bivariate probit models show,

if there is additional negative selection effect then the estimated positive impact of depression on

obesity becomes stronger.

       In summary, the results from the NCS-R suggest that past depression, in particular, is

associated with a higher BMI and probability of being overweight and obese among females.

Estimates from the extended models suggest that these effects are robust to controlling for

various factors that are typically unobserved in other datasets. Constrained selection models

indicate that additional negative selection on unobservables is likely, and that the positive effect

of depression on obesity among females may be even stronger after accounting for this negative

selection. In contrast, we do not find any significant and large positive effects of current

depression on bodyweight or overweight/obesity. Estimates for males are generally insignificant

and small in magnitude. This pattern of results suggests that a causal link from past depression

to BMI and being overweight/obese is plausible among females but not males.

       Table 7 presents the impact of lagged depression on BMI and on the probability of being

overweight/obese among males, based on data from the NLSY79. Across all models, we do not

find any substantial or significant effects of past depression on indicators or obesity among

males, which is consistent with our previous results based on the NCS-R.




                                                                                                  28
       Table 8 presents similar estimates among females. Panel A presents estimates for BMI,

and Panel B presents estimates for overweight/obesity. The basic specification (model 1)

suggests that depression in the past wave is associated with about a one point increase in BMI.

The estimate is not sensitive to controlling for the extended covariates (model 2), including

maternal education and proxies for risk tolerance. However, the effect magnitudes become

insignificant and essential drop to zero in the fixed effects and first-difference models. Similarly,

in Panel B, we find that past depression raises the probability of being overweight or obese by

between 6.7 (basic specification) and 7.6 percentage points (extended specification). The effect

magnitudes decline to zero in the person fixed effects (model 3) and first differenced models

(model 4). While this may suggest that essentially all of the association between past depression

and obesity is driven by unobserved person-specific factors, it should be noted that there is very

limited variation in depression and obesity indicators within individuals over adjacent waves

which may also lead to imprecision and inconsistent effects.

       In order to maximize variation while still accounting for all unobserved time-invariant

family characteristics (for instance, parental characteristics, family history, parental investments,

past life events, genetic and health endowment, etc.), model 5 includes family-level fixed effects

– suggesting that past depression raises the probability of being overweight/obese by 2.6

percentage points. This effect is biased downwards due to the measurement error in classifying

an individual as depressed based on the CES-D score (versus using a more reliable indicator

based on the DSM-IV guidelines as in the NCS-R data). Based on the level of misclassification

(false positives and false negatives) associated with using a CES-D score threshold to diagnose

major depression (Thomas et al. 2001), the estimate is biased downward by a factor of 3-4 times.

Thus, the family fixed effects models suggests that past depression is associated with a 7.8-10.4



                                                                                                   29
percentage points increase in the probability of being overweight or obese --- these estimates are

closely aligned with the single-equation and constrained bivariate probit estimates based on the

NCS-R.

       Tables 9 and 10 report estimates of the association of poor mental health with eating

habits and physical activity. Among both males and females, we find that poor mental health in

the past month reduces the consumption of healthy foods such as fruits and vegetables and

increases the consumption on unhealthy foods such as snacks, French fries, hot dogs, and

doughnuts. The estimates for measures of unhealthy foods are based on smaller sample sizes,

rendering some of these effects imprecise; however, effect magnitudes for all measures of food

consumption are generally robust across the basic and extended specifications. We also find that

being of poor mental health in the past month is associated with a reduced probability of being

physically active for both males and females. These proximate channels are consistent with

depression leading to a higher BMI and raising the probability of being overweight and obese.

       However, given the results from the NCS-R which suggest that past depression has a far

stronger, positive effect on the bodyweight of females relative to males, we would expect

stronger changes in food consumption and/or physical activity among females as a result of poor

mental health. The effect magnitudes from the BRFSS are suggestive of this “dose-response”

relation. For instance, scaling the effect magnitudes relative to the sample mean among mentally

healthy individuals, poor mental health is associated with a 4-7% decline in healthy food

consumption among females compared to a 2-4% decline among males. Substitution into high-

calorie unhealthy foods is of similar magnitudes for both males and females, approximately a 4-

12% increase. However, the decline in the prevalence of regular or vigorous physical activity is

again far larger among females – 12.2% versus 4.3%. While these estimates should be



                                                                                                  30
interpreted with caution due to potential unobservables and simultaneity between food choices,

physical activity and depression, the general pattern of results is consistent with a larger increase

in BMI and overweight/obesity among females as a result of depression, relative to males, as

noted earlier in the models estimated with the NCS-R.

VI.    Discussion

       Unadjusted differences document a strong positive association between lifetime

depression and overweight or obesity. The aim of this study was to examine whether, and the

extent to which, this association is consistent with a causal link. Results are generally not

supportive of a causal link among males. Among females, we find some evidence that past and

lifetime depression significantly raise BMI and consequently the likelihood of being overweight

or obese. These estimates are robust to controlling for a large vector of typically unobserved

factors from the NCS-R as well as imposing an additional amount of selection on unobservable

factors (based on the level of selection that is already present from observed factors).

Expectedly, there are no significant or substantial positive contemporaneous effects of

depression on bodyweight, given that bodyweight is a stock measure and responds over time to

excess caloric intake. Panel data methods applied to the NLSY79 confirm this result.

Robustness across multiple datasets and methods raises the level of confidence in the estimates.

       In addition, these estimates appear to be plausibly driven by behavioral responses related

to the proximate causes of obesity, that is shifts in food consumption and physical activity.

Based on individual records from the BRFSS, we find that poor mental health is associated with

lower healthy food consumption, part of which is substituted by higher consumption of

unhealthy foods that are generally high in calorie and fat content. Poor mental health is also

associated with a significantly lower likelihood of regular or vigorous physical activity. And,



                                                                                                   31
consistent with a stronger depression-obesity link among females, we find that the decrease in

healthy food consumption and physical activity is also generally larger among females relative to

males. Future research should focus on these gender differences and other distant mechanisms

underlying the depression-obesity link.

        Based on the NCS-R, 34.9% of adult women experience a major depressive episode at

some point over their life. Healthy People 2020 aims at reducing this prevalence by 10% or by

3.5 percentage points. The estimates from this study suggest that this improvement in mental

health could also help achieve another Healthy People 2020 objective aimed at increasing the

proportion of adults who are at a healthy weight. Specifically, if the Healthy People 2020

objective relating to major depression is met, this would reduce overweight/obesity among

women by between 0.22 and 0.55 percentage point, which represents about a 5% to 12.6%

improvement towards achieving the Healthy People 2020 healthy weight objective.12

        Recent estimates place the economic burden of depression in the United States at $83.1

billion in the year 2000, or approximately $100 billion in current dollars (Wang et al. 2003).

Given the relative lifetime prevalence of major depression among females versus males in the

NCS-R, about 61.8% of these costs are attributed to females.13 In 2000-2003, based on the NCS-

R, about 34.9% of women had suffered from major depression over their lifetime, which raises

the probability of overweight/obesity by between 2.2 – 5.4 percentage points.




12
   We assume that lifetime depression raises the probability of being overweight by between 6.24 – 15.6
percentage points, which is the range suggested by estimates for females reported in Table 5, Table 6,
and Table 8.
13
   This allocation may be understated since depression among women is more likely to be chronic or
more intensive, women are more likely to seek treatment and also more likely to attempt suicide, thus
raising treatment or medical costs. This allocation may also be overstated since productivity losses due to
depression among men may be relatively higher (due to greater labor force attachment and higher
wages), fewer males seek treatment leading to potentially long-term adverse effects, and suicide mortality
is higher among males relative to females.

                                                                                                        32
        The total cost of adult obesity in the United States has been estimated to be as high as

$215 billion (Hammond and Levine 2010). Cost estimates for overweight have not been

established for the U.S. as a whole; however, a study for California (Chenoweth 2005) estimated

the costs of overweight and obesity and found that overweight adds about a third more to the

estimated economic burden of obesity. Given that the prevalence of overweight and obesity in

California is reflective of the national prevalence, overweight imposes an additional $70 billion

in economic burden for the U.S. Thus, the overall economic costs of obesity and overweight in

the U.S. are as high as $285 billion annually. Of this, $134 billion can be attributed to female

overweight and obesity, based on the relative prevalence across males and females. Since

lifetime depression is estimated to raise overweight/obesity by 2.2 – 5.4 percentage points among

females or about 4.2 – 10.2%, this higher risk of being overweight or obese could potentially add

about $5.6 – $13.7 billion (or 6-14%) to the economic costs of depression.14 These estimates

suggest that public health interventions which reduce major depression among women could also

further promote public health by reducing overweight and obesity.




14
  This calculation assumes that the marginal cost of overweight/obesity prevalence is approximately
equal to the average cost.

                                                                                                      33
References

Altonji J.G., Elder T.E., and Taber C.R. “Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 151-184,
2005.

Angst J., Gamma A., Gastpar M., Lepine J.P., Mendlewicz J., and Tylee A. “Gender differences
in depression: epidemiological findings from the European DEPRES I and II studies,” European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 252(5): 201-209, 2002.

Barrett-Connor E., von Muhlen D.G., and Kritz-Silverstein D. “Bioavailable Testosterone and
Depressed Mood in Older Men: The Rancho Bernardo Study,” Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism, 84(2): 573-577, 1999

Bauman A.E., Sallis J.F., Dzewaltowski D.A., and Owen N. “Toward a better understanding of
the influences on physical activity: the role of determinants, correlates, causal variables,
mediators, moderators, and confounders,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 23(2): 5-
14, 2002.

Bulik C.M. “Anxiety, depression, and eating disorders,” In Fairburn C.G. and Brownell K.D.,
eds. Eating disorders and obesity: a comprehensive handbook, New York, NY, The Guilford
Press, 2002.

Cargill B.R., Clark M.M., Pera V., Niaura R.S., and Abrams D.B. “Binge eating, body image,
depression, and self-efficacy in an obese clinical population,” Obesity Research, 7(4):379-386,
1999.

Carpenter, K., D. Hasin, D. Allison & M. Faith. (2000). Relationships Between Obesity and
DSM-IV Major Depressive Disorder, Suicide Ideation, and Suicide Attempts: Results From a
General Population Study. American Journal of Public Health 90(2): 251-257.

Chenoweth D. The economic costs of physical inactivity, obesity, and overweight in California
adults: health care, workers’ compensation, and lost productivity, California Department of
Health Services, CA, April 2005.

Chou S, Grossman M, and Saffer H. “An economic analysis of adult obesity: results from the
behavioral risk factor surveillance system,” Journal Of Health Economics, 23(3):565 – 587,
2004.

Epel E., Lapidus R., McEwen B., and Brownell K. “Stress may add bite to appetite in women: a
laboratory study of stress-induced cortisol and eating behavior,” Psychoneuroendocrinology, 26:
37-49, 2001.

Evans W.N. and Schwab R.M. 1995. Finishing high school and starting college: do catholic
schools make a difference?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110: 941–974.

                                                                                                  34
Fava M. “Weight gain and antidepressants,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61(11): 37-41, 2006.

Flegal K.M., Carroll M.D., Ogden C.L., and Curtin L.R. “Prevalence and trends in obesity
among US adults, 1999-2008,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 303(3): 235-241,
2010.

Frost R.O., Goolkasian G.A., Ely R.J., and Blanchard F.A. “Depression, restraint, and eating
behavior,” Behaviour Research and Therapy, 20(2): 113-121, 1982.

Glassman A.H., Helzer J.E., Covey L.S., Cottler L.B., Stetner F. et al. “Smoking, smoking
cessation, and major depression,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 264:1546-1549,
1990.

Gluck M.E., Geliebter A., and Satov T. “Night eating syndrome is associated with depression,
low self-esteem, reduced daytime hunger, and less weight loss in obese outpatients,” Obesity
Research, 9: 264-267, 2001.

Goldman D.P., Bhattacharya J., McCaffrey D.F., Duan N., Leibowitz A.A., Joyce G.F. and
Morton S.C. 2001. Effect of insurance on mortality in an HIV-positive population in care,
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96: 883-894.

Greenberg,P.E., Kessler, R.C., Birnbaum, H.G., Leong, S.A., Lowe, S.W., Berglund, P.A., and
Corey-Lisle, P.K.. The economic burden of depression in the united states: how did it change
between 1990 and 2000?. The Journal Of Clinical Psychiatry, 64(12):1465 – 1475, 2003.

Grossman M. “On the concept of health capital and the demand for health,” Journal of Political
Economy, 80: 223-255, 1972.

Grossman M., and Kaestner R. “Effects of education on health,” In The social benefits of
education, edited by Jere R. Behrman and Nevzer Stacey. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press, pp. 69–123, 1997.

Hammond R.A. and Levine R. “The economic impact of obesity in the United States,” Diabetes,
Metabolic Syndrome and Obesity: Targets and Therapy, 3:285–295, 2010.

Jonas B.S. and Mussolino M.E. “Symptoms of depression as a prospective risk factor for stroke,”
Psychosomatic Medicine, 62(4):463, 2000.

Ma, J & L. Xiao. (2010) Obesity and depression in US women: results from the 2005-2006
National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey. Obesity 18(2): 347-53.

Mcelroy, S., M. Frye, T. Suppes, D. Dhavale, P. Keck, G. Leverich, L. Altshuler, K. Denicoff,
W. Nolen, R. Kupka, H. Grunze, J. Walden & R. Post. (2002). Correlates of overweight and
obesity in 644 patients with bipolar disorder. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 63(3):207-213.



                                                                                               35
National Comorbidity Survey. (2010). National Comorbidity Survey (NCS) and National
Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Accessed at:
http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php

Onyike, C., R. Crum, H. Lee, C. Lyketsos & W Eaton. (2003). Is obesity associated with major
depression? Results from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
American Journal of Epidemiology 158(12): 1139-47.

Rashad I. and Kaestner R.. Teenage sex, drugs and alcohol use: problems identifying the cause
of risky behaviors, Journal of Health Economics, 23(3): 493-503, May 2004.

Robbins J., Hirsch C., Whitmer R., Cauley J., Harris T., et al. “The association of bone mineral
density and depression in an older population,” Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,
49(6):732–736, 2001.

Saffer H. and Dave D. “Mental illness and the demand for alcohol, cocaine, and cigarettes”,
Economic Inquiry, 43(2): 229-246, 2005.

Scott, K. et al. (2008). Obesity and Mental Disorders in the General Population: Results from
the World Mental Health Surveys. International Journal of Obesity 32(1): 192-200.

Simon, G., M. Von Korff, K. Saunders, D. Miglioretti, P. Crane, G. van Belle, and R. Kessler.
(2006). Association between obesity and psychiatric disorders in the US adult population.
Archives of General Psychiatry 63(7): 824-830.


Smith D.E., Marcus M.D., Lewis C.E., Fitzgibbon M. and Schreiner P. “Prevalence of binge
eating disorder, obesity, and depression in a biracial cohort of young adults,” Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 20(3): 227-232, 1998.

Solaroli, A., G. Marchesini, C. Baldassarri D. Boccaccini, R. Biolcati, F. Visani, S. Migliorini,
& N. Melchionda. (1999). Eating behavior and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in obesity.
Quality of Life Research, Vol. 8, No. 7, Abstracts: 6th Annual Conference of the International
Society for Quality of Life Research: 633.

Strawbridge W.J., Deleger S., Roberts R.E., and Kaplan G.A. “Physical activity reduces the risk
of subsequent depression for older adults,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 156(4): 328-334,
2002.

Strohle A. “Physical activity, exercise, depression, and anxiety disorders,” Journal of Neural
Transmission, 116(6): 777-784, 2009.

Thomas JL, Jones GN, Scarinci IC, Mehan DJ, and Brantley PJ. The utility of the CES-D as a
depression screening measure among low-income women attending primary care clinics, The
International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 31(1): 25-40, 2001.


                                                                                                 36
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon
General—Executive Summary. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for Mental Health Services,
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Mental Health, 1999.

Wolf AM, and Colditz GA. “Current estimates of the economic cost of obesity in the united
states,” Obesity Research, 6(2):97 – 106, 1998.




                                                                                            37
                                                   Table 1
                               National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R)
                                           Weighted Sample Means

Variable                    Description                                              Male                    Female
                                                                               No         Lifetime      No        Lifetime
                                                                            Lifetime     Diagnosis   Lifetime    Diagnosis
                                                                            Diagnosis     of MDE     Diagnosis    of MDE
                                                                            of MDE                   of MDE
BMI                         Body mass index – kg/m2                          28.152        28.203     26.802        27.617
                                                                             (0.23)        (0.30)     (0.26)        (0.28)
Overweight/Obese            BMI >= 25                                         0.731         0.728      0.512        0.563
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.02)
Current Major Depressive    R had DSM-IV Major Depressive Episode               _           0.399        _           .431
Episode (MDE)               in the last 12 months                                          (0.03)                   (0.02)
Past MDE                    R had DSM-IV Major Depressive Episode               _           0.601        _           .569
                            more than a year ago                                           (0.03)                   (0.02)
Age                         Age of respondent                                40.427        41.868     41.045        41.596
                                                                             (0.48)        (0.65)     (0.45)        (0.46)
Black                       African-American                                  0.075         0.052     0.111*        0.064*
                                                                             (0.01)        (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)
Other Race                  Race not African-American or Non-Latino          0.015*        0.047*      0.027        0.029
                            White                                            (0.00)        (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)
Married                     Respondent is married                            0.678*        0.582*      0.638        0.560
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.02)
Divorced                    Respondent is divorced                           0.101*        0.197*     0.168*        0.253*
                                                                             (0.01)        (0.02)     (0.01)        (0.02)
High School grad            Respondent has a high school diploma              0.906         0.922      0.925        0.931
                                                                             (0.01)        (0.02)     (0.01)        (0.01)
College or more             Respondent has at least a bachelor’s degree       0.327         0.296      0.337        0.310
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.02)
Any religious preference    Respondent has some religious preference          0.818         0.795      0.894        0.824
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.01)        (0.02)
Household income            Household income (in $1000's)                    75.769        72.677     65.759        63.694
                                                                             (2.18)        (3.26)     (1.93)        (2.01)
Northeast                   R lives in the Northeast                          0.179         0.202      0.149        0.167
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.03)     (0.01)        (0.02)
Midwest                     R lives in the Midwest                            0.251         0.235      0.242        0.273
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)
South                       R lives in the South                              0.354         0.267      0.376        0.337
                                                                             (0.02)        (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.02)
Mom depressed               When R growing up, mother had periods of         0.144*        0.297*     0.185*        0.369*
                            sadness 2+ weeks                                 (0.01)        (0.03)     (0.02)        (0.02)
Mom drink or drugs          When R growing up, mother had problems           0.046*        0.105*      0.058        0.101
                            with alcohol or drugs                            (0.01)        (0.02)     (0.01)        (0.01)
Dad depressed               When R growing up, father had periods of         0.076*        0.173*     0.074*        0.169*
                            sadness 2+ weeks                                 (0.01)        (0.02)     (0.01)        (0.02)
Dad drink or drugs          When R growing up, father had problems           0.182*        0.309*     0.162*        0.274*
                            with alcohol or drugs                            (0.02)        (0.03)     (0.01)        (0.02)
Parents attempted suicide   At least one of R's parents attempted suicide     0.023         0.051      0.037        0.070
                                                                             (0.01)        (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)
Lived with biological       Lived with both biological parents until 16       0.781         0.767      0.783        0.787
parents                                                                      (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)


                                                                                                               38
Number of siblings             Number of siblings                                       3.360          3.202          3.468             3.44
                                                                                       (0.10)          (0.14)         (0.10)           (0.10)
Government assistance          R's family received government assistance                0.062           0.085          0.046           0.074
                               for 6+ months in childhood                              (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.01)           (0.01)
Never unsupervised             R never left unsupervised in childhood                  0.883*          0.759*         0.900*           0.783*
                                                                                       (0.01)          (0.03)         (0.01)           (0.02)
Father years of education      R's father's years of education                         11.569          11.839         11.548           11.598
                                                                                       (0.18)          (0.21)         (0.14)           (0.15)
Parental effort                R's parents put "a lot" of effort into                  0.935*          0.858*         0.909*           0.824*
                               upbringing                                              (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.01)           (0.02)
Times moved                    Number of times R moved to a different                   2.090           1.907         1.671*           2.27*
                               neighborhood in childhood                               (0.14)          (0.15)         (0.09)           (0.13)
Current smoker                 Currently a smoker                                      0.231*          0.328*         0.226            0.295
                                                                                       (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.02)           (0.02)
Past smoker                    Past smoker                                              0.238          0.235          0.207            0.248
                                                                                       (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.02)           (0.02)
Alcohol abuse lifetime         DSM-IV Alcohol abuse lifetime                           0.183*          0.397*         0.053*           0.158*
                                                                                       (0.01)          (0.03)         (0.01)           (0.02)
Illicit drug abuse lifetime    DSM-IV drug abuse lifetime                              0.101*          0.284*         0.033*           0.107*
                                                                                       (0.01)          (0.03)         (0.00)           (0.01)
Take chances                   Takes chances or does reckless things                   0.173*          0.313*         0.056*           0.134*
                                                                                       (0.01)          (0.03)         (0.01)           (0.01)
Urges                          R says giving into urges gets him/her into              0.378*          0.584*         0.307*           0.482*
                               trouble                                                 (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.02)           (0.02)
Antidepressants                R took antidepressants in last 12 months                0.038*          0.216*         0.091*           0.310*
                                                                                       (0.01)          (0.02)         (0.01)           (0.02)
Any prescriptions              R took any prescription medication in last              0.080*          0.307*         0.153*           0.402*
                               12 months                                               (0.01)          (0.03)         (0.01)           (0.02)
Post911                        Interview took place after September 11,                 0.444           0.486         0.401            0.430
                               2001                                                    (0.02)          (0.03)         (0.02)           (0.02)
    Note: Weighted sample means are presented, with standard deviations reported in parentheses. Maximum observations are
    3,229.. Asterisks denote a statistically significant difference in means between ever-depressed and never-depressed individuals,
    by gender, as follows: *p-value≤0.05




                                                                                                                                  39
                                                   Table 2
                            National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-1979 (NLSY79)
                                          Weighted Sample Means

 Variable            Description                                                           Wave I           Wave II         Wave III
                                                                                           (1992)           (1994)        (1998-2006)
 Depressed           CES-D Score >= 10                                                      0.102            0.094           0.089
                                                                                           (0.303)          (0.292)         (0.285)
 BMI                 Body mass index                                                         26.4             26.9            28.3
                                                                                           (0.053)          (0.055)         (0.059)
 Overweight /        BMI >= 25                                                               55.2             59.2            69.7
 Obese                                                                                     (0.497)          (0.492)         (0.460)
 Hispanic            Dichotomous indicator for Hispanic                                      18.4             18.6            18.7
                                                                                           (0.387)          (0.389)         (0.390)
 Non-Hispanic        Dichotomous indicator for Non-Hispanic black                            29.1             29.2            29.8
 Black                                                                                     (0.454)          (0.455)         (0.458)
 Other Race          Dichotomous indicator for other race                                     0.9              0.8             0.7
                                                                                           (0.094)          (0.089)         (0.084)
 Age                 Age at interview                                                        31.5             33.5            41.1
                                                                                             (2.2)            (2.2)           (1.8)
 Northeast           Dichotomous indicator for whether respondent resides in                0.164            0.160           0.153
                     the Northeast                                                         (0.370)          (0.367)         (0.360)
 Midwest             Dichotomous indicator for whether respondent resides in                0.239            0.239           0.241
                     the Midwest                                                           (0.426)          (0.427)         (0.428)
 South               Dichotomous indicator for whether respondent resides in                0.393            0.400           0.413
                     the South                                                             (0.488)          (0.490)         (0.492)
 Current Smoker      Dichotomous indicator for current smoker                               0.338            0.333           0.295
                                                                                           (0.473)          (0.471)         (0.456)
 Food Stamps         Value of food stamps in $1000’s                                          0.3              0.2             0.1
                                                                                             (0.9)            (0.8)           (0.7)
 Never married       Dichotomous indicator for never married                                0.290            0.258           0.182
                                                                                           (0.454)          (0.438)         (0.386)
 Separated           Dichotomous indicator for separated                                    0.057            0.058           0.051
                                                                                           (0.232)          (0.234)         (0.219)
 Divorced            Dichotomous indicator for divorced                                     0.104            0.118           0.166
                                                                                           (0.305)          (0.323)         (0.373)
 Widowed             Widowed                                                                0.004            0.006           0.011
                                                                                           (0.067)          (0.075)         (0.103)
 Highest Grade       Highest grade completed                                                 13.0             13.0            13.3
                                                                                             (2.4)            (2.4)           (2.5)
 Family Size         Family size                                                              3.2              3.3             3.3
                                                                                             (1.7)            (1.6)           (1.6)
 Mother High         Dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent’s                     0.422            0.423           0.431
 School              mother is a high school graduate                                      (0.494)          (0.494)         (0.495)
 Mother Some         Dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent’s                     0.095            0.095           0.094
 College             mother has had some college                                           (0.294)          (0.293)         (0.291)
 Mother College      Dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent’s                     0.075            0.075           0.076
 plus                mother is a college graduate or above                                  (26.3)           (26.4)          (26.5)
 Savings             Dichotomous indicator for whether the respondent or their              0.620            0.617           0.619
 Account             spouse had a savings account in 1985                                  (0.485)          (0.486)         (0.486)
 Life Insurance      Dichotomous indicator for whether respondent has life                  0.529            0.530           0.528
                     insurance through job                                                 (0.499)          (0.499)         (0.499)
 Observations                                                                               7,179            7,369           6,817
Note: Weighted sample means are presented, with standard deviations reported in parentheses. Observations noted represent the
maximum sample sizes; sample sizes in some models are lower due to missing information on some covariates. Asterisks denote
a statistically significant difference in means between ever-depressed and never-depressed individuals, by gender, as follows:
***p-value≤0.01, **0.01<p-value≤0.05, *0.05<p-value≤0.10.
                                                                                                                           40
                                          Table 3
                    Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)
                                     Weighted Means

Variable             Description                                                       Mean
Days Depressed       Number of days in past month mental health was                      3.448
                     not good due to depression or stress                               (7.465)
Depressed            Dichotomous indicator for whether mental health                    0.3280
                     was not good at any time in past month                            (0.4695)
Fruits               Annual consumption of fruits                                      289.759
                                                                                      (305.511)
Fruit Juice          Annual consumption of fruit juice                                 248.672
                                                                                      (303.700)
Carrots              Annual consumption of carrots                                      96.096
                                                                                      (154.792)
Green Salad          Annual consumption of green salad                                 181.709
                                                                                      (187.952)
Vegetables           Annual servings of vegetables (not carrots, potatoes,             455.376
                     or salad)                                                        (346.701)
Snacks               Annual consumption of snacks                                      119.856
                                                                                      (167.966)
Hamburgers           Annual consumption of hamburgers, cheeseburgers,                   76.944
                     or meatloaf                                                       (91.634)
Hot Dogs             Annual consumption of hot dogs                                     91.295
                                                                                      (201.530)
French Fries         Annual consumption of fries                                        64.594
                                                                                      (111.107)
Fried Chicken        Annual consumption of fried chicken                                33.538
                                                                                       (68.163)
Physically Active    Dichotomous indicator for whether respondent currently engages     0.4283
                     in regular or vigorous physical activity in an average week       (0.4948)
Male                 Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is                 0.496
                     male, and 0 if respondent is female                                (0.500)
Some High School     Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent                    0.072
                     completed at least 9 but less than 12 years of school              (0.258)
High School          Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent                    0.304
                     completed exactly 12 years of schooling                            (0.460)
Some College         Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent                    0.269
                     completed at least 13 but less than 16 years of school             (0.443)
College              Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent                    0.316
                     graduated from college                                             (0.465)
Age                  Age of respondent in years                                         39.468
                                                                                       (11.489)
Married              Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is                 0.643
                     married                                                            (0.479)
Divorced             Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is                 0.124
                     divorced or separated                                              (0.330)
Widowed              Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is                 0.018
                     widowed                                                            (0.134)


                                                                                                  41
    Black               Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent               0.098
                        is black and not Hispanic                                     (0.297)
     Hispanic           Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent               0.118
                        is of Hispanic origin                                         (0.322)
     Other Race         Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent’s             0.051
                        race is other than white, black, or Hispanic                  (0.220)
     Work               Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is            0.782
                        Employed                                                      (0.413)
     Unemployed         Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent               0.092
                        is out of work or unable to work                              (0.289)
     Family Income      Real household income in thousands of 1982-84                33776.360
                        Dollars                                                     (26876.690)
     Physical Health    Number of days in past month physical health not               2.915
                        Good                                                          (7.049)
     Health Plan        Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent               0.829
                        currently has health insurance                                (0.377)
     Observations                                                                    2,858,973
Notes: Weighted sample means are reported, and standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
Observations denote the maximum sample size; sample sizes in some models are less due to missing
information on some covariates.




                                                                                                   42
                                                     Table 4
                     Effects of Major Depression on BMI & Overweight/Obesity among Males
                                                  Data: NCS-R

Panel A                                                           Dependent Variable: BMI
Variable                                       1              2              3              4             5                 6
Current Depression                   -0.4639        -0.0063            _              _              _              _
                                      [0.40]         [0.48]
Past Depression                         _              _            0.5214         0.3702            _              _
                                                                    [0.34]         [0.36]
Lifetime Depression                     _               _              _              _              0.1071        0.2724
                                                                                                     [0.28]        [0.32]
Age                                   0.2875          0.3331          0.2778          0.3330         0.2786        0.3325
                                      [0.08]          [0.10]          [0.08]          [0.10]         [0.08]        [0.10]
Age Squared                          -0.0029         -0.0034         -0.0028         -0.0034        -0.0028       -0.0034
                                      [0.00]          [0.00]          [0.00]          [0.00]         [0.00]        [0.00]
Black                                 0.3303          0.7998          0.3584          0.7936         0.3512        0.7992
                                      [0.44]          [0.63]          [0.44]          [0.63]         [0.44]        [0.63]
Other Race                           -0.2129         -0.4489         -0.2570         -0.4842        -0.2529       -0.4982
                                      [0.75]          [0.83]          [0.75]          [0.84]         [0.74]        [0.83]
Married                               1.0029          0.5531          1.0355         0.5468          1.0463        0.5619
                                      [0.37]          [0.44]          [0.37]          [0.44]         [0.37]        [0.44]
Divorced                              0.1637         -0.1358          0.1159         -0.1655         0.1382       -0.1682
                                      [0.49]          [0.57]          [0.49]          [0.57]         [0.49]        [0.57]
High School Graduate                  0.8859          0.5221          0.8682          0.4964         0.8983        0.5096
                                      [0.39]          [0.50]          [0.39]          [0.51]         [0.39]        [0.50]
College Graduate                     -1.0913         -1.3132         -1.0913         -1.3196        -1.0785       -1.3125
                                      [0.28]          [0.31]          [0.27]          [0.31]         [0.28]        [0.31]
Any Religious Preference              0.9278          0.8349          0.9417          0.8416         0.9270        0.8315
                                      [0.32]          [0.34]          [0.32]          [0.34]         [0.32]        [0.34]
Household Income                      0.0002         -0.0014         0.00014         -0.0015         0.0003       -0.0014
                                      [0.00]          [0.00]          [0.00]          [0.00]         [0.00]        [0.00]
Northeast                             0.4707          0.4713         0.4827          0.4813          0.4685        0.4721
                                      [0.39]          [0.44]          [0.39]          [0.44]         [0.39]        [0.44]
Midwest                               0.3894          0.3910         0.4069          0.4021          0.4002        0.3985
                                      [0.34]          [0.37]          [0.34]          [0.37]         [0.34]        [0.37]
South                                  0.326          0.1931         0.3658          0.2144          0.3468        0.2079
                                      [0.34]          [0.36]          [0.34]          [0.36]         [0.34]        [0.36]
Extended Covariates                     No              Yes             No             Yes             No           Yes
R-squared                              0.053           0.102          0.054           0.103          0.052         0.103
Observations                           1669            1318            1669            1318           1669          1318
    Note: Coefficients from OLS regression models are reported, with robust standard errors in brackets. Extended
    covariates include: mom depressed, mom drink or illicit drugs, dad depressed, dad drink or illicit drugs, lived with
    both parents, parent attempted suicide, number of siblings, government assistance to family when young, never
    unsupervised as a child, high parental effort, maternal/paternal education, times moved in childhood, current
    smoker, past smoker, lifetime diagnosis of alcohol abuse, lifetime diagnosis of illicit drug abuse, describes
    personality as “taking chances”, troublesome urges, anti-depressant use, other prescription drug use, and interview
    took place after 9/11. Asterisks denote statistical significance of coefficients as follows: ***p-value≤0.01,
    **0.01<p-value≤0.05, *0.05<p-value≤0.10.




                                                                                                                        43
Panel B                                                Dependent Variable: Overweight / Obese
Variable                       1                 2               3              4                  5                6
Current Depression         -0.0516*           0.0053             _              _                  _                _
                            [0.03]            [0.03]
Past Depression                _                 _             0.0339           0.0254             _                _
                                                               [0.03]           [0.03]
Lifetime Depression            _                _                 _                _             -0.0047          0.0212
                                                                                                  [0.02]           [0.03]
Extended Covariates            No             Yes               No               Yes                No              Yes
Observations                  1965            1553             1965              1553              1965             1553
    Note: Marginal effects from probit models are reported, with robust standard errors in parentheses. See notes for
    Panel A above.




                                                                                                                     44
                                               Table 5
               Effects of Major Depression on BMI & Overweight/Obesity among Females
                                             Data: NCS-R

Panel A                                                     Dependent Variable: BMI
Variable                              1             2            3           4                 5             6
Current Depression                 0.8029**       0.0483          _              _             _             _
                                     [0.36]       [0.41]
Past Depression                         _            _         0.5471*        0.6164*          _             _
                                                                [0.33]         [0.36]
Lifetime Depression                   _             _              _              _       0.8715***        0.5027
                                                                                            [0.27]         [0.31]
Age                                 0.3069         0.3466       0.3063         0.3412       0.2944         0.3409
                                     [0.08]        [0.09]       [0.08]         [0.09]       [0.08]         [0.09]
Age Squared                         -0.0029       -0.0034      -0.0029        -0.0034      -0.0027        -0.0034
                                     [0.00]        [0.00]       [0.00]         [0.00]       [0.00]         [0.00]
Black                               2.6954         2.5001       2.6925         2.5523       2.7512         2.5226
                                     [0.43]        [0.55]       [0.43]         [0.55]       [0.43]         [0.55]
Other Race                          1.0936         1.9154       1.0340         1.9065       1.0098         1.9034
                                     [0.77]        [0.84]       [0.77]         [0.85]       [0.77]         [0.85]
Married                             0.8038        0.5662       0.75799        0.5789        0.8304        0.5970
                                     [0.40]        [0.45]       [0.40]         [0.45]       [0.40]         [0.45]
Divorced                            0.4521         0.1750       0.4413         0.1562       0.4389         0.1645
                                     [0.46]        [0.54]       [0.46]         [0.54]       [0.46]         [0.54]
High School Graduate                -1.5292       -1.6663      -1.5900        -1.6910      -1.5808        -1.6883
                                     [0.49]        [0.71]       [0.49]         [0.71]       [0.49]         [0.71]
College Graduate                    -1.2916       -1.0077      -1.2869        -0.9804      -1.2683        -0.9895
                                     [0.29]        [0.33]       [0.29]         [0.33]       [0.29]         [0.33]
Any Religious Preference            0.7886         0.6375       0.7935         0.6631       0.8330         0.6696
                                     [0.36]        [0.40]       [0.36]         [0.40]       [0.36]         [0.40]
Household Income                   -0.01405       -0.0122      -0.0147        -0.0125      -0.0145        -0.0123
                                     [0.00]        [0.00]       [0.00]         [0.00]       [0.00]         [0.00]
Northeast                           0.0973         0.3480       0.0991         0.3650       0.1201         0.3568
                                     [0.40]        [0.46]       [0.40]         [0.46]       [0.40]         [0.46]
Midwest                             0.9233         0.9042       0.9236         0.8861       0.9017         0.8762
                                     [0.37]        [0.41]       [0.37]         [0.41]       [0.37]         [0.41]
South                               0.2800         0.2359       0.2990         0.2324       0.2878         0.2302
                                     [0.35]        [0.40]       [0.35]         [0.40]       [0.35]         [0.41]
Extended Covariates                    No           Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes
R-squared                            0.086         0.123         0.085         0.125        0.0875         0.125
Observations                          2485          1911         2485           1911         2485           1911
See notes to Table 4.

Panel B                                              Dependent Variable: Overweight / Obese
Variable                               1             2              3             4              5             6
Current Depression                 0.0436*        0.0201            _             _              _             _
                                    [0.03]        [0.03]
Past Depression                       _              _         0.0551**       0.0656**           _             _
                                                                 [0.02]         [0.03]
Lifetime Depression                   _              _              _             _          0.0653**     0.0624**
                                                                                               [0.02]       [0.02]
Extended Covariates                  No             Yes           No             Yes             No          Yes
Observations                        2671           2040          2671           2040            2671         2040
Note: Marginal effects from probit models are reported, with robust standard errors in parentheses. See notes for
Panel A above.

                                                                                                                 45
                                                                            Table 6
                                               Effects of Major Depression on Overweight/Obesity among Females
                                                          Estimates from Constrained-Selection Models
                                                                         Data: NCS-R

                                                                  Dependent Variable: Overweight / Obese
 Model             1                  2                3             4                         6                         7                8                9                 10
Constraint       Rho = 0             0.1              0.2           0.3          0.4          0.5                       -0.1             -0.2             -0.3             Equal
 on Rho                                                                                                                                                                  Selection1

  Past         0.0656***          -0.0014         -0.0702**       -0.1398***       -0.2089***      -0.2762***        0.1299***       0.1905***        0.2471***          0.1565***
Depression        [0.03]           [0.07]           [0.07]           [0.07]           [0.07]          [0.07]           [0.07]          [0.07]           [0.07]             [0.07]
                                                                                                                                                                        Rho = -0.143

 Lifetime       0.0624***         -0.0020        -0.0672***       -0.1326***       -0.1977***      -0.2615***        0.1255***       0.1866***        0.2454***          0.1087***
Depression        [0.02]           [0.06]           [0.06]           [0.06]           [0.06]          [0.06]           [0.06]          [0.06]           [0.06]             [0.06]
                                                                                                                                                                        Rho = -0.073
  Obs.                                                                                          2040
         Note: Each cell represents a separate bivariate probit model, with alternate constraints on the correlation (Rho) between the error terms in the obesity and
         depression equations. Marginal effects are reported, with standard errors in brackets.
         1 Bivariate probit model is estimated by constraining rho such that the selection on unobservable factors is equal to the selection on observable factors.




                                                                                                                                                                          46
                                              Table 7
       Effects of Past Depression (CES-D scale) on BMI and Overweight/Obesity among Males
                                           Data: NLSY79

Panel A                                                                   Dependent Variable: BMI
Model`                                           1                    2               3               4                           5
Variable                                    Between              Between           Person           First-                    Family
                                             Effects              Effects      Fixed Effects    Differences                Fixed Effects
Depressed                                     0.337                0.325           0.038           0.039                       0.008
(Based on CES-D Scale)                       (0.611)              (0.616)         (0.126)         (0.103)                     (0.234)
Age at interview                              -0.145               -0.241        0.411**          0.442**                      0.090
                                             (0.670)              (0.676)         (0.135)         (0.142)                     (0.237)
Age-squared                                   0.004                0.005           -0.003         -0.004*                      0.001
                                             (0.010)              (0.010)         (0.002)         (0.002)                     (0.003)
Lives in Northeast                           0.657*               0.598*           -0.296          -0.499                      -0.131
                                             (0.280)              (0.281)         (0.297)         (0.278)                     (0.433)
Lives in Midwest                             0.531*                0.482           0.391           0.122                       -0.087
                                             (0.258)              (0.258)         (0.271)         (0.290)                     (0.458)
Lives in South                               0.624*               0.556*           0.011           -0.204                      0.159
                                             (0.246)              (0.248)         (0.235)         (0.257)                     (0.363)
Current Smoker                             -1.749***            -1.711***          -0.135          0.027                    -0.824***
                                             (0.219)              (0.220)         (0.110)         (0.096)                     (0.218)
Food Stamps                                   0.537                0.564           -0.007          0.032                       -0.141
                                             (0.453)              (0.451)         (0.093)         (0.066)                     (0.099)
Never married                                 -0.483               -0.427          0.012           0.009                      -0.523*
                                             (0.270)              (0.277)         (0.150)         (0.138)                     (0.261)
Separated                                     -0.999               -0.990          -0.271          -0.090                      -0.051
                                             (0.618)              (0.622)         (0.152)         (0.138)                     (0.293)
Divorced                                     -0.791*             -0.775*           -0.210          -0.138                      0.077
                                             (0.391)              (0.390)         (0.137)         (0.117)                     (0.220)
Widowed                                      4.520*               4.481*           0.106           -0.201                      1.166
                                             (2.005)              (2.012)         (1.157)         (0.818)                     (0.801)
Highest grade completed                    -0.284***            -0.254***          0.057           0.001                     -0.226**
                                             (0.038)              (0.042)         (0.074)         (0.057)                     (0.082)
Family size                                   -0.036               -0.046         -0.057*          -0.026                      0.027
                                             (0.079)              (0.080)         (0.027)         (0.024)                     (0.056)
Constant                                   31.577**             32.638**        16.399***          0.063                    26.170***
                                            (11.351)             (11.448)         (2.615)         (0.057)                     (4.437)
Extended Covariates                             No                  Yes              No              No                          No
R-squared                                      0.047               0.050           0.201           0.042                       0.113
Observations                                   3296                 3296           10441            6361                       10441
P-value Ho: RE valid                             -                    -            0.000              -                        0.000
     Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported, standard errors clustered at the family-level in parentheses. Extended
     covariates include maternal education, and indicators of risk tolerance (savings account and purchase of life insurance).
     Asterisks denote statistical significance of coefficients as follows: ***p-value≤0.01, **0.01<p-value≤0.05, *0.05<p-
     value≤0.10.

Panel B                                                    Dependent Variable: Overweight / Obese
Model                                       1                 2                  3             4                                   5
Variable                               Between            Between             Person         First-                            Family
                                         Effects           Effects        Fixed Effects   Differences                       Fixed Effects
Depressed                                 0.019             0.018             -0.013         0.003                              -0.014
                                         (0.053)           (0.053)           (0.019)        (0.016)                            (0.024)
Extended Covariates                        No                Yes                No            No                                  No
     Notes: Marginal effects from probit models are reported. See additional notes above.


                                                                                                                                  47
                                              Table 8
     Effects of Past Depression (CES-D scale) on BMI and Overweight/Obesity among Females
                                          Data: NLSY79

Panel A                                              Dependent Variable: BMI
Model                                1           2               3               4              5
Variable                        Between     Between          Person            First-       Family
                                 Effects     Effects      Fixed Effects    Differences   Fixed Effects
Depressed                        0.985*      1.091*           -0.187          -0.191         -0.100
                                 (0.591)     (0.585)         (0.129)         (0.108)        (0.243)
Age at interview               -3.267***   -3.178***           0.266           0.161        0.661*
                                 (0.818)     (0.816)         (0.173)         (0.186)        (0.319)
Age-squared                     0.053***    0.052***          -0.001          -0.000         -0.007
                                 (0.012)     (0.012)         (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.004)
Lives in Northeast                -0.389      -0.410          -0.501          -0.556         -0.119
                                 (0.392)     (0.393)         (0.427)         (0.358)        (0.794)
Lives in Midwest                   0.054       0.062          -0.522          -0.407          1.123
                                 (0.357)     (0.357)         (0.476)         (0.427)        (0.679)
Lives in South                    0.431        0.376          -0.037          -0.241         -0.175
                                 (0.332)     (0.328)         (0.368)         (0.322)        (0.537)
Smokes yes/no                  -1.516***   -1.548***          -0.114           0.048         -0.543
                                 (0.273)     (0.273)         (0.141)         (0.120)        (0.336)
Value of food stamps ($1000)    0.633**      0.550*           -0.036          -0.010        0.284*
                                 (0.217)     (0.221)         (0.060)         (0.049)        (0.115)
Never married                   3.083***    2.954***          -0.394          -0.247          0.288
                                 (0.425)     (0.429)         (0.221)         (0.196)        (0.377)
Separated                          0.992       0.869          -0.224          -0.030         -0.524
                                 (0.652)     (0.655)         (0.191)         (0.180)        (0.299)
Divorced                          -0.221      -0.345          -0.174          -0.170         -0.181
                                 (0.440)     (0.434)         (0.153)         (0.140)        (0.272)
Widowed                           1.322        1.276           0.460           0.413         -0.297
                                 (1.327)     (1.335)         (0.690)         (0.698)        (1.861)
Highest grade completed        -0.326***   -0.224***         0.141*            0.056          0.039
                                 (0.051)     (0.058)         (0.066)         (0.066)        (0.106)
Family size                     0.295**      0.253*           -0.061         -0.080*         -0.076
                                 (0.107)     (0.107)         (0.039)         (0.037)        (0.073)
Constant                       77.162***   74.820***       17.277***          0.172*        10.662
                                (13.792)    (13.759)         (3.250)         (0.073)        (5.888)
R-squared                          0.082       0.090           0.132           0.025          0.072
Observations                       3217        3217           10924            6751          10924
P-value Ho: RE valid                 -           -             0.000             -            0.000
    Notes: See Table 7.

Panel B                                     Dependent Variable: Overweight / Obese
Model                              1           2              3                 4              5
Variable                       Between     Between         Person             First-        Family
                                Effects     Effects     Fixed Effects    Differences     Fixed Effects
Depressed                       0.067*      0.076*          0.003            -0.002          0.026
                               (0.040)     (0.040)         (0.015)          (0.013)         (0.019)
Extended Covariates               No         Yes             No                No             No
    Notes: See Table 7.



                                                                                               48
                                                                                    Table 9
                                                  Effects of Depression on Food Consumption and Physical Activity among Males
                                                                                  Data: BRFSS

  Panel A                                                                                          Healthy Food Consumption
  Outcome                                 Fruit                            Fruit Juice                       Carrots                           Green Salad                       Vegetables
  Model                           1                 2              3                 4                  5                 6                 7                8               9                10
  Depressed                 -12.7027***      -11.9770***     -3.7174***        -5.3561***         -2.4712***        -2.6153***        -10.4296***      -7.9748***      -12.9913***      -12.2309***
                              (0.8929)          (0.9602)       (0.9708)          (1.0974)           (0.4247)          (0.4567)          (0.5588)         (0.5842)        (1.1409)          (1.1137)
  Extended Covariates            Yes               No             Yes               No                 Yes               No                Yes              No              Yes               No
  R-squared                     0.037             0.037          0.032             0.031              0.015             0.014             0.051            0.055           0.047             0.046
  Observations                 783327            613530         785242            614545             775505            607725            786193           615388          779328            610885
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state-year cells and reported in parentheses. Extended covariates include: individual is
working, individual is unemployed, real family income, number of days in the past month that physical health was good, and covered by health insurance. Asterisks denote statistical significance
of coefficients as follows: ***p-value≤0.01, **0.01<p-value≤0.05, *0.05<p-value≤0.10.


  Panel B                                                                                    Unhealthy Food Consumption
  Outcome                     Snacks                      Hamburger                      Hot Dogs                  French Fries                    Fried Chicken                  Doughnuts
  Model                  1                2             3               4              5            6            7              8                 9             10             11           12
  Depressed         11.1139***       14.6579***      3.5143          4.4522         2.1901       2.7331     10.0631*** 10.0179***              0.8383        -1.8867       10.5293***   8.9737**
                     (2.8784)         (3.5160)      (3.4916)        (3.2111)       (6.0840)     (7.2539)     (1.8727)       (2.1638)          (2.0000)       (1.8884)       (3.2989)     (3.5836)
  Extended
  Covariates            Yes             No            Yes             No              Yes          No             Yes            No             Yes             No            Yes             No
  R-squared            0.051           0.052         0.065           0.062           0.026        0.032          0.055          0.078          0.058           0.065         0.008           0.008
  Observations         38878           6122          39169           6153            39093        6148           38975          6135           39057           6133          38941           6114
Notes: See notes to Panel A above.


                                                               Panel C                                  Physical Activity
                                                               Outcome                       Regular / Vigorous Activity – Yes / No
                                                               Model                               1                           2
                                                               Depressed                     -0.0686***                   -0.0190**
                                                                                               (0.0070)                    (0.0076)
                                                             Extended Covariates                  No                          Yes
                                                             R-squared                           0.039                       0.048
                                                             Observations                       205836                      178947
                                                             Notes: Marginal effects from probit models are reported. See notes above.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     49
                                                                                  Table 10
                                               Effects of Depression on Food Consumption and Physical Activity among Females
                                                                                Data: BRFSS

Panel A                                                                                        Healthy Food Consumption
Outcome                                Fruit                             Fruit Juice                      Carrots                          Green Salad                         Vegetables
Model                            1                2                3                 4              5                 6                 7                 8                9               10
Depressed                 -25.1331***       -25.1531***     -10.0065***        -13.7200***    -5.1567***        -5.6103***        -14.9881***      -12.0212***       -20.7381***      -19.4144***
                             (0.8712)         (0.8421)        (0.6294)           (0.6605)       (0.3685)          (0.3929)          (0.5009)          (0.4717)         (1.0062)         (1.0015)
Extended Covariates             No               Yes              No                Yes            No                Yes               No                Yes              No               Yes
R-squared                      0.058            0.061           0.042              0.043          0.022             0.022             0.040             0.047            0.055            0.054
Observations                 1200345           894648         1200243             894122        1186800            886598           1201177            895431          1196205           892396
       Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state-year cells and reported in parentheses. Extended covariates
       include: individual is working, individual is unemployed, real family income, number of days in the past month that physical health was good, and covered by health insurance.
       Asterisks denote statistical significance of coefficients as follows: ***p-value≤0.01, **0.01<p-value≤0.05, *0.05<p-value≤0.10.


Panel B                                                                                    Unhealthy Food Consumption
Outcome                    Snacks                      Hamburger                       Hot Dogs                  French Fries                  Fried Chicken                  Doughnuts
Model                  1               2              3               4              5            6            7              8               9             10             11           12
Depressed          8.0648*           9.2276*      -0.0702           2.0424       4.4101*        3.0894     2.2634*         4.1046**       2.3393*       1.7749          8.4198*     11.1671**
                   (4.5972)         (4.5696)      (3.1475)         (2.5322)      (2.4976)     (2.7177)     (1.2632)        (1.4883)       (1.2102)      (1.9432)        (4.5075)     (3.4023)
Extended
Covariates          No             Yes              No              Yes             No          Yes            No             Yes           No             Yes            No             Yes
R-squared          0.047           0.039           0.063            0.052          0.018        0.035         0.091           0.064        0.032        0.071            0.007          0.008
Observations      53374          8086              53627           8116            53438       8094           53429          8103          53541        8094             53429          8106
      Notes: See notes to Panel A above.


                                                             Panel C                                  Physical Activity
                                                             Outcome                       Regular / Vigorous Activity – Yes / No
                                                             Model                               1                           2
                                                             Depressed                     -0.1110***                  -0.0519***
                                                                                             (0.0059)                    (0.0059)
                                                           Extended Covariates                  No                          Yes
                                                           R-squared                           0.046                       0.054
                                                           Observations                       297999                      245291
                                                           Notes: Marginal effects from probit models are reported. See notes above.




                                                                                                                                                                                      50
