                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ARE THE SEEDS OF BAD GOVERNANCE SOWN IN GOOD TIMES?

                                          Antoinette Schoar
                                        Ebonya L. Washington

                                         Working Paper 17061
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We thank Yale’s Institution for Social and Policy Studies for financial support. We thank Martin Baker,
Martijn Cremers, Gary Gorton, Tim Guinnane, Naomi Laromeaux, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Roberta
Romano, Andrei Shleifer, and participants at the MIT Sloan faculty lunch, MIT organizational economics
seminar, the CAF conference at the Indian School of Business, the finance seminar at UNC, University
of Washington and the Yale Law School’s Law and Economics seminar for helpful comments. All
mistakes are of course our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Antoinette Schoar and Ebonya L. Washington. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are the Seeds of Bad Governance Sown in Good Times?
Antoinette Schoar and Ebonya L. Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 17061
May 2011, Revised October 2012
JEL No. G34

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the extent to which the corporate governance structure of a firm arises endogenously
in response to its performance. We demonstrate that following periods of abnormally good performance,
managers are more likely to call special meetings and to propose and pass governance measures that
are contrary to shareholder interests (based on IRRC classification). These results are driven primarily
by firms that are characterized as having poor governance according to either the GIM Index or the
proportion of activist shareholders. Following these special meetings, we find that the next quarter
performance of the firm is negative. Our results are consistent with an interpretation of shareholder
inattention to governance following good firm performance or a desire to reward management for
good past performance. Overall, our evidence seems more consistent with the former interpretation.


Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

Ebonya L. Washington
Yale University
Box 8264
37 Hillhouse, Room 36
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ebonya.washington@yale.edu
    1. Introduction


    One of the classic debates in corporate finance revolves around the question of
whether firms’ governance structures arise optimally in response to competitive pressures
in the market for corporate control. The argument put forward by supporters of this view
is that competition for resources, especially capital, will force firms to improve their
governance structures in order to obtain better cost of capital. In their seminal paper,
Demsetz and Lehn (1985) argue that firms in which governance matters more for the cost
of capital will develop better governance structures in order to attract investors. Firms
whose valuations are not sensitive to governance structure will thus have poorer
governance. As a result, one should not expect a strong empirical relationship between
firm governance and performance in the cross section. On the other side of the debate are
proponents of the view that the market for corporate control does not function perfectly;
instead, entrenched managers shape the firm’s governance structure for their private
benefit. Examples of this view are Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988); Lang and Stulz
(1994) and Yermack (1996). A related argument suggests that such opportunistic
behavior by managers is facilitated when shareholders are either too shortsighted or do
not pay enough attention to effectively impose governance pressures; see for example
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), and Yermack (1997). This second view of
governance would therefore suggest a positive relationship between better (for
shareholders) governance structures and firm performance.

        A large empirical literature has examined the impact of governance on firm
performance. Many early papers struggled exactly with the omitted variable bias pointed
out by Demsetz and Lehn (1985) which implies that any correlation between governance
and performance in the cross section cannot be interpreted in a causal way. A number of
more recent papers have looked at exogenous variation to governance and found a strong
positive impact of improved governance on firm performance; see for example Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2002), Garvey and Hanka (1999), and Bhagat and Bolton (2008).

       In the current paper we turn the question on its head: we investigate when and
how changes in governance provisions and CEO compensation come about.
Documenting how governance structures emerge is important for understanding whether
managers are able to entrench themselves over time. Specifically, we ask whether
governance changes are predicted by either abnormally good or bad firm performance. If
the main force shaping the governance provisions of firms is market pressure, we would
expect to see a tightening of governance in favor of shareholder rights after periods of
poor firm performance. However, we would not expect a worsening (or loosening) of

2
governance after good performance, since positive stock returns would provide
confirmation of the quality of the firm’s governance structure. On the other hand, if
managers’ preferences for entrenchment and weak oversight are a first order factor in
shaping the governance structure of firms, we would expect to see deterioration in
governance structures after periods of particularly good firm performance. The idea that
shareholder attention is limited and that shareholders pay closer attention to firms that are
performing poorly than those that are performing well has been previously proposed in
studies by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), Baker et al (2007), and Jenter and Kanaan
(2008).

        Shareholders vote on changes to the governance provisions of a firm including the
CEO’s compensation in both routine annual and less-frequent special shareholder
meetings. While the timing of annual meetings is set well in advance, the occurrence and
timing of special meetings are at the discretion of management.1 Thus, using a panel of
shareholder meetings for 1500 S&P firms which were obtained from the Institutional
Shareholder Services (ISS), we first examine the endogeneity of the timing of special
meetings with respect to firm performance. We define abnormally good (bad)
performance as the extent to which the firm beats (falls short of) their predicted analysts’
earnings forecasts. Earnings surprises are defined as the absolute difference between the
analysts’ consensus forecast for the quarter and the realized quarterly earnings divided by
the forecast. We find that the mean positive surprise increases the probability of a special
meeting in the quarter by over five percent. In contrast, we find little or no impact of
negative earnings surprises. These results also hold if we use quarterly stock returns in
place of earnings surprises. Interestingly, when we decompose the returns into the
industry overall return and the idiosyncratic stock returns, the timing of special meetings
is correlated with both components but it seems more consistently affected by the firm
specific return. When repeating the analysis for earnings surprises before annual
meetings, we do not find any significant relationship. This is comforting since the timing
of annual meetings is exogenous and set more than a year in advance. We further present
evidence that the surprises are not endogenously caused by earnings manipulation
suggesting that managers are responding to, but not causing, these earnings surprises.

        Secondly, we examine the relationship between abnormal earnings surprises and
the types of proposals included on the meeting agenda. We classify ballot propositions as
bad (good) governance items if the IRRC shareholder voting guidance officially
encourages shareholders to vote against (in favor of) these items. Examples of bad
governance proposals are the introduction of a dual class stock or poison pills, while
good proposals would eliminate these measures. We find that positive earnings surprises
increase the frequency with which management places bad governance items on the
ballot of these special meetings. These ballot items result in real changes to the quality of
corporate governance as measured by the GIM Index of Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick
(2003). We again find a strongly asymmetric effect: after periods of poor stock
performance, there is no increase in the number of pro-shareholder provisions that firms

1
  Shareholders also have the option of calling for special meetings; however, de facto, this very rarely
happens (and does not happen in our data) since the transaction costs for shareholders are enormously high
in setting up a special meeting.

3
put on the agenda of a special meeting. We interpret these findings as demonstrating that
managers strategically call shareholder meetings to put up ballot items in their own favor
after periods in which the firm has done well.

        Finally, we analyze how these findings vary with the existing governance
structure of the firm, using two different measures of the quality of governance structure.
We find that poorly, but not well, governed firms are more likely to set up special
meetings, particularly special meetings with bad governance proposals following good
performance. This result is robust to using alternative measures of governance quality
such as the presence of large activist shareholders.

        One concern regarding our results may be that our findings, while statistically
significant, lack economic relevance due to the relative infrequency of special meetings
and the failure to pass managerial proposals. So to be clear, the importance of our results
stems not from our ability to predict meeting time or agenda per se, but in uncovering a
channel by which changes in the quality of governance occur. Overall, these results
demonstrate that governance structures are changed endogenously in favor of
management when the firm has done well. We see two main hypotheses that could
explain these findings. One possibility is that managers find it easier to pass bad
governance proposals following a good performance because shareholders pay less
attention and are less focused on active governance during good times. The alternative
explanation, following Hermalin and Weisbach (2001), is that the worsening governance
structure in good times is the outcome of deliberate and efficient negotiations between
the shareholders and top management: If top managers value discretion, shareholders
might be willing to allow these managers to entrench themselves (i.e., insulate
themselves from actions of shareholders) in order to reward them for good performance.
The current data do not allow us to fully separate these two explanations. However, we
believe that our evidence is more suggestive of the former story (shareholder inattention
during good times) for three reasons: First, we only see the change in governance after
good performance but we do not see a symmetric change toward improvement in
governance after poor performance. In other words, we observe a reward for good
performance with no corresponding punishment for bad performance. (Of course the
punishment may be meted out in a manner unobserved to us.) Second, there is no
evidence that increased discretion leads to improved performance. If shareholders are
granting management greater leeway because they have more confidence in
management’s abilities, then that confidence is misplaced. And finally, as we discuss in
the data section, bad governance items are presented to stockholders in a manner
seemingly designed to subvert attention: They are frequently packaged into multi-item
proposals and are found on significantly longer ballots than ballots that do not include
bad items.

        This paper relates to a large literature on corporate governance which recognizes
that governance mechanisms arise endogenously in response to the separation of
ownership and control within large corporations. A number of papers have looked at the
relationship between governance and firm performance and the forces that endogenously
shape the governance structure of a firm. See for example Bhagat and Black (1998),

4
Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999), Yermack (1996), or Shleifer and Vishny (1997)
for a survey of some of the early literature that examines the tradeoff between different
governance provisions such as board composition, corporate charter, executive
compensation, or ownership concentration. More closely related to our paper are studies
such as Gillan, Hartzell, and Starks (2006) or Boone et al (2007) which analyze how firm
characteristics such as industry competition, performance, and others affect the tradeoffs
that firms make in governance. Similarly Gompers et al (2003) and Cremers and Farrel
(2009) show that omitted variables explain a significant fraction (but not all) of the
variation in firms’ decisions to adopt certain governance changes. However, none of
these papers look at the timing of changes in governance provisions in relation to firm
performance. Our focus on provisions for shareholder voting in special and annual
meetings allows us to identify the specific channel by which governance changes are
introduced.

        This paper also speaks to the political economy literature on endogenous election
timing. This literature finds that in parliamentary systems, elections are more likely to be
called when economic conditions are good. (See for example Cowdhury (1993) on India,
Inoguchi (1981), and Cargill and Hutchison (1991) on Japan.) Smith (2003) presents
evidence that British leaders call elections when their popularity is at its peak and that
therefore elections predict declining future performance. In presidential systems where
election timing is exogenous, clearly ballot contents are not. However most likely
because of the multidimensionality of both politician performance and proposal value,
there is little work modeling the types of candidates and ballot issues that will appear on
the ballot at various times. The advantage of beginning work on the endogeneity of ballot
proposals in the corporate finance context are the clear and simple measures of both firm
performance and the value of the proposals to the voter (shareholder).

    The remainder of the paper is structured as followed: Section 2 discusses the data,
Section 3 lays out the institutional background of shareholder meetings and voting as
well as the descriptive statistics, Section 4 describes the results, and Section 5 discusses
the major implications and concludes.


    2. Data


        We obtained data on shareholder voting from the Investor Responsibility
Research Center (IRRC) which has since been acquired by Institutional Shareholder
Services (ISS). The ISS aims to track the contents and outcome of management and
shareholder proposals for the S&P Super 1500 which includes the largest companies in
the S&P 500, Midcap (top 400), and Small Cap (top 600) groups. Across our 1997-2004
sample period, the ISS collected data from 900-1200 companies each year. We observe
2784 unique firms; the median and average sample firm is present in our dataset for three
years. Twenty-three percent of firms are present for five or more years. For each proposal
presented to shareholders for approval, the ISS records the company name, the meeting
date, a description of the issues included in the proposal, votes for, votes against,

5
abstentions, and the decision rule (i.e., passes with majority or supermajority of votes cast
or shares outstanding).

        Although the ISS data have been used repeatedly in the corporate finance
literature to examine questions related to meeting content, they have not, to our
knowledge, been used previously to examine meeting timing. We note two limitations of
the data for this purpose. First, the dataset does not include meetings at which the only
item on the agenda is board elections. This limitation does not affect our key outcome of
interest: special meetings, because special meetings always contain agenda items other
than board elections. However, this limitation does mean that some annual meetings are
missing from our dataset. Bethhel & Gillan (2000) find that 40% of the S&P Super
1500’s proxy statements include only board and auditor elections, but leave out any non-
standard proposals. We control for annual meeting timing in our regressions. However
we do not believe that this limitation biases our results as our specifications are robust to:
1) not controlling for annual meetings; 2) controlling for only those annual meetings
contained in our dataset; and 3) controlling for annual meetings in each year we have a
special meeting, basing the timing of missing annual meetings on their timing in an
adjacent year since annual meeting timing is largely invariant.

        A second limitation is that we do not have a balanced panel. The ISS does not aim
for balance, but rather for all of the firms in the S&P 1500 in a year. Unfortunately the
ISS is unable to obtain all such firms in a year. And in fact, when we cross check with
other sources, we find that the dataset also includes firms that are not in fact in the S&P
1500 in a given year.2 To address this second limitation, we limit our sample to firms for
which we have at least three years of data. Results are robust to limiting focus to the
sample of firms for which we have at least five years.

        We merge our shareholder voting data with earnings data to create our key
independent variable: firm performance. Our preferred performance measure is the
magnitude of the earnings surprise. The measure defines earnings surprises relative to
analysts’ expectations and thus incorporates the market’s priors about firm performance.
Specifically, using IBES data on realized and forecasted earnings we calculate the level
of the surprise as the difference between the realized and average forecasted earnings
divided by the average forecasted earnings. We split this measure into two variables:
positive and negative earnings surprises. Conditional on a positive surprise, the median
surprise is three and the mean surprise is seven percent. Conditional on a negative
surprise, the median surprise is ten and the mean surprise is twenty percent. Our second
measure of firm performance is quarterly earnings, the change in company’s stock price
from quarter t-1 to t divided by the price at t-1. (We obtain stock prices from CRSP data.)



2
 This second limitation makes it impossible for us to fix the first. We cannot simply go to another source
and add in all of the missing annual meetings because we do not know if they are in fact missing or not in
ISS’s universe for that year. If an annual meeting is not in ISS’s universe and we do include it, then we
could be adding an annual meeting without the corresponding special meeting. We have found no good
source for special meeting timing outside of ISS. For example, the SEC website is missing a large portion
of the special meetings that we have in our dataset.

6
We present earnings results for comparison purposes. We merge both IBES and CRSP
data to our voting dating by ticker.


       3. Institutional Details and Descriptive Statistics

        Shareholders in US firms have the opportunity to vote in two types of meetings:
1) annual meetings and 2) special meetings.3 Corporate law requires companies to hold
an annual meeting to elect board members and approve appointed auditors. At that time,
shareholders are typically updated on the firm’s fiscal health and other management
proposals. Firms generally hold their annual meeting at the same time each year. Sixty-
five percent of the annual meetings in our dataset happen in April or May, just after the
accounting data for the prior year are available.

         Outside of the annual meeting, managers can bring proposals to the consideration
of the shareholders by calling a special meeting with 10-60 days notice, depending on the
state. Special meetings are much more limited in scope than annual meetings. Only
agenda items that are announced in the meeting notice may be formally considered in the
meeting. Special meetings are not concentrated at any one time of the year. No more
than 10% of the special meetings in our sample occur in any particular month. Not
surprisingly, special meetings happen much less frequently than annual. We have nearly
seven times the number of annual as special meetings. (See Table 1 for descriptive
statistics.) Thus, special meetings are held with lower frequency than annual meetings
and can be endogenously called by managers with minimal lag time. We focus on the
timing and contents of these meetings precisely because of this endogeneity. Our goal is
to understand how firm performance impacts the timing and agenda of special meetings.
In the remainder of this section we compare the contents, turnout, and vote margins of
annual and special meetings.

        Theoretically, both shareholders and management can place proposals on the
ballot of both annual and special meetings. The law varies by state, but generally,
managers must obtain shareholders’ consent on mergers, charter amendments, issuance of
new equity, and compensation matters (Maug and Rydqvist, 2001). Managers are also
free to place other items on the ballot for shareholder consideration. For example, our
dataset includes a management proposal for a company name change. Shareholders may
also put forth proposals; however, shareholder proposals are typically not binding on
management. Because shareholders must announce their proposals within 120 days of an
annual meeting and within a “reasonable” time of a special meeting, which they may
become aware of with only 10 days lead time, it is much easier for shareholders to place
proposals on the agenda of annual meetings. Eighteen percent (2498/13868) of our
annual meeting proposals were made by shareholders; only one of the 1688 special
meeting proposals was shareholder initiated. Thus we focus the remainder of the paper on
management proposals, noting that the dearth of shareholder proposals in special
meetings suggests that special meetings may be less open to shareholder influence.


3
    We ignore written consent. Only 0.13% of the items in our dataset are decided by written consent.

7
        A management proposal may contain more than one substantive item. A single
vote is taken on the full proposal. For instance, a proposal might include provisions for
both director and employee stock options. Other times, the items seem less closely
related. For example, one proposal in our sample bundles an increase in common stock
with a change in location headquarters. And most interestingly, other proposals bundle
items that the IRRC says are good for investors with items that the IRRC labels as bad.
For instance, one proposal in our sample bundles an increase in dual class common stock
(bad) with the elimination of supermajority requirements (good) along with neutral
proposals on common stock and charter amendments. Bethel and Gillan (2000) argue
that managers use issue bundling to pass less popular items. As demonstrated in Table 1,
bundling is more common in special meetings, where 30% of proposals contain more
than one item, compared to annual meetings in which 20% of proposals contain bundles.
Voting eligibility is defined by the record date set by management, regardless of meeting
type. Those who own company stock on that date, typically 35 days before the meeting,
may vote in the upcoming meeting. Shareholders do not have to attend the meeting to
cast a ballot. They may vote by completing a proxy card, mailed out an average of 20
days before the meeting (Young, Millar, and Glezen, 1993). A shareholder may cast one
vote for each share owned on the record date. Turnout is typically quite high. Bethel and
Gillan (2002) find turnout of approximately 80% for their 1998 sample of S&P1500
companies suggesting that not only institutional investors but individual investors
generally participate (Maug and Rydqvist, 2001). Given data limitations, we can only
calculate turnout for those companies with decision rules that are a function of shares
outstanding, rather than shares voted. Twenty-four percent of our 13057 management
proposals are voted on as a function of shares outstanding. Table 1 indicates that turnout
in annual meetings is significantly higher than turnout in special meetings (83 vs 78
percent). Note that this difference in turnout is not simply due to differences in agenda
items between special and annual meetings. Controlling for agenda items, turnout is 2.5
percentage points higher in annual meetings.

        Interestingly, management proposals almost always pass. Many scholars have
speculated that high passage rates are due to management’s control of the record and
mailing dates (Young, Millar, and Glazen, 1993) and of the packaging of proposals
(Bethel and Gillan, 2000). Others suggest that high passage rates result from bargaining
between management and institutional shareholders4 prior to the voting or even prior to
the proposal stage. (See Maug and Rydqvist, 2001, for a summary of this literature.)5 As
indicated in Table 1, passage rates in our data, which can be calculated for all
management proposals, are similar to those found in prior literature. Ninety-five percent
of management proposals in annual meetings and 99% of such proposals in special
meetings pass. (This is in contrast to a 22 percent passage rate for shareholder proposals.)
The higher passage rate in special meetings suggests that regardless of the source of
management’s bargaining power in the voting process, the power is even greater in
special meetings.

4
  See Hartzell and Starks (2003) and Almazan, Hartzell, and Starks (2005) on the influence of institutional
investors in management compensation.
5
  In a more recent contribution, Listokin (2008) shows that management more often wins than loses close
elections, suggesting their greater ability to influence votes.

8
        While management proposals are overwhelmingly passed, there are large
differences in the type of proposals that are put on the ballot. In particular there is wide
variation in how shareholder or manager friendly proposals are. In fact, the ISS publishes
two forms of guidance for shareholder voting. First, the IRRC, before its acquisition by
the ISS, published detailed guidelines on how to vote on each type of ballot item.6
Second, the ISS produces voting advice for each specific ballot item. So while the IRRC
guidelines recommend that shareholders vote in favor of items to lower the supermajority
requirement, to make it easier for shareholders to take action by written consent and to
adopt confidential voting, the ISS guidelines do not uniformly preclude voting “no” on
any of these items. Where the IRRC guidelines advise voting against items to create a
new class of common stock with superior voting rights, to eliminate cumulative voting
and to create equity plans that explicitly create repricing, the recommendation of the ISS
varies by company and by time. In some cases the IRRC does not issue a clear guideline
but advises considering the matter on a case by case basis. For instance, the organization
advises that social and environmental issues should be considered on a case by case basis.
The ISS, on the other hand, considers all items on a case by case basis and thus issues
recommendations for all votes. Because of a concern that the ISS recommendations may
be endogenous to the corporation’s governance policies, we follow the more general
IRRC guidelines to characterize ballot items, but note the general patterns of results (but
not significance nor magnitude) is robust to either coding. We code items that the IRRC
recommends voting in favor of as “good” for shareholders, those that the ISS suggests
voting against as “bad” for shareholders, and those for which the IRRC provides no
guidance or suggests consideration on a case by case basis as neutral. The vast majority
of proposals are categorized as neutral. (Please see Appendix Table 1 for an overview of
good and bad items in our data.) If a proposal contains at least one “bad” item, we label it
a bad proposal, likewise for good. Thus a proposal can be both bad and good at the same
time. In practice, only 6 percent of bad proposals are also coded as good.

        Examining the characteristics of bad and good proposals, we see support for
Bethel and Gillan’s (2000) contention that unpopular proposals are more likely to be
bundled with other proposals. First, in unreported results, we find that the presence of a
bad proposal is associated with a significantly longer ballot (more proposals) than good
or neutral proposals. Second, as shown in Table 1, while in annual meetings 20% of
proposals contain more than one item, of those proposals that include an item that is
coded as bad, 29% contain more than one item. While as explained above, we may be
missing some annual meetings, we are not missing any with bad or good proposals, only
those meetings on which the only agenda item is board elections. Thus we can compare
the rate of bundling of bad proposals in special meetings (58%) to the much lower rate in
annual meetings. Nonetheless, the passage rate for bad proposals, like all proposals in our
data, is higher in special meetings (96%) than in annual meetings (90%). Good proposals
are also more frequently bundled than the average proposal. But with good proposals, the
bundling rate is higher in annual meetings (36%) than special meetings (15%). In
summary, relative to annual meetings, special meetings have lower turnout, higher rates
of bundling bad items, and higher passage rates for all types of proposals. These patterns
6
    These guidelines are available on the website www.riskmetrics.com.

9
hold across time periods and firm size, as demonstrated in Appendix Tables 2 and 3. One
interesting time pattern is that there are a smaller number of special meetings (absolutely
and relative to annual meetings) over time.7

        One might think that the difference in the content of annual and special meetings
is simply due to timing. If bad items were more time sensitive, then that would explain
their greater frequency in special meetings. But a close examination of the agenda of each
meeting type demonstrates that special meetings are not simply time related. While
special meetings are more likely to include bad proposals than annual meetings, special
meetings that are held in the same quarter as an annual meeting are even more likely than
typical special meetings to include bad proposals. Further, the bad proposals we observe
most frequently in special meetings are issues that do not appear to be time sensitive at
all. The top five most relatively frequent are: 1) approve issuance/conversion, 2)
authorize dual class stock, 3) eliminate special meeting, 4) adopt supermajority lock-in
provision, and 5) eliminate written consent. On the other hand, the most relatively
frequent good proposals include leverage buyouts, restructuring, and ratifying auditors;
items that are arguably very time sensitive.


     4. Results

     4.1.        Do Managers Endogenously Time Special Meetings?

    In this section we ask whether special meetings are timed to occur during or
following periods when shareholders receive good news about company performance.
Specifically, we test whether earnings surprises predict the timing and content of special
meetings by running models of the form of equation (1)

(1) Specialit = +1(surposm)i,t +2(surnegm)i,t + c(annual)it + S +Y + F + uit

where i indexes firms and t calendar quarters. Special is an indicator for whether a special
meeting occurs in the quarter, and surposm and surpnegm are the magnitudes of the
positive (negative) earnings surprise in the current quarter. These are our key independent
variables. A positive significant B1 (negative significant B2) would indicate that firms are
more (less) likely to call special meetings in quarters of greater (less) than expected
earnings. We control for annual, whether there is an annual meeting in the quarter
because companies are not likely to schedule a special meeting in the window of the
annual meeting. The correlation between the timing of annual and special meetings is
strongly negative. S, Y, and F are vectors of quarter, year, and firm fixed effects


7
 Despite the difference in special meeting frequency, we find similar substantive results before and after
January 1, 2000; Bebchuck, Cohen, and Wang (2010) document a decreased association between
governance provisions and abnormal returns beginning in 2000 which they attribute to investor learning.
However, because there are fewer special meetings over time, we cannot speak to how our findings change
with the passage Sarbanes Oxley because we have little data for the post period.


10
respectively. Robust standard errors are clustered by firm. The basic sample is restricted
to firms for which we have at least three years of data.

        As the results in Table 2 indicate, managers are more likely to call for a special
meeting in a quarter of greater than expected returns. The .0341 coefficient on surposm
indicates that returns that are ten percent higher than expected increase the probability of
a special meeting in the quarter by .003 percentage points. Thus the mean positive
surprise of .07 points increases the likelihood of a special meeting by 5.25% (off of a
mean of .04 special meetings per quarter). The magnitude and significance of this result
is robust to controlling for firm fixed effects (column 2), one and two lags of earnings
surprise (columns 3 and 4), and the lead of earnings surprise (column 5).

        There is an asymmetric response to positive and negative earnings surprises.
While firms are more likely to call a special meeting in response to a positive earnings
surprise, firms are only slightly less likely to call a special meeting in response to a
negative earnings surprise, and this result is not robust across specifications. In fact, the
sign of the coefficient on negative earnings surprise changes with the inclusion of firm
fixed effects and the magnitude of the absolute value of the estimate increases
considerably with the addition of the lagged or lead values of the surprise. In column 3,
our preferred specification which includes current and one lag of earnings surprise, we
find that returns that are ten percentage points below expected decrease the likelihood of
a special meeting by only .0004 percentage points, an impact that is nearly an order of
magnitude smaller than that of the positive surprise.

        As we discussed previously, special meetings must be called with at least 10-60
days anticipation depending on state. By the time that managers realize that earnings will
be better than expected, it may be too late to legally schedule a meeting within the current
quarter. Therefore it is not surprising that we see that there is a smaller positive
significant impact of a one quarter lagged positive earnings surprise on the likelihood of a
special meeting in the current quarter. Interestingly, there is a smaller but yet still
significant positive impact of lagged negative earnings surprises on the likelihood of a
special meeting in the current quarter. We present evidence later that this finding is
consistent with some of the better managed firms, calling a special meeting following bad
news perhaps in order to get ahead of the problem. Given the 10-60 days advanced notice
needed, it is comforting that we see no significant impact of twice lagged earnings
surprise (positive or negative) on the likelihood of a special meeting.

        One concern is that our findings could simply represent concurrent trends.
Companies that are doing better than expected are simply more likely to call special
meetings. If that were the case, then the lead of the positive surprise should also predict a
special meeting in the current quarter. We examine this possibility in column 5. We find
that the lead of the positive surprise actually has a negative association with special
meeting probability. (Both leads of the negative earnings surprise and the second lead of
the positive earnings surprise enter with very small coefficients and have no significant
association with the occurrence of a special meeting.) Thus it does not appear that our
results simply reflect concurrent trends.

11
        A second concern is that our findings could be driven by earnings manipulation,
and therefore, that the causality runs from meeting to positive earnings surprise rather
than reverse. (This is akin to the political business cycle in the political economy
literature, whereby politicians are thought to manipulate fiscal or monetary policy to
produce more favorable economic conditions leading up to an election.8) While the
possibility of earnings manipulation should be factored into the forecast, and therefore
not reflected in the earnings surprise, we present empirical evidence to support this
supposition. If earnings manipulation is at play, we should see similar results when the
outcome is an annual meeting. For annual meetings, the possibility of causation running
from earnings to meeting time is nonexistent because annual meeting dates are largely
fixed from year to year. Thus if our story is correct and the meetings are called in
response to the surprise, we should see no impact of earnings surprises on annual
meetings. And this is in fact what we find in the final column of the table; coefficients on
our surprise variables show no economically or statistically significant association with
the occurrence of an annual meeting.9

        We further investigate the possibility of earnings manipulation in Appendix Table
4 in which we add a variable on discretionary accruals to our basic timing and content
specifications.10 In the first column, we run our basic model predicting the incidence of
special meetings on the limited sample, for which we have discretionary accruals data.
Our basic result is weaker in this sample. A ten percent increase in positive surprise
increases the likelihood of a special meeting by only an insignificant .001 percentage
points. Lagged positive surprise is a stronger predictor in this sample, a ten percent
increase in this variable increases the likelihood of a special meeting by .006 percentage
points. The key finding in this table, however, is that neither the addition of discretionary
accruals (column 2) or lagged discretionary accruals (column 3) changes any of the
earnings surprise findings to the third decimal place. The coefficient on discretionary
accruals is small and insignificant. Thus in the horse race between surprise earnings and
manipulated earnings, surprise earnings are clearly the better predictor of special
meetings.

        We interpret the results of Table 2, therefore, as indicating that positive earnings
surprises causally increase the likelihood of managers’ calling special meetings. We note
that our results are robust to modeling earnings surprises as simply two dummy variables
for the presence of a positive or negative earnings surprise. Results are also robust to

8
  Empirical evidence for such a cycle has been mixed, although Nordhaus (1975) finds evidence for the
case of the United States as do Akhemedov and Zhuravskaya (2004) for Russia.
9
  Results are robust to filling in missing annual meetings based on the timing in an adjacent year.
10
   Discretionary accruals are calculated following the Modified Jones method, as described in Dechow,
Sloan, and Sweeney (1995). We calculate total accruals as change in current assets over quarter minus
change in total liabilities over quarter minus change in cash and short term investments over quarter. We
then run a regression for each industry quarter of total accruals on a constant, the change in revenues minus
the change in total receivables and current net property plant and equipment. All variables in the regression,
including the constant, are normalized by lagged assets. We call the predicted total accruals based on these
regressions the non-discretionary accruals. We subtract non-discretionary accruals from total accruals to
obtain discretionary accruals.

12
splitting the sample by time period. Further, our basic result is robust to substituting
simple stock returns for earnings surprise. While the earnings surprise results can be more
readily interpreted as causal, given that positive earnings surprises are not always
associated with positive stock returns, it is comforting to see in Table 3 that as stock
returns increase, so does the likelihood of a special meeting. Both current and lagged
stock returns are positively associated with special meeting incidence. Current industry
level returns are an even greater (by an order of magnitude) predictor of special meetings.
Neither current nor lagged stock returns are associated with the occurrence of annual
meetings.11


     4.2.         Are Bad Governance Propositions More Frequent after Good Returns?

        Having demonstrated that earnings surprises predict special meetings, we next ask
whether earnings surprises also predict the items that management proposes in these
special meetings. We run models of the form of equation 1 in which we replace the
special meeting indicator for an indicator for a special meeting with at least one bad (for
shareholders) proposal. As explained earlier, the coding of bad versus good proposals is
based on the IRRC recommendation.12 As Column (1) of Table 4 shows, following a ten
percent positive earnings surprise, management is .002 percentage points more likely to
call a special meeting with a bad proposal. Column 2 demonstrates that this result is
robust to the inclusion of lagged earnings surprise. Recall that following the same ten
percent surprise, management is .003 percentage points more likely to call a special
meeting. The coefficient on lagged positive earnings surprise in this specification is 2/3
of the magnitude of the coefficient in the meeting specification of Table 2. Thus the
results of Table 4 indicate that 2/3 of those meetings induced by a positive earnings
surprise include a measure that is bad for shareholders. In contrast, only 10% of special
meetings in our analysis sample overall contain a proposal that is bad for shareholders.
Recall that over 90 percent of proposals pass and that figure climbs to 96 percent for bad
proposals at special meetings. So the results indicate that following a positive earnings
surprise, management is more likely to call a special meeting in which they pass a
proposal that is bad for shareholders.13

       Once again we find an asymmetry in the reaction to positive and negative
earnings surprises. As shown in columns 3 and 4, we find no significant impact of
negative earnings surprises (contemporaneous or lagged) on the incidence of special
meetings with bad proposals. Coefficients are at least an order of magnitude smaller than


11
   Dimitrov and Jain (2011) find significantly positive returns forty days before annual meetings. Given the
insignificant positive coefficients in our stock return specification and the difference in window (40 days
versus one quarter), our results do not directly contradict theirs. In fact, given the potential endogeneity of
stock returns, we focus on our earnings surprise specifications for causal interpretation.
12
   In order to focus only on propositions where timing is driven by management and not by external events,
we do not include takeover related propositions in the content analysis.
13
   Specifications predicting bad proposals that pass produce similar results. And as we demonstrate in
Appendix Table 4, there is no evidence of earnings manipulation prior to special meetings with bad
proposals.

13
coefficients on positive earnings surprise. Nor do we find an impact of either positive or
negative earnings surprises on the incidence of good proposals.

        Our findings thus far indicate that positive earnings surprises result in an
increased likelihood of special meetings, and in particular, an increased incidence of
special meetings at which managers propose (and pass) measures that are bad for
shareholders. One remaining question is the economic significance of these findings. Is
this increase in management discretion meaningful? We next measure the economic
significance in terms of the well known GIM-Index (Gompers et. al, 2003) which can be
thought of as a de jure measure of shareholder power. It awards a point for each
governance provision in the firm’s charter that reduces shareholder rights. A higher score
on the GIM-Index indicates greater management power at the expense of the power of
shareholders. In the fifth column of the table we run models of the form of equation 1, in
which the outcome is the firm’s score on the GIM Index and an observation is a firm-year
(instead of firm-quarter) because the GIM Index is an annual measure. Mirroring our
results on bad governance proposals, we see that a positive surprise is associated with a
significant increase in the GIM Index. There is no significant change in the GIM Index in
a year in which there is a negative earnings surprise. Thus the results of column five
demonstrate that our management proposals correspond to meaningful changes to
corporate governance quality.

        While the timing of the annual meeting is arguably exogenous, the content of the
meeting is not. In the remaining columns of the table, we investigate whether earnings
surprises predict the items that appear on the ballot in annual meetings. We return to
firm-quarters as our unit of observation; we limit focus on those firm-quarters in which
there is an annual meeting. We then run models of the form of equation 1, employing an
indicator for an annual meeting with a bad (good) proposal as the dependent variable.
And we note that we are not missing any annual meetings with bad or good proposals.
The missing meetings’ proposals would all be coded as neutral. As demonstrated in
columns 6-7, there is no evidence that firms are significantly more likely to include either
good or bad proposals on an annual meeting ballot following an earnings surprise.

     4.3.        Does the Overall Governance Level of the Firm Matter?

    Our findings in the last section indicate that positive earnings surprises result in an
increased likelihood of special meetings, and in particular, an increased incidence of
special meetings at which managers propose (and pass) measures that are bad for
shareholders. We now investigate which types of firms are driving our findings. In
particular, we ask whether managers in well or poorly governed firms are more likely to
call special meetings in response to positive earnings surprises. We recognize that there is
an array of governance measures available. We choose the two most frequently employed
in the corporate governance literature: 1) We use the GIM-Index (Gompers et. al, 2003)
that we employed in Table 4.14 2) We measure the extent to which there are activist large
shareholders amongst a firm’s investors. For this analysis, we use the block shareholder

14
  Because we do not have index data for all of our firms, we lose about twenty percent of our sample in the
GIM-index analysis.

14
data collected by Cronqvist and Fahlenbrach (2009) in which activist shareholders are
defined as “shareholders who announce their intention of influencing firm policies at the
time of the block purchase or who are known for activist policies in the past”.15

        We first divide our firms into two groups based on their average GIM-Index in the
three years prior to our sample period. We label firms with a GIM-Index greater than nine
(median governance) as poorly governed firms. We label the remainder as well governed.
Our results are robust to alternative cutoffs for poorly and well governed. Regardless of
cutoff, this classification is based on the average GIM-index in the three years prior to the
start of our sample period in order to minimize mechanical correlation. In Table 5, we
rerun the analyses of Tables 2 and 4 by governance quality. Poorly (well) governed firms
appear in the odd (even) columns. The first two columns demonstrate that our finding of
an increased likelihood of a special meeting in the quarter of a positive earnings surprise
is driven by poorly governed firms. The coefficient on this variable in the poorly
governed sample is .0774 and significant at the 1% level, while in the well governed
sample the coefficient is an insignificant -.0142. However, when we examine the
coefficients on the lags, we do see that there is a significant increase in special meetings
in the quarter following a positive surprise and (to a much lesser, but still significant
extent) a negative surprise in the well governed firms. We present only the once lagged
specification for parsimony. However, results are robust to the inclusion of a second lag.
Both the positive and negative second lags enter insignificantly. In columns 3 and 4, we
present our robustness check by analyzing whether annual meetings are more likely to be
set up after good earnings surprises. For neither type of firms do earnings surprises
predict the timing of annual meetings.

        While we find that both poor and, to a lesser extent, well governed firms call
special meetings endogenously with respect to earnings surprises, we demonstrate in the
remainder of the table that only poorly governed firms are more likely to put bad
governance items on the ballot in response to that same surprise. In column 5 of the table,
the coefficient of .0514 indicates that when earnings are ten percent higher than expected,
firms are .005 percentage points more likely to call a special meeting in which they
propose an item that is bad for shareholders. Comparing this result to the .0774
coefficient in the special meeting specifications, this suggests that for the poorly
governed sample, as in the full sample, 2/3 of those special meetings that are induced by
positive earnings surprises contain a bad proposal. We find no impact of a negative
concurrent earnings surprise on the frequency of special meetings with bad proposals. We
do find, however, consistent with our earlier findings, that lagged positive surprise has a
smaller positive impact on the likelihood of a bad special meeting. We further find a
positive significant impact of lagged negative earnings surprise; however, this result is
economically insignificant as it is more than an order of magnitude smaller than our
positive earnings surprise main effect. As for good proposals, we do find some evidence
of an increase following a lagged positive earnings surprise. We also find a positive
significant relationship between negative concurrent earnings surprise and good
proposals, but this result is economically insignificant. Previewing our large shareholder

15
  The authors cite Carl Icahn, Warren Buffet, and the Bass brothers as examples of individual activists.
They further note that there are public and private pension funds that they classify as activist.

15
results, none of the good proposal results are robust across definitions of management
quality.

        In contrast to the poorly governed firms, in the well governed sample we find no
predictive power of earnings surprise for special meetings with either good or bad items.
To the extent that these firms are more likely to call special meetings following positive,
and to some extent negative earnings, it does not seem to be for the purpose of passing
proposals that will limit shareholder power. Therefore, we conclude that the results of
Table 5 indicate that our findings of an increased likelihood of special meetings (that
contain bad for shareholder proposals) are driven by poorly managed firms.

        We provide additional evidence to support our contention that results are driven
by poorly managed firms by turning to our alternative governance measure: the
prevalence of activist shareholders. We calculate two such measures of well governed
firms: 1) We define well governed firms that have at least one activist shareholder who
owns at least 5% of the firm’s equity. 2) Our alternative measure of good governance is
that the company had at least 10% of their equity held by activist shareholders.16 We
define these measures over the three years prior to the first year in which the firm appears
in our dataset.

        Across the two measures, we find evidence that our principal finding of increased
likelihood of a special meeting, and in particular, a special meeting with a bad proposal,
is driven by poorly governed firms. In Table 6, results for poorly (well) governed firms
are found in even (odd) columns. The first two columns are the 5% activist specification,
and the second two columns are the 10% activist specification. By either measure, we see
that a positive significant relationship between concurrent positive earnings surprise and
the presence of a special meeting exists only for the poorly governed firms. Although we
see some indication that well governed firms are more likely to call special meetings
following a quarter with a positive earnings surprise (coefficient on lagged earnings
surprise is positive significant), we once again find no evidence that the better governed
firms are more likely to put bad items on the ballot in response to an earnings surprise.17
Table 7 examines the endogeneity of ballot content with respect to earnings surprises. We
find that by either definition, poorly managed firms (but not well managed firms) are
more likely to call a special meeting with a bad item in a quarter of positive earnings
surprise. 18

        The finding that our bad item results are driven by the more poorly governed
firms is also robust to following the ISS (vote by vote) coding instead of the IRRC issue
by issue coding. (Please see Appendix Table 5 for these results.) After demonstrating in
the first two columns of the table that our meeting timing results hold in this slightly

16
   Results are robust to using 5 and 20% as the cutoffs.
17
   While we do not table the result in the interest of parsimony, for neither firm type do we find a
significant relationship between earnings surprises and the timing of annual meetings.
18
   Hung, Kuang, and Gorton (2009) note another interesting difference in the behavior of well and poorly
managed firms. The authors argue that private information is more valuable in a corporation with bad
governance because that private information will not be acted on by the company.

16
smaller sample for which ISS recommendations are available, we show in column 3 that
lagged positive surprises predict bad ballot items, but that contemporary positive
surprises do not significantly predict bad ballot items; in fact the coefficient is negative.
However, in the remaining columns of the table, we break the sample into well and
poorly governed firms. Once again, we see larger coefficients on positive surprises (both
contemporary and lagged) for poorly governed firms (as measured by the either the GIM
or activist measures) than for well-governed firms. Note that there is no analogous good
specification here as there is no neutral classification under the ISS guidelines; proposals
that are not bad, are good. 19

     5. Discussion and Conclusion

        Our results demonstrate the endogeneity of special meetings and special meeting
content with respect to firm performance. Positive earnings surprises increase the
likelihood of a special meeting being called in the current or following quarter. More
notably, these surprises increase the incidence of special meetings in which management
proposes items that hurt shareholder interests either by reducing shareholder power or by
increasing rents to management. As we note in the background section, these bad
management proposals have a passage rate of 96 percent in special meetings. And their
passage leads to meaningful changes in corporate governance quality as measured by the
GIM-Index. The fact that our findings are driven by companies that are labeled as poorly
managed, according to both the GIM-Index and the fraction of activist shareholders,
suggests that managers may be strategically timing when to propose bad governance
measures in order to have the greatest chance of getting them approved. A positive
earnings surprise does not predict the incidence of an annual meeting or the meeting
content, conditional on occurrence. But yet these same surprises predict the timing and
content of low turnout, high passage rate special meetings. In special meetings, bad items
are nearly twice as likely (as compared to annual meetings) to be bundled with other
items in a single proposal, a strategy that Bethel and Gillam (2000) suggest managers
employ to pass less popular items.

        But the shareholder behavior is more difficult to interpret. Are shareholders
allowing these bad proposals to pass in order to reward management for the better than
expected earnings? Hermalin and Weisbach (1999) propose that if top managers value
discretion over the firm, shareholders might be willing to loosen governance oversight if
they learn that the CEO is of high quality and delivers positive returns. Turning to the
political economy literature, we might think of allowing these proposals to pass as a form
of retrospective voting first noted by Key (1966), in which voters reward or punish
incumbents based on past performance. The alternative hypothesis is that shareholders
simply become less attentive when times are good, and therefore, the passage of these
bad proposals is not intentional on the part of shareholders.

19
   We do find some significant coefficients on lagged negative earnings surprises for both types of firms,
but coefficients are small and economically insignificant. While there is little evidence that either type of
firm is more likely to put good items on the ballot in response to earnings shocks, there is a negative
significant coefficient in the 5% good specification for poorly managed firms. But this finding is not robust
across definitions of governance quality.

17
        While we cannot definitively rule out either of these stories, we can provide
evidence in support of the hypothesis that shareholder inattention affects the timing and
content of special meetings. First, as we show in the results section, there is an
asymmetry between good and bad earnings surprises. If more or less managerial
discretion were granted as a reward for performance, we would also expect to see a
punishment for poor performance. However, we do not observe a decrease in managerial
discretion following poor performance. This leaves the possibilities that there is no
punishment, or that the punishment comes in some other form that we do not observe in
our data. Second, the results in Table 2 show that following a quarter in which there is a
special meeting, we see no additional earnings surprise. In fact, in the quarter following
the special meeting, the firm is less likely to post a positive earnings surprise. Now,
analysts might have updated their priors so higher earnings are no longer a surprise; but
even in the simple stock returns specifications we see that, if anything, returns are
negative following special meetings.20 This decline in earnings is consistent with Smith
(2003) who argues that elections are called when performance is at its peak. Thus the
increased discretion awarded by bad governance proposals does not translate into
increased stock returns (at least in the short term). Again, this is not dispositive evidence
of shareholder inattention, but it suggests at the least that if shareholders are granting
greater discretion because of increased confidence in management’s abilities, that
increased confidence is misplaced. Our final piece of suggestive evidence is that bad
governance items seem designed in a manner to subvert attention: As we discuss in the
background section, they are frequently packaged into multi-item proposals, particularly
when they appear in special meetings, and are found on ballots that are significantly
longer than ballots that do not include bad items.

        While the paucity of special meetings may mean that this is not a channel that
leads to frequent changes in governance provisions, we note that the larger economic
significance of this work is in the proof of concept by identifying a mechanism by which
corporate governance worsens. Our findings suggest that firms’ governance structures are
importantly shaped by endogenous forces such as firm performance. Managers use times
of good firm performance to pass ballot items that hurt shareholder interest. Moreover,
this margin seems to be more easily exploited in firms that already have weaker
governance mechanisms. It is interesting to note that in the vast majority of cases,
propositions which are passed under a particular management team do not expire once
the management retires. Since governance structures do not “reset” at the end of a CEO’s
term, they limit shareholder power going forward. Thus the seeds of bad governance
seem to be sown in good times.




20
   Similarly, Cuñat, Gine, and Guadalupe (forthcoming) find that the passage of a shareholder proposal—
which increases shareholder’s power at the expense of management’s-- causes an increase in firm value.
However, Karpoff, Matesta, and Walkling (1996) find no impact of the passage of shareholder proposals on
firm performance.

18
        TABLES

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                           Annual           Special
                                                           Meetings         Meetings
Number of Meetings                                         7924             1164
Number of Proposals                                        13868            1688
Numbers Shareholder Proposals                              2498             1
Number Management Proposals                                11370            1687
  Percent of Proposals with More than One Item             20%              30%
  Turnout (Management Proposals)1                          83%              78%
  Passage Rate (Management Proposals)                      95%              99%
Number Bad Management Proposals                            500 (4%)         92 (5%)
  Percent of Proposals with More than One Item             29%              58%
  Passage Rate                                             90%              96%
Number Good Management proposals                           4149 (36%)       247 (15%)
  Percent of Proposals with More than One Item             36%              15%
  Passage Rate                                             95%              97%
Passage rates do not include 73 management proposals, for which information is missing.
1
  Turnout is only available for the 24% of sample votes whose decision rule is a function of votes
outstanding.




19
Table 2: Impact of Abnormal Returns on Meeting Timing
                      (1)         (2)          (3)                         (4)              (5)             (6)
                    Special     Special      Special                     Special          Special          Annual
 Outcome:          Meeting     Meeting      Meeting                      Meeting          Meeting          Meeting

PosSurprise     0.0341**  0.0295*** 0.0273*** 0.0310*** 0.0355***                                         -0.00965
                 (0.0150)  (0.00806)  (0.00818)  (0.00819)  (0.00821)                                      (0.0193)
NegSurprise   0.000606*** -0.000853 0.00351*** 0.00335*** 0.00301***                                      -0.00127
               (0.000192) (0.000743) (0.00118)   (0.00118)  (0.00122)                                     (0.00278)
PosSurprise1                          0.0165**   0.0174**                                                   0.0221
                                      (0.00843)  (0.00852)                                                 (0.0198)
NegSurprise1                         0.00480*** 0.00523***                                                 -0.00188
                                      (0.00163)  (0.00191)                                                (0.00384)
Pos Surprise2                                     -0.00990
                                                 (0.00890)
NegSurprise2                                      -0.00112
                                                 (0.00192)
Pos Lead 1                                                 -0.0124***
                                                            (0.00747)
Neg Lead 1                                                    -0.0007
                                                             (0.0006)
Pos Lead 2                                                   -0.00019
                                                            (0.00178)
Neg Lead 2                                                  -.0006728
                                                           (0.000818)
                               -
Annual Meet    -0.0287*** 0.0181*** -0.0183*** -0.0180*** -0.0145***
                (0.00249)  (0.00254)  (0.00255)  (0.00254)   -0.00232
Quarter F.E.        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes                                          Yes
Year F.E.           Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes                                          Yes
Firm F.E.           No        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes                                          Yes
Observations      30621      30621      30547      30405       30621                                        30547
R-squared          0.012     0.126      0.126       0.127      0.121                                        0.411
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super
1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small cap firms). Only firms for which ISS collects data for at least three years
are included in our sample. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a special meeting in the quarter
and zero otherwise. PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is constructed as the positive (negative) earnings surprise of quarterly
earnings over the analysts’ consensus forecast. PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter lagged earning surprise.
Parallel for NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one quarter lead earnings surprise. Annual Meet is a
dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors, clustered
at the firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




20
Table 3: Stock Market Returns and Meeting Timing
                     (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
 VARIABLES dspecialm            dspecialm    dspecialm   dspecialm    dspecialm     dspecialm    dannualm     dannualm

Stock returns     0.00683     0.00447**     0.00423**    0.00484***   0.00474***   0.00415***     0.00638      0.00522
                 (0.00454)    (0.00177)     (0.00178)     (0.00178)    (0.00178)    (0.00166)    (0.00415)    (0.00419)
Lagged stock
returns                                                  0.00391***   0.00385***                               0.00192
                                                          (0.00106)    (0.00106)                              (0.00248)
Twice lagged
stock returns                                             0.00138      0.00118                               -0.00772***
                                                         (0.00105)    (0.00105)                                (0.00246)
Industry level
stock returns                                 0.0416                   0.0570**                   -0.0200      0.0514
                                             (0.0255)                  (0.0272)                  (0.0597)     (0.0639)
Lagged
industry level
stock returns                                                           0.0160                                -0.0552
                                                                       (0.0229)                               (0.0537)
Twice lagged
industry level
stock returns                                                          0.0627**                               0.196***
                                                                       (0.0259)                               (0.0607)
Lead stock
returns                                                                            -0.00445***
                                                                                     (0.00166)
Twice led
stock returns                                                                       -0.00267
                                                                                    (0.00158)


21
dannualm            -0.0304***        -0.0188***        -0.0188***        -0.0182***       -0.0183***        -0.0113***
                     (0.00254)         (0.00251)         (0.00251)         (0.00251)        (0.00251)         (0.00194)
Quarter F.E.            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Year F.E.               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Firm F.E.                No               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations           32020             32020             32020             31633            31633             30888             32020             31633
R-squared              0.012             0.141             0.141             0.143            0.143             0.121             0.408             0.408
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small
cap firms). Only firms for which ISS collects data for at least three years are included in our sample. Stock returns are calculated as the change in the stock
price from period t-1 to period t normalized by the price at t-1. The Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero
otherwise. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




22
Table 4: Impact of Abnormal Returns on Meeting Agenda
                           (1)           (2)          (3)                              (4)             (5)                 (6)              (7)
                          Bad            Bad        Good                             Good           GIM Index             Bad             Good
                        Proposal      Proposal     Proposal                         Proposal                            Proposal         Proposal
                        (Special       (Special    (Special                         (Special                            (Annual          (Annual
 Outcome:               Meeting)      Meeting)     Meeting)                         Meeting)                            Meeting)         Meeting)

 PosSurprise                 0.0174***         0.0211***          -0.00219          -0.00295       0.3134652**          0.00947           -0.0317
                              (0.00232)         (0.00234)         (0.00320)         (0.00325)      (0.1497526)          (0.0547)          (0.104)
 NegSurprise                    0.000           0.000398          0.000291          0.000435        -0.006338           -0.00893           0.0145
                             (0.000214)        (0.000338)        (0.000295)        (0.000470)      (0.0129998)          (0.0153)          (0.0290)
 PosSurprise 1                                 0.0114***                             0.00389                           -0.0260             0.0921
                                                (0.00241)                           (0.00335)                           (0.0446)          (0.0847)
 NegSurprise1                                   -0.000620                          -0.000227                             0.0269            0.0691*
                                               (0.000466)                          (0.000648)                           (0.0210)          (0.0399)
 Annual Meet                 -0.0888***        -0.0881***        -0.201***         -0.201***
                              (0.00177)         (0.00177)        (0.00245)          (0.00246)
 Special Meet

 Quarter F.E.                    Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes                No                Yes              Yes
 Year F.E.                       Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes
 Firm F.E.                       Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes
 Observations                   30621             30547             30621            30547              7656              7454             7454
 R-squared                      0.182             0.181             0.285            0.285             0.9234             0.348            0.180
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small
cap firms). The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a special meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is
constructed as the positive (negative) earnings surprise of quarterly earnings over the analysts’ consensus forecast. PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter
lagged earning surprise. Parallel for NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one quarter lead earnings surprise. Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if




23
there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1




24
Table 5: Impact of Abnormal Returns on Meeting Timing and Agenda, by Governance Quality (GIM Index)
                      (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)
                 Special     Special      Annual       Annual         Bad       Bad         Good      Good
                 Meeting     Meeting      Meeting      Meeting     Proposal  Proposal     Proposal  Proposal
                                                                   (Special   (Special     (Special (Special
 Outcome:                                                         Meeting)   Meeting)     Meeting)  Meeting)
                  Gindex>9    Gindex<9 Gindex>9 Gindex<9 Gindex>9 Gindex<9 Gindex>9 Gindex<9
 PosSurprise      0.0774***     -0.0142     -0.0362    0.0147    0.0514*** -0.00374       -0.00208  -0.00429
                   (0.0125)     (0.0112)   (0.0280) (0.0273) (0.00347) (0.00397) (0.00477) (0.00567)
 NegSurprise       -0.00192  0.00529*** -0.00490 0.00132           2.64e-05  0.000581     0.00147*  0.000423
                  (0.00216)    (0.00152) (0.00486) (0.00372) (0.000602) (0.000465) (0.000826) (0.000663)
 PosSurprise1      -0.00143   0.0387***     0.0323     0.00884 0.0163*** -0.00560         0.0116**  -0.00314
                   (0.0127)     (0.0118)   (0.0284) (0.0287) (0.00353) (0.00428) (0.00484) (0.00610)
 NegSurprise1      -0.00338  0.00713*** 0.000631 -0.00500 0.00209* -0.000897 -0.000126 -0.000450
                  (0.00442)    (0.00202) (0.00992) (0.00492) (0.00123) (0.000617) (0.00168) (0.000880)
 Annual Meet -0.0143*** -0.0138***                               0.0844*** 0.0882*** -0.184*** -0.222***
                  (0.00302)    (0.00261)                          (0.00267) (0.00274) (0.00366) (0.00391)
 Year F.E.            Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
 Firm F.E.            Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
 Observations       12815        17208       12815      17208       12815      13233        12815     13233
 R-squared           0.117       0.137       0.469      0.378        0.195     0.198        0.256     0.327
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid
cap, 600 small cap firms). The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a special meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise.
PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is constructed as the positive (negative) earnings surprise of quarterly earnings over the analysts’ consensus forecast.
PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter lagged earning surprise. Parallel for NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one quarter lead
earnings surprise. Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




25
Table 6: Impact of Abnormal Returns on Meeting Timing, by Governance Quality
(Activist Shareholders)
                      (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)
                    Special     Special        Special       Special
 VARIABLES         Meeting     Meeting        Meeting       Meeting
                                no 5%                         <10%
                 5% activist    activist  >=10% activist     activist
 PosSurprise      -0.00161   0.0910***        -0.0160      0.0561***
                   (0.0105)    (0.0154)       (0.0139)      (0.0109)
 NegSurprise     0.00440***    0.00722     -0.00548***      -0.00327
                  (0.00129)   (0.00965)      (0.00173)     (0.00204)
 PosSurprise1 0.0334***       -0.00502       0.0489***      -0.00346
                   (0.0108)    (0.0148)       (0.0141)      (0.0114)
 NegSurprise1 0.00602***       0.00214      0.00763***     -0.000829
                  (0.00180)    (0.0102)      (0.00228)     (0.00490)
                                                                -
 dannualm        -0.0201*** -0.00766        -0.0210***     0.0163***
                  (0.00291)   (0.00668)      (0.00412)     (0.00351)

Year F.E.               Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes
Quarter F.E.            Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes
Firm F.E.               Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes
Observations           23183            4284               11821               15646
R-squared              0.116            0.123              0.119               0.115
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS,
which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small cap firms).
Only firms for which ISS collects data for at least three years are included in our
sample. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a special meeting in
the quarter and zero otherwise. PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is constructed as the positive
(negative) earnings surprise of quarterly earnings over the analysts’ consensus forecast.
PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter lagged earning surprise. Parallel for
NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one quarter lead earnings surprise.
Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and
zero otherwise. We follow Cronquist and Fahlenbrach (2009) in defining activist
shareholders. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are shown in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




26
Table 7: Impact of Abnormal Returns on Meeting Agenda, by Governance Quality (Activist Shareholders)
                       (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)                                       (7)               (8)
                      Bad           Bad            Bad           Bad        Good             Good                                      Good              Good
                    Proposal     Proposal       Proposal      Proposal     Proposal        Proposal                                  Proposal          Proposal
                    (Special     (Special       (Special      (Special     (Special        (Special                                  (Special          (Special
 VARIABLES         Meeting)      Meeting)      Meeting)      Meeting)     Meeting)         Meeting)                                 Meeting)          Meeting)
                                  no 5%           >10%          <10%                        no 5%                                      >10%              <10%
                  5% activist     activist       activist      activist  5% activist        activist                                  activist          activist
 PosSurprise       -0.00330    0.0730***       -0.00457     0.0410***      0.00391       -0.0201***                                  0.00218          -0.00608
                   (0.00299)    (0.00515)      (0.00393)     (0.00333)    (0.00421)       (0.00607)                                 (0.00588)         (0.00417)
 NegSurprise       0.000561     0.000224      0.000869*      0.000362     0.000692         -0.00243                                 0.000838          0.000467
                  (0.000370)    (0.00321)     (0.000488)    (0.000619)   (0.000521)       (0.00378)                                (0.000731)        (0.000776)
 PosSurprise1      -0.00485      -0.00723      -0.00581    -0.00898***     0.00393        -0.000144                                  0.00480           0.00216
                   (0.00310)    (0.00494)      (0.00399)     (0.00346)    (0.00436)       (0.00582)                                 (0.00597)         (0.00434)
 NegSurprise1 -0.00105**       0.00737**     -0.00146**     0.00298**    -0.000653         0.00211                                 -0.000884           6.90e-05
                  (0.000515)    (0.00338)     (0.000645)     (0.00149)   (0.000725)       (0.00399)                                (0.000965)         (0.00187)
 dannualm        -0.0863***     -0.138***    -0.0857***     -0.101***    -0.209***        -0.193***                                -0.232***         -0.185***
                   (0.00202)    (0.00561)      (0.00279)     (0.00263)    (0.00284)       (0.00661)                                 (0.00418)         (0.00330)

Yeah F.E.               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Quarter F.E.            Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Firms F.E.              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Observations           23183              4284              11821             15646              23183              4284              11821             15646
R-squared              0.175              0.278             0.185             0.193              0.289              0.247             0.313             0.254
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small cap
firms). Only firms for which ISS collects data for at least three years are included in our sample. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a
special meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is constructed as the positive (negative) earnings surprise of quarterly earnings over
the analysts’ consensus forecast. PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter lagged earning surprise. Parallel for NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one
quarter lead earnings surprise. Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. We follow Cronquist and



27
Fahlenbrach (2009) in defining activist shareholders. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




28
Appendix Table 1: Coding of Proposals in Our Dataset
Bad Proposals                                          Good Proposals
Stock
Authorize or increase authorized preferred stock       Decrease or cancel authorized preferred stock
Authorize dual class stock                             Eliminate dual class stock
Approve issuance/conversion

Voting
Eliminate cumulative voting                            Adopt cumulative voting
Adopt supermajority requirement                        Eliminate supermajority requirement
Adopt supermajority lock in                            Restore written consent
Eliminate or limit written consent                     Allow internet voting
                                                       Eliminate preemptive rights

Special Meetings
Eliminate or limit special meetings                    Restore right to call special meeting

Board of Directors
Approve classified board                               Repeal classified board
No shareholder approval to fill vacancy                Approval of board size
                                                       Adopt director liability provision
                                                       Allow board to set director fees
Compensation
Adopt or redeem poison pill                            Approve long-term bonus plan
Extend term of stock option plan                       Adopt stock option plan
                                                       Limit annual awards
                                                       Adopt deferred compensation plan
                                                       Adopt advance notice requirement
Restructuring
                                                       Approve restructuring/leveraged buyout
                                                       Approve governance agreement
Other
Opt out of state takeover law                          Ratify auditors
Exchange underwater options




29
Appendix Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, by Time Period
                                                        1997-2000                 2001-2002                 2003-2004
                                               Annual        Special       Annual       Special      Annual       Special
                                               Meetings      Meetings      Meetings     Meetings     Meetings     Meetings
Number of Meetings                                    4218             910       1946            182       1760             72
Number of Proposals                                   7292           1315        3203            270       3373            103
Numbers Shareholder Proposals                         1089               1         557             0         852             0
Number Management Proposals                           6203           1314        2646            270       2521            103
   Percent of Proposals with More than                 26%            32%         20%           25%          5%           15%
One Item
   Turnout (Management Proposals)1                     83%            78%         83%           79%         84%           81%
   Passage Rate (Management Proposals)                 99%            99%         97%           96%         85%         100%
Number Bad Management Proposals                   281 (5%)        62 (5%)    122 (5%)      20 (7%)      97 (4%)     10 (10%)
   Percent of Proposals with More than                 36%            63%         25%           50%         16%           40%
One Item
   Passage Rate                                        89%            95%         91%           95%         93%         100%
Number Good Management proposals                2249 (36%)      198 (15%)   890 (34%)     34 (13%) 1010 (40%)       15 (15%)
   Percent of Proposals with More than                 44%            42%         33%           21%          8%            7%
One Item
   Passage Rate                                        99%            98%         97%           91%         86%         100%




30
Appendix Table 3: Descriptive Statistics, by Asset Size
                                                   Bottom Asset Tercile       Middle Asset Tercile      Top Asset Tercile
                                               Annual        Special        Annual      Special      Annual      Special
                                               Meetings      Meetings       Meetings    Meetings     Meetings    Meetings
Number of Meetings                                     2827             322       2662           359       2375           341
Number of Proposals                                    4416             447       4483           558       4865           529
Numbers Shareholder Proposals                            243              0         541            1       1690             0
Number Management Proposals                            4173             447       3942           557       3175           529
   Percent of Proposals with More than                  23%           28%          19%          30%         17%          37%
One Item
   Turnout (Management Proposals)1                      83%           80%          83%          78%         83%          78%
   Passage Rate (Management Proposals)                  97%           99%          97%          98%         92%          99%
Number Bad Management Proposals                    154(3%)         33(7%)     188 (5%)       36(6%)    154(5%)        23(4%)
   Percent of Proposals with More than                  31%           58%          30%          47%         28%          74%
One Item
   Passage Rate                                    80%                97%          93%          92%         97%         100%
Number Good Management proposals                1440(35%)         70(16%) 1446(37%)         89(16%) 1225(39%)       71(13%)
   Percent of Proposals with More than                  38%           43%          32%          39%         28%          31%
One Item
   Passage Rate                                         96%          100%          96%          94%         92%          97%
Sample size is smaller than in Table 1 because asset information is unavailable for some firms. Passage rates do not include 73 management proposals, for which
information is missing.
1
  Turnout is only available for the 24% of sample votes whose decision rule is a function of votes outstanding.




31
Appendix Table 4: Discretionary Accruals, Meeting Timing, and Content
                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                           Bad          Bad        Bad        Good        Good        Good
                                                        Proposal      Proposal   Proposal   Proposal    Proposal    Proposal
                  Special      Special      Special      Special       Special    Special    Special     Special     Special
 VARIABLES       Meeting       Meeting     Meeting      Meeting       Meeting    Meeting    Meeting     Meeting     Meeting

PosSurprise        0.0140     0.0139    0.0142           0.0004       0.0004      0.0007      0.0080     0.0081       0.0076
                  (0.0127)   (0.0127)  (0.0127)         (0.0038)     (0.0038)    (0.0038)   (0.0051)    (0.0051)    (0.0051)
NegSurprise     -0.0127*** -0.0126*** 0.0127***          0.0009       0.0009      0.0010*    -0.0001     0.0000      -0.0001
                 (0.00192)   (0.0019)  (0.0019)         (0.0006)     (0.0006)    (0.0006)   (0.0008)    (0.0007)    (0.0008)
PosSurprise1     0.0573*** 0.0574*** 0.0572***          0.0088**     0.0088**    0.0084**   -0.0101*    -0.0100*    -0.0101*
                  (0.0133)   (0.0133)  (0.0133)         (0.0050)     (0.0040)    (0.0040)   (0.0053)    (0.0053)      (0.01)
NegSurprise1     0.0183*** 0.0183*** 0.0182***          -0.0014*     -0.0014*    -0.0014*     0.0003     0.0003       0.0003
                 (0.00267)   (0.0027)  (0.0027)         (0.0008)     (0.0008)    (0.0008)   (0.0010)    (0.0011)    (0.0011)
Discretionary
Accruals                      -0.0005                                 0.0002                            -0.0003
                              (0.0004)                               (0.0001)                           (0.0002)
Lagged
discretionary
accruals                                 0.0006                           0.0001                                    0.0006***
                                        (0.0004)                         (0.0001)                                    (0.0002)
dannualm        -0.0138*** -0.0138*** -0.0142*** -0.0969*** -0.0969*** -0.0992***           -0.202***   -0.202***   -0.200***
                 (0.00260)   (0.0027)   (0.0026)   (0.0022)   (0.0022)   (0.0022)            (0.0030)    (0.0030)    (0.0030)
Constant         0.0208*** 0.0208*** 0.0212*** 0.0971*** 0.0971*** 0.0995***                 0.203***    0.203***    0.202***
                  (0.0036)   (0.0036)   (0.0036)   (0.0024)   (0.0024)   (0.0024)            (0.0032)    (0.0032)    (0.0032)




32
Observations           21320            21320           21299            21320            21320            21299            21320            21320            21299
R-squared              0.105            0.105           0.107            0.179            0.179            0.181            0.261            0.261            0.261
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small cap
firms). Only firms for which ISS collects data for at least three years are included in our sample. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a special
meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is constructed as the positive (negative) earnings surprise of quarterly earnings over the
analysts’ consensus forecast. PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter lagged earning surprise. Parallel for NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one quarter
lead earnings surprise. Discretionary accruals are calculated following the Modified Jones method, as described in Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney (1995). We
calculate total accruals as change in current assets over quarter minus change in total liabilities over quarter minus change in cash and short term investments over
quarter. We then run a regression for each industry quarter of total accruals on a constant, the change in revenues minus the change in total receivables and current
net property plant and equipment. All variables in the regression are normalized by lagged assets. We call the predicted total accruals based on these regressions the
non-discretionary accruals. We subtract non-discretionary accruals from total accruals to obtain discretionary accruals. Sample size is smaller than in Table 2 due to
missing discretionary accrual data. Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. Year, quarter, and firm
fixed effects are included in all specifications. Robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




33
Appendix Table 5: Robustness to ISS Coding
                        (1)           (2)                         (3)                (4)                (5)                  (6)                  (7)
                                                                                    Bad               Bad                                       Bad
                                                            Bad Proposal          Proposal          Proposal          Bad Proposal            Proposal
                            Special           Annual          (Special            (Special          (Special            (Special              (Special
 VARIABLES                  Medeting          Meeting        Meeting)             Meeting)          Meeting)           Meeting)               Meeting)
                                                                                                                                            no 5%
                                                                                gindex>9     gindex<9      >5% activist                     activist
 surposm                      0.0285***        -0.0182           -0.00139           0.00738       0.00289         -0.00365                       0.00556
                                (0.0090)      (0.0206)            (0.0035)          (0.0048)      (0.0062)         (0.0069)                      (0.0100)
 surnegm                    -0.00467***        -0.0034         0.00157**           -0.00141 0.00241***          0.00200**                       0.000827
                                (0.0017)      (0.0039)            (0.0007)          (0.0025)      (0.0008)         (0.0008)                      (0.0043)
 lsurposm1                     0.0232**         0.0231           0.00648*          0.0115**       0.00887          0.00237                       0.00461
                                (0.0093)      (0.0214)            (0.0036)          (0.0047)      (0.0069)         (0.0070)                      (0.0120)
 lsurnegm1                   0.00621***       0.00079        -0.00273***          -7.76E-05 -0.00383***       -0.00301***                      -0.000728
                                (0.0023)      (0.0052)            (0.0009)          (0.0019)      (0.0011)         (0.0011)                      (0.0048)
 dannualm                    -0.0199***                         -0.192***         -0.137***     -0.252***        -0.213***                     -0.120***
                                (0.0028)                          (0.0026)          (0.0036)      (0.0043)         (0.0036)                      (0.0049)

 Observations                       26203        26203               26203             10643              11684                    14748              4962
 R-squared                           0.127       0.381               0.276             0.216              0.344                    0.278             0.207
The unit of observation is a firm-quarter. Data on shareholder voting come from ISS, which covers the S&P Super 1500 (500 large cap, 400 mid cap, 600 small
cap firms). Only firms for which ISS collects data for at least three years are included in our sample. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if there is a
special meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. PosSurprise (NegSurprise) is constructed as the positive (negative) earnings surprise of quarterly earnings over
the analysts’ consensus forecast. PosSurprise 1(2) is the one (two) quarter lagged earning surprise. Parallel for NegSurprise 1(2). Pos Lead (Neg Lead) is the one
quarter lead earnings surprise. Annual Meet is a dummy equal to one if there is an annual meeting in the quarter and zero otherwise. Year, quarter, and firm fixed
effects are included in all specifications. We follow Cronquist and Fahlenbrach (2009) in defining activist shareholders. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
firm level, are shown in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




34
REFERENCES

Akmedov, A., Zhuravskaya, E. (2004). “Opportunistic Political Cycles: Test in A Young
Democracy Setting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics November, Vol. 119, No. 4: 1301–
1338.

Almazan, A., Hartzell, J., and Starks, L. (2005). “Active Institutional Shareholders and
Cost of Monitoring: Evidence from Executive Compensation.” Financial Management,
winter, 5-34.

Baker, M., Coval, J., and Stein, J. (2007). "Corporate financing decisions when investors
take the path of least resistance," Journal of Financial Economics, 84(2), 266-298.

Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., and Wang, C.C.Y. (2010). “Learning and the Disappearing
Association Between Governance and Returns.” NBER Working Paper Number 15912.

Bethel, J., Gillan, S. (2000). “Corporate Voting and the Proxy Process: Managerial
Control versus Shareholder Oversight.” SSRN Working Paper.

Bethel, J., Gillan, S. (2002). “The Impact of the Institutional and Regulatory Environment
on Shareholder Voting.” Financial Management, Vol. 31, No. 4, 29-54.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S. (2001), Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without
principles are, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 901-32.

Bertrand, M., Mullainathan, S. (2003), “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate and
Managerial Preferences,” Journal of Political Economy,111, 215.

Bhagat, S., Black, B.S. ”The Relationship Between Board Composition and Firm
Performance,” in Comparative Corporate Governance: The State of the Art and Emerging
Research, K. Hopt, M. Roe, and E. Wymeersch, eds. (Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, New
York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1998).

Bhagat, S., Bolton, B. (2008). "Corporate Governance and Firm Performance," Journal of
Corporate Finance, 14, 257-273.

Boone, A., Field, L., Karpof, J., and Raheja, C. (2007), “The determinants of corporate
board size and composition: An empirical analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 85,
1, 66-101.

Cargill, T., Hutchinson, M. (1991). “Political Business Cycles with Endogenous Election
Timing,” The Review of Economic and Statistics, 73, 4, 733-739.

Cowdhury, A. (1993). “Political Surfing over Economic Waves: Parliamentary Election
Timing in India,” American Journal of Political Science, 37, 4, 1100-1118.


35
Cremers, M., Ferrell, A. (2009), “Thirty Years of Shareholder Rights and Firm
Valuation,” CELS 2009 4th Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies Paper.

Cronqvist, H., Fahlenbrach, R. (2009), “Large Shareholders and Corporate Policies,”
Review of Financial Studies, 22, 3941-3976.

Cuñat, V., Gine, M., and Guadalupe, M. (forthcoming). “The Vote is Cast: The Effect of
Corporate Governance on Shareholder Value,” Journal of Finance.

Dechow, P., Sloan, R., and Sweeney, A. (2005). “Detecting Earnings Management.”
Accounting Review, 70, 2, 193-225.

Demsetz, D., Lehn, K. (1985), “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy 93-6, 1155-1177.

Dimitrov, V., Jain, P. C. (2011), “It’s Showtime: Do Managers Report Better News
Before Annual Shareholder Meetings?” Journal of Accounting Research, 49, 5, 1193-
1221.

Garvey, G. T., Hanka, G. (1999),“Capital Structure and Corporate Control: The Effect of
Antitakeover Statutes on Firm Leverage.” Journal of Finance, 54, 519–546

Gillan, S., Hartzell, J. C., and Starks, L. (2006), “Tradeoffs in Corporate Governance:
Evidence from Board Structures and Charter Provisions,” Working paper.

Gompers, P., Ishii, J., and Metrick, A. (2003). “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1, 107-155.

Hartzell, J., Starks, L. (2003). "Institutional Investors and Executive Compensation,"
Journal of Finance, 58, 2351-2374.

Hermalin, B. E., Weisbach, M.S. (1988), The determinants of board composition, Rand
Journal of Economics 19, 589–606.

Hermalin, B. E., Weisbach, M. S. (1998). “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors
and Their Monitoring of the CEO.” American Economic Review, 88: 96-118.

Huang, L., Kang, Q., and Gorton, G. (2009). “The Limitations of Stock Market
Efficiency: Price Informativeness and CEO Turnover.” SSRN April 27.

Inoguchi, T. (1981). “Explaining and Predicting Japanese General Elections: 1960-1980,”
Journal of Japanese Studies, 7, 255-318,

Jenter, D., Kanaan, F. (2008), “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evaluation,”
Working Paper.



36
Karpoff, J., Matesta, P., and Walkling, R. (1996). “Corporate Governance and
Shareholder Initiatives: Empirical Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 42, 3,
365-395.
rpoff a, Paul H. Malatesta *'a, Ralph A. Walkling b
Listokin, Y. (2008). “Management Always Wins the Close Ones.” American Law and
Economics Review, 10, 2, 159-184.

Key, V. O. 1966. The Responsible Electorate. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Maug, E., Rydqvist, K., (2001). What is the Function of the Shareholder Meeting?
Evidence from the US Proxy Voting Process, Working Paper.

Maug, E., Rydqvist, K., (2009), Do Shareholders Vote Strategically? Voting Behavior,
Proposal Screening, and Majority Rules, Review of Finance, 13:1, 47-79

Morck, R., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (1988), “Management Ownership and Market
Valuation: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293–315.

Nordhaus, W. (1975). “The Political Business Cycle." Review of Economic Studies,
42:169-90.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (1997), “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of
Finance, LII, 737-783.

Shivdasani, A., Yermack, D. (1999). “CEO Involvement in the Selection of New Board
Members: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Finance 54: 1829-54.

Smith, A. (2003). “Election Timing in Majoritarian Parliaments.” British Journal of
Political Science, 33, 3, 397-418.

Yermack, D. (1996), “Higher Market Valuation for Firms with a Small Board of
Directors,” Journal of Financial Economics 40, 185–211.

Yermack, D. (1997), “Good Timing: CEO stock options awards and company news
announcements,”Journal of Finance” 52, 449–476.

Young, P., Millar, J., and Glezen, W. (1993). “Trading volume, management solicitation,
and shareholder voting.” Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 1, 57-71.




37
