                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CONFIDENCE AND THE TRANSMISSION OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING SHOCKS

                                        Rüdiger Bachmann
                                          Eric R. Sims

                                       Working Paper 17063
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17063


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Rüdiger Bachmann and Eric R. Sims. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Confidence and the Transmission of Government Spending Shocks
Rüdiger Bachmann and Eric R. Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 17063
May 2011
JEL No. E00,E3,E62

                                              ABSTRACT

There seems to be a widespread belief among economists, policy-makers, and members of the media
that the "confidence'" of households and businesses is a critical component in the transmission of fiscal
policy shocks into economic activity. We take this proposition to the data using standard structural
VARs with government spending and aggregate output augmented to include empirical measures of
consumer or business confidence. We also estimate non-linear VAR specifications to allow for differential
impacts of government spending in "normal'' times versus recessions. In normal times confidence
does not react significantly to unexpected increases in government spending and spending multipliers
are in the neighborhood of one; during recessions confidence rises and spending multipliers are significantly
larger. We then quantify the importance of the systematic response of confidence to spending shocks
for the spending multiplier and find that, in normal times, confidence is irrelevant for the transmission
of government spending shocks to output, but during periods of economic slack it is important. We
argue and present evidence that it is not confidence per se – in the sense of pure sentiment – that matters
for the transmission of spending shocks during downturns, but rather that the composition of spending
during a downtown is different. In particular, spending shocks during downturns predict future productivity
improvements through a persistent increase in government investment relative to consumption, which
is in turn reflected in higher measured confidence.


Rüdiger Bachmann
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
rudib@umich.edu

Eric R. Sims
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
723 Flanner Hall
South Bend, IN 46556
and NBER
esims1@nd.edu
“But the hope that monetary and fiscal policies would prevent continued weakness by boosting
consumer confidence was derailed by the recent report that consumer confidence in January
collapsed to the lowest level since 1992.” – Martin Feldstein, Wall Street Journal, February
20, 2008

“Confidence matters independently of fundamentals!” – Roger Farmer, UCLA Today - Fac-
ulty and Staff News - 10 Questions: Economist Roger Farmer



1       Introduction
A widespread belief among economists, policy-makers, and members of the news media is that
the “confidence” of households and firms is a critical component in the transmission of policy
shocks into economic activity. A sampling of quotes from economists and policy-makers with
wide-ranging economic and political philosophies attests to this fact (see Appendix A.1).
We take this proposition to the data for the case of government spending shocks. A large
literature studies the effects of these shocks on the real economy, while another literature
examines the effects of confidence on aggregate fluctuations.1 To our knowledge no study
bridges these two literatures and explicitly examines the relationship between confidence and
the transmission of policy shocks. Says John Cochrane (Cochrane, 2009): “Others say that
we should have a fiscal stimulus to ‘give people confidence,’ even if we have neither theory
nor evidence that it will work.” This paper is a first attempt at the latter.
    Barsky and Sims (2011a) show that surprise changes in consumer confidence are as-
sociated with long-lasting movements in macroeconomic aggregates. They argue that this
relationship between confidence and the economy obtains because empirical measures of con-
fidence are reflective of changes in future economic fundamentals, in particular productivity.
In contrast, they argue that autonomous fluctuations in confidence unrelated to fundamen-
tals – i.e. what one might call “animal spirits” or “pure sentiment” – are unlikely to be
an important source of economic fluctuations. Their analysis is, however, silent on whether
the systematic behavior of confidence is important in the propagation of other shocks. We
address this question in this paper.
    Given that there is no off-the-shelf workhorse model for confidence or even a widely ac-
cepted channel by which confidence might matter in the transmission of fiscal policy shocks,
    1
    Examples for the first group of papers are Shapiro and Ramey (1998), Mountford and Uhlig (2009),
Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Rossi and Zubairy (2010), Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011), Ramey
(2011), Feyrer and Sacerdote (2011), Nakamura and Steinsson (2011), and Shoag (2011). Examples for the
second group of papers are Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994), Matsusaka and Sbordone (1995), Barsky and
Sims (2011a), and Barsky and Sims (2011b).


                                                   1
we use structural vector autoregressions (VAR), which need a minimum of theoretical restric-
tions, to identify government spending shocks and their effects on the macroeconomy. As
David Laibson and co-authors recently wrote, “If a sample of macroeconomists were forced
to write down a formal model of animal spirits, most wouldn’t know where to start and the
rest would produce models that had little in common” (Fuster, Laibson, and Mendel, 2010).
    We estimate VARs with a measure of government spending, an empirical measure of
either consumer or business confidence, and aggregate output. The widely accepted identi-
fying restriction to isolate government spending shocks is that spending shocks impact the
economy immediately, whereas government spending only reacts to other shocks with a delay
(e.g. Blanchard and Perotti, 2002; Ramey, 2011; Rossi and Zubairy, 2010). This amounts
to a recursive identification with government spending ordered first. We implement this
assumption throughout the paper, allowing confidence to directly and immediately respond
to surprise changes in government spending.
    In such a VAR, the impulse response of output to a government spending shock is the
sum of two effects. First, there is a direct effect, because the government spending shock
is allowed to have a contemporaneous effect on output. This effect captures the standard
notion of a pure fiscal output multiplier. In addition, there is an indirect effect where fiscal
policy influences confidence which in turn influences output. It is the hypothetical impulse
response which features only the direct effect that we isolate and compare to the actual
impulse response in order to answer the question of how important the systematic response
of confidence to a spending shock is in the transmission of that spending shock into output.
We do this decomposition using the methodology proposed in Bernanke, Gertler, and Watson
(1998), Sims and Zha (2006), and Kilian and Lewis (2011). It amounts to constructing a
hypothetical sequence of some other shock in the system so as to leave the impulse response
of confidence to a spending shock zero at all horizons. As a first pass we use confidence
innovations ordered second in a recursive identification for this purpose.
    In conventional linear specifications of the underlying VARs we find little evidence to
support the notion that confidence is an important part of the transmission of spending
shocks into economic activity. The estimated spending multipliers are generally just below
unity (see Hall, 2009, for an overview of the literature). Confidence typically declines slightly
on impact in response to a spending shock and rises after a few quarters, though this response
is economically small and statistically insignificant. The hypothetical impulse responses
of macroeconomic aggregates in which we isolate the direct effect of government spending
on output without the systematic movement of confidence are very similar to the actual
responses. These findings are robust to a variety of different specifications, including ones in
which we directly control for anticipated changes in government spending (Ramey, 2011). In


                                               2
short, confidence does not appear to be a part of the transmission of government spending
shocks in normal times.
    Recent theoretical (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2009; and Woodford, 2010) and
empirical (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2011; and Shoag, 2010) work has emerged arguing
that government spending multipliers might be large during periods of economic slack. To
capture the idea of government spending shocks having different effects during recessions, we
also estimate non-linear VAR specifications. Following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011),
we allow the parameters of the VAR to differ during periods in which economic growth has
been weak for an extended period of time. Similar to them, we find that spending multipliers
are significantly larger during recessions than in normal times. In particular, our estimated
maximum spending multipliers range between 2 and 3 during recessions. Also, we find that
confidence significantly rises on impact following a positive spending shock in a recession.2
    These findings suggest that confidence may be an important part of the transmission
of spending shocks during periods of economic distress. Indeed, in the non-linear VAR
specifications the hypothetical impulse response of output to a government spending shock
based only on the direct effect of government spending on output is much smaller than the
actual one. The estimated hypothetical spending multipliers are much closer to those from
the linear case, i.e. just below unity.
    It is important to stress that the recessionary impulse responses of output to a spending
shock are small on impact, and are only large after a number of quarters. Indeed, the response
of output looks similar to the slowly-building response following a “news shock” about future
productivity (Beaudry and Portier, 2006; Barsky and Sims, 2011b). To investigate further,
we include in the VAR output per hour as a measure of labor productivity. We show that, in
a recession, a positive government spending shock is also associated with a slowly-building
and prolonged increase in productivity. Furthermore, when we isolate the direct effect of
the government spending shock, output and productivity react similarly to the linear case.
Given Barsky and Sims’ (2011a) findings about the relationship between confidence and
future productivity, these results suggest that the confidence innovations we identify may
be an amalgamation of “pure” confidence innovations, by which we mean fluctuations in
“sentiment” that are unrelated to fundamentals, and news about fundamentals.
    We therefore modify the basic approach so as to isolate structural shocks in the system.
In particular, we identify what we call a “fundamentals” shock as a shock that explains
productivity in the long run and that is uncorrelated with the government spending shock.
We identify a “sentiment” shock as an innovation in confidence orthogonalized with respect
   2
    Mertens and Ravn (2010) provide a theoretical example where, in contrast, aggregate demand stimulation
decreases consumer confidence.



                                                    3
to both the government spending and “fundamentals” shocks. We then ask whether the large
indirect effect of government spending on output that operates through confidence is mainly
due to the fundamental content or the sentiment content in measured confidence. We thus
separately create hypothetical impulse response functions where we eliminate, respectively,
the indirect effect from future fundamentals and sentiment. Without the indirect sentiment
effect the output and productivity responses to a spending shock are nearly the same as in
the actual response. In contrast, without the indirect fundamental effect the output and
productivity responses to the spending shock are much smaller at all horizons. These results
suggest that it is not sentiment that is important in the transmission of government spending
shocks during times of economic slack, but rather a channel that works through productivity
at medium horizons.
    This productivity channel is also consistent with our last finding: the composition of
government spending in response to identified spending shocks is very different in recessions
compared to normal times. In particular, we show that a spending shock in a recession
leads to a persistent increase in the amount of government investment relative to govern-
ment consumption; this is not the case in normal times. This relative increase in government
investment spending causes future productivity increases. The systematic response of confi-
dence appears to largely reflect this policy-induced change.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews mechanisms for
why confidence might matter for the transmission of spending shocks. Section 3 describes
the data and our empirical strategy. Section 4 presents our main results. Section 5 discusses
why confidence matters for the transmission of spending shocks during recessions. The final
section concludes.


2    Why Might Confidence Matter?
An old idea (Keynes, 1936) that has gained recent attention (Ackerlof and Shiller, 2008)
is that “animal spirits” in consumer and in particular business sentiment are central to
understanding economic fluctuations. While intriguing, this idea lacks a widely accepted
theoretical structure, and has met with limited empirical success (see Barsky and Sims,
2011a, as well as Luzzetti and Ohanian, 2010). Loosely speaking, the idea is that aggregate
sentiment determines aggregate spending, which in turn determines aggregate output and
employment. Fiscal or monetary shocks from the government might signal a commitment
to aggregate stability, thereby raising sentiment, stimulating demand, and leading to an
economic expansion. This idea is related to the “sunspot” framework popularized by Farmer
(1998) and others, which holds that there are, at any time, multiple aggregate equilibria.

                                             4
Stimulating sentiment could cause the economy to jump from a “bad” equilibrium to a
“good” one.
    Another related possibility includes a role for informational frictions and strategic comple-
mentarities in a world in which households fail to perfectly observe aggregate fundamentals
and use observed variables like aggregate output to form beliefs about the true fundamentals
(see Lorenzoni, 2009). Following a recession there might be induced sluggishness – the true
fundamentals might have improved but beliefs about the fundamentals are slow to catch
up, hence putting a brake on the recovery. By engaging in expansionary fiscal or monetary
policies, the government may be able to convince agents that fundamentals have improved,
thereby facilitating recovery.
    Recently, Bai, Rios-Rull and Storesletten (2011) have advocated a model of consumer
search where the (variable) search effort of consumers is an input of the aggregate produc-
tion function. In such a context, one might interpret confidence as search effort and thus
stimulative fiscal policy as having a positive impact on the willingness to search and shop.
    Another possibility is that empirically measured confidence is a measure of a time-varying
discount factor – periods of high confidence are periods in which households discount the
future more, and thus are more willing to spend. If policies can lead to an increase in
confidence, they might therefore stimulate demand over and above what would happen under
normal transmission channels.
    And finally there is the view in Barsky and Sims (2011a) that autonomous innovations
to confidence merely reflect autonomous news about future fundamentals. This means that
fiscal policy, for example through investment in infrastructure, R & D and education, might
change agents’ views about these future fundamentals and thus generate important system-
atic movements in confidence. We provide evidence that is consistent with this view.


3     Data and Methodology
3.1    Data
Quarterly real GDP is taken from the BEA. We measure real government spending as the
sum of government consumption and gross investment. We divide both aggregate quantities
by the civilian non-institutionalized population aged 16 and over.
    We draw on two data sources for subjective measures of confidence – one for households
and one for businesses. The Michigan Survey of Consumers polls a nationally represen-
tative sample of households on a variety of questions concerning personal and aggregate
economic conditions. We focus on the Index of Consumer Expectations, which is an aver-


                                               5
age of the indices from three different forward-looking survey questions – one concerning
expectations about aggregate business conditions over the next year, another concerning
expectations about aggregate business conditions over the next five years, and the third
concerning personal financial conditions over the next year. These data are available at a
quarterly frequency beginning in the first quarter of 1960.3
    For business confidence we use the Conference Board’s CEO Confidence Survey, which is
available at a quarterly frequency beginning in 1976. Figures 1 and 2 plot each confidence
series over time. The shaded gray areas are recessions as dated by the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


3.2     Identifying Government Spending Shocks
Much of the empirical literature on the identification of government spending shocks is or can
be cast in a vector autoregression framework. Let gt be a time series measure of government
spending, and xt be a k × 1 vector of other time series of interest observed at time t, (e.g.
output). Let Yt = [gt xt ]0 be (k + 1) × 1. The structural VAR can be written (abstracting
from the constant term) as:
                                                 p
                                                 X
                                      A 0 Yt =         Aj Yt−j + εt                                (1)
                                                 j=1

    p is the lag length and εt is a (k + 1) × 1 vector of structural shocks, defined as being
uncorrelated with one another. A0 is the impact matrix. Restrictions must be imposed on A0
to uniquely recover the structural form. Following Blanchard and Perotti (2002), most of the
literature imposes that in the first row of A0 all elements but (1, 1) be zero. Economically,
this assumption means that all the variables in xt react immediately to government spending
shocks, whereas government spending does not react on impact to other shocks in the system.
Given the delays inherent in the legislative system, this is a natural assumption. In an
econometric sense, the identifying assumption is equivalent to a Choleski factor with gt
ordered first applied to the variance-covariance matrix of reduced-form innovations, Ωu ,
where ut = A−1 0 εt , and where we interpret ε1,t as the structural government spending shock.



3.3     Isolating the Role of Confidence
So as to fix ideas, let xt = [conft yt ]0 , where conft is an empirical measure of confidence and
yt is log real GDP. The identifying assumption on the timing effects of government spending
  3
    In Appendix A.2 we replace consumer confidence with a measure of consumer uncertainty (the cross-
sectional standard deviation of the answers to the “personal finance” question in the consumer survey).


                                                   6
is as above. The system can be written as:
                                                                
                 1    0   0       gt       p         gt−j        ε 1,t
                                       X 
               a2,1 1 a2,3   conft  =     Aj  conft−j  +  ε2,t                       (2)
                                                                  
                                          j=1
                a3,1 a3,2 1       yt                 yt−j        ε3,t
     Let us first look at how confidence on impact influences the transmission of spending
shocks into the other variables of interest. If confidence reacts to government spending
immediately (a2,1 6= 0), and output reacts to confidence immediately (a3,2 6= 0), then a2,1 ×
a3,2 measures the “confidence” channel of government spending on impact. This is the
indirect impact effect. In contrast, a3,1 is the direct impact effect of spending on output.
     In addition, confidence can operate as a propagation mechanism of spending shocks,
whether it has an impact effect or not. For example, if confidence reacts to spending shocks
at any horizon, and if the coefficients on lagged confidence are (economically) significant in
the output equation, then the dynamic response of confidence to a spending shock will have
an effect on the dynamic response of output to a spending shock.
     Our objective is to statistically isolate the direct effect (in a dynamic sense) of spending
shocks on output from the indirect effect operating through confidence, where this indirect
effect consists of both the indirect impact effect and the propagation mechanism discussed
above. In particular, we construct a hypothetical impulse response of output to a govern-
ment spending shock holding confidence fixed at all forecast horizons. A comparison of this
hypothetical response with the actual impulse response allows us to quantify how important
confidence is as a transmission mechanism of government spending shocks.
     In order to do so, we need to first impose more structure on A0 . While the timing as-
sumption that government spending does not react within period to confidence or output is
sufficient to identify a2,1 and a3,1 , an additional restriction is required to identify a3,2 and
a2,3 . We begin by imposing that a2,3 = 0, which amounts to identifying the system under a
Choleski decomposition with confidence ordered second and output ordered third. We then
interpret ε2,t as a confidence shock and ε3,t as a residual output shock. We use confidence
shocks to “zero out” the confidence response to a spending shock. Put differently, we answer
the following question: while on average the output response to a government spending shock
is comprised of the direct effect and the indirect effect (through confidence), and government
spending and confidence shocks are uncorrelated - how would output have responded in a
hypothetical situation where confidence shocks in the same structural economy completely
offset the effects of the government spending shock on confidence? This eliminates the indi-
rect effect and isolates the direct effect of government spending on output. Notice that this
is a purely statistical decomposition of the actual average impulse response. We have simu-


                                               7
lated data from fully-specified DSGE models (both with and without an independent role for
confidence) and conducted our decomposition on simulated data. The results are remarkably
good (and available upon request from the authors) and suggest that our empirical approach
does in fact do a good job of isolating the role of confidence in the transmission of spending
shocks. Our approach is similar to the methodology used by, for example, Bernanke, Gertler,
and Watson (1998), Sims and Zha (2006), as well as Kilian and Lewis (2011).4
    Once the restriction has been imposed on a2,3 and A0 has been recovered, the structural
form of the system specified above can be written as:
                                            p
                                            X
                                     Yt =         A−1           −1
                                                   0 Aj Yt−j + A0 εt                                     (3)
                                            j=1

   We can write this more compactly in companion matrix form as a VAR(1) by defining
Zt = [Yt Yt−1 . . . Yt−p−1 ]:
                                                                                           
                                                   A−1    −1
                                                    0 A1 A0 A2 . . . ...           A−1
                                                                                    0 Ap
                                                                                           
                                       
                                                    I     0     0 ...               0      
                                                                                            
                            −1
              Zt = ΛZt−1 + A0 εt , Λ = 
                                                    0     I     0 ...               0      
                                                                                                        (4)
                                                    ..    ..   ..    .              ..     
                                       
                                                     .     .      . ..               .     
                                                                                            
                                                     0    ...  ... I                  0

    Let ei be a selection row vector of dimension 1 × 3, with a one in the ith place and zeros
elsewhere. Let A−1 0 (q) be the q
                                  th
                                     column of A−1   0 . The impulse response of variable i to
                                                   5
structural shock q at horizon h = 1, . . . , H is:

                                         Φi,q,h = ei Λh−1 A−1
                                                           0 (q)                                         (5)

    The thought experiment of holding confidence fixed in response to a change in government
spending requires setting Φ2,1,h = 0 at each forecast horizon, where 2 is the position indicator
for confidence and 1 is the index of the spending shock. We accomplish this by creating a
   4
     There is an alternative interpretation of our research question whether confidence matters in the trans-
mission of government spending shocks. While in the baseline approach we fix the underlying economic
environment and study particular statistical shock combinations that hit this economy, one could also study
the output response to a government spending shock in a different and restricted economy, where we restrict
government spending not to move confidence at any horizon. In practice, this amounts to a restricted VAR
estimation, setting a2,1 = 0 (which would impose that confidence not react to spending on impact), and then
to restrict the AR coefficients of the system in such a way that confidence does not react to spending shocks
at subsequent horizons either. In Appendix A.4 we show that this approach yields very similar results,
compared to the baseline methodology. This gives us additional confidence in our findings.
   5
     This calculation requires augmenting both A−1  0 (q) and ei with 3 × p rows or columns of zeros for the
matrix multiplication to work, given the dimension of Zt , which is (p + 1) × 3.



                                                      8
hypothetical sequence of confidence innovations, ε2,h , so as to force this to hold at each
relevant horizon. On impact this evidently requires:

                                                                          A−1
                                                                           0 (2, 1)
                      A−1          −1
                       0 (2, 1) + A0 (2, 2)ε2,1 = 0 ⇒ ε2,1 = −                                (6)
                                                                          A−1
                                                                           0 (2, 2)

   We can calculate the required values of subsequent confidence innovations recursively as:
                                        Ph−1
                             Φ2,1,h +    j=1   e2 Λh−j A−1
                                                        0 (2)ε2,j
                    ε2,h =                                              h = 2, . . . , H      (7)
                                            e2 A−1
                                                0 (2)

   Given this sequence, we can compute the modified impulse responses of the variables in
the system to the spending shock as:

                                            h
                                            X
                      Φ
                      e i,1,h = Φi,1,h +          ei Λh−j A−1
                                                           0 (2)ε2,j i = 1, . . . , 3         (8)
                                            j=1

    We will refer to the modified impulse responses, Φ e i,1,h , as the responses to a spending
shock “without confidence” or as the “direct effect”. That is, these are the impulse responses
to a spending shock when the response of confidence is held fixed at zero for all horizons.
Comparing these hypothetical responses with the actual average responses, Φi,1,h , provides
a statistical measure of how important the response of confidence is in the transmission of
the spending shock.


3.4    Non-Linear Specification
Traditional Keynesian thinking and some recent theoretical work (Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo, 2009, and Woodford, 2010) both suggest that fiscal policy may be more potent
when the economy is experiencing significant slack. So as to allow for this possibility, we
also consider a non-linear VAR specification similar to Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011).
Following them, let zt be a backward-looking seven quarter moving average of real GDP
growth, normalized to have mean zero and re-scaled to have unit variance. Define:

                                              exp(−γzt )
                                f (zt ) =                  ,       γ > 0.                     (9)
                                            1 + exp(−γzt )
f (zt ) is thus bound between 0 and 1, and can be interpreted as the probability of being in a
recession given observations on zt . f (zt ) ≈ 1 means that zt is very negative, while f (zt ) ≈ 0
means that zt is very positive. We calibrate γ = 1.5 to match the frequency of post-War US
recessions and define a “recession” as a period in which f (zt ) was greater than 0.8 any time
in the previous year. This lines up well with NBER-defined recessions, as shown in Figure
3, which plots f (zt ) against time, with the shaded gray regions denoting NBER defined
                                                       9
recessions.
   The non-linear system can then be written as (using the same notation as above):
                              p                 p                        p
                              X                 X                        X
                 Ar0 Yt   =         Aj Yt−j +         A2,j Yt−j zt−j +                    2
                                                                               A3,j Yt−j zt−j + εt   (10)
                              j=1               j=1                      j=1



                               r = 1 if max{f (zt−4 ) : f (zt )} ≥ 0.8
                               r = 0 if max{f (zt−4 ) : f (zt )} < 0.8

In words, Yt follows an autoregressive process depending on its own lags, its own lags inter-
acted with zt , and its own lags interacted with zt2 . These interaction terms allow the AR
coefficients to vary with the state of the economy. We assume that the impact matrix, A0 ,
takes on two values – one in “normal” times (A00 ) and one in “recessions” (A10 ). This amounts
to allowing for a conditionally heteroskedastic variance-covariance matrix of reduced form
innovations and the impact effects of shocks to be different across the two regimes.
    This specification nests the linear case when A2,j = A3,j = 0 ∀j and when A00 = A10 . The
identifying assumptions on A0 are identical to the linear specification, and the procedure
for isolating the role of confidence is (conceptually) the same as well. To compute impulse
responses for a recession we fix zt initially at its sample average conditional on r = 1, and
then compute the subsequent zt consistently with the estimated impulse response of output.


4     Results
4.1    Linear VARs
As a benchmark, we estimate a system with log real government spending, a measure of
confidence, and log real GDP. We estimate the system in levels with four lags. Inference is
conducted via Kilian’s (1998) bias-corrected bootstrap after bootstrap.
    Figure 4 shows impulse responses using consumer confidence data. The solid lines are the
estimated responses to a one standard deviation government spending shock. The shaded
gray regions are 90 percent confidence bands. Government spending follows a hump-shaped
response but is nevertheless fairly persistent. Output rises by about 0.2 percent on impact
before reverting back to its pre-shock value. Confidence actually falls on impact before rising
slightly a few quarters later. This response, however, is never significantly (in the statistical
sense) different from zero.
    The dashed lines in Figure 4 show the hypothetical impulse responses holding the response


                                                          10
of confidence fixed at zero. The direct response of output without the endogenous response
of confidence is indeed lower, suggesting a positive role of confidence in the transmission of
fiscal policy. However, the differences in the impulse responses are economically small and
statistically insignificant.
    Keynes, for example, saw the role of animal spirits particularly with entrepreneurs and
their business investment decisions. That is why in Figure 5 we use the business confidence
index in lieu of the consumer confidence series. The responses are very similar. Government
spending follows a hump-shaped response to a spending shock, confidence initially falls and
then rises, and the initial impact on output is an increase of about 0.2 percent. As in the
case with consumer confidence, the impulse responses to the spending shock when confidence
is held fixed are very similar to the actual responses, although again the point estimate for
the output response does suggest a small stimulating role for confidence.
    Next, we present the corresponding spending multipliers in two different versions: the
“impact” multiplier and the “max” multiplier. The impact multiplier is essentially the
impact response of output divided by the impact response of government spending to a
spending shock. The max multiplier is the maximum response of output taken over the
first sixteen quarters divided by the impact response of government spending. As both
government spending and output enter the estimated VARs in logs, these multipliers would
be elasticities. To put the multipliers in dollar terms, we multiply them by the sample
average ratio of output to spending.
    Table 1 shows the estimated multipliers. The first column, labeled “Actual”, gives the
estimated spending multipliers in both the system estimated with consumer confidence and
the system estimated with CEO confidence. The numbers in brackets are the 90 percent
bootstrap confidence bands. The estimated multipliers are all in the neighborhood of one,
which is in line with most previous estimates (e.g. Ramey, 2011). The impact and max
multipliers are both about 0.7 for the system with consumer confidence, suggesting that a
one dollar increase in spending generates about 70 cents in extra output. In the system
with CEO confidence, the impact multiplier is close to 1 and the max multiplier is 1.2; the
difference in multipliers between the two systems results primarily from the different sample
horizons used (from 1960 on for consumer confidence and from 1976 on for CEO confidence,
due to data availability). The second column, labeled “Without Confidence”, gives the
estimated hypothetical multipliers when confidence is held fixed following a government
spending shock. These are very similar to the actual ones.
    We conduct a number of additional robustness checks on our basic result. The most
important one concerns anticipation effects with respect to government spending shocks.
Ramey (2011) emphasizes that VAR shocks to government spending are actually predictable,


                                             11
            Table 1: Government Spending Multipliers in Normal Times

                                                 Actual         Without Confidence
                    Consumer Confidence
                    Impact Multiplier            0.684          0.765
                                                 [0.29, 1.10]   [0.39, 1.17]
                    Max Multiplier               0.759          0.770
                                                 [0.43, 2.33]   [0.43, 1.20]
                    CEO Confidence
                    Impact Multiplier            0.967          0.990
                                                 [0.47, 1.56]   [0.52, 1.53]
                    Max Multiplier               1.223          0.991
                                                 [0.65, 3.64]   [0.52, 1.72]

This table shows spending multipliers from the benchmark three variable systems described in Section 3. The
“Actual” column corresponds to the standard VAR specification, and the following “Without Confidence”
column is the multiplier when the response of confidence is held fixed. The numbers have the interpretation
as the dollar impact on output (either on impact – ‘Impact Multiplier’ – or the maximum effect – ‘Max
Multiplier’ – over 16 quarters) for a one dollar increase in spending. The numbers in brackets are 90 percent
bootstrap confidence intervals.


which can render impulse response functions biased. She proposes a measure of anticipated
government spending, gta , that is equal to the present discounted value of future spending,
based on the reading of news reported in Business Week and other newspaper sources. In
order to accommodate these anticipation effects, the VAR system to be estimated has to
be modified to Yt = [gta gt xt ]0 . The unanticipated government spending shock is then
identified as the innovation in gt ordered second (i.e. after gta ). We show in Appendix A.3
that our results are robust to directly accounting for spending news a la Ramey (2011).
    The inclusion of additional variables other than output, such as aggregate consumption,
in the block of variables xt also does not substantively affect our conclusions or our estimates
of spending multipliers. We prefer to keep xt small because our non-linear specifications place
large burdens on the data.6 Our results are also largely unaffected by different lag lengths
or different assumptions concerning common trends (e.g. estimating a VECM instead of a
VAR in levels or including a deterministic time trend).
    In summary, the evidence from the linear VAR specifications suggests that, on average,
confidence is not an important part of the transmission of government spending shocks into
output. The actual impulse response of output to a government spending shock is very
   6
    In the benchmark system there are p × q autoregressive parameters to estimate, where p is the lag length
and q is the number of variables. In the non-linear estimation there are 3 × p × q parameters to estimate,
which grows quickly with q.



                                                     12
similar to the one that features only the direct effect of spending on output. The spending
multipliers are always estimated to be in the neighborhood of one, regardless of whether
confidence is allowed to react to the spending shock or not.


4.2     Non-Linear VARs
Next we examine results from the non-linear specification detailed in Section 3.4. As in
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011), we find that the output effects of government spending
are much larger in recessions than in normal times. Figure 6 shows impulse responses to a
spending shock in a recession, with the size of the shock normalized to be the same as in
the linear system. The dashed lines are the impulse responses in a recession, the solid lines
are the responses estimated from the linear system, and the shaded gray areas are the 90
percent confidence bands from the linear estimation. Two main features stand out. First,
the output response to a spending shock is very different in a recession compared to normal
times. Importantly, most of the difference is at longer horizons rather than shortly after the
spending shock. Secondly, consumer confidence increases on impact and is persistently high
following a spending shock. This impulse response is statistically different from the linear
case. Figure 7 gives the same picture using CEO confidence: confidence rises in response to
a spending shock and the output response is much larger than in the linear case, particularly
at longer horizons.7
    Having established that output and confidence respond quite differently to government
spending shocks in recessions relative to normal times, we next investigate how important the
confidence response is for the output response in recessions. Figures 8 and 9 show actual and
hypothetical (holding confidence fixed) impulse responses in recessions, for systems estimated
with consumer and CEO confidence, respectively. The shaded gray regions are the confidence
bands for the impulse responses to a spending shock in recessions.8 Given that we effectively
have few observations for recessions, these bands are significantly wider than in the linear
case. For both cases we see that shutting down the response of confidence to a spending
shock renders the output response significantly smaller and more similar to what obtains
in the linear specification. Put differently, it appears as though the systematic response of
empirical confidence measures is critical to the transmission of the spending shock to output
   7
      As an additional numerical test of the non-linear specification we started the impulse response also at
zt = 0, i.e. f (zt ) = 0.5, and recuperated essentially the linear response.
    8
      These confidence bands are constructed differently from the confidence bands in the linear case so as to
preserve the heteroskedasticity of the innovations. In particular, instead of a parametric bootstrap where we
re-sample the innovations, here we do a non-parametric block bootstrap where we resample the growth rates
of the underlying series in the VAR. Then we estimate VARs on the resampled series to construct confidence
regions.



                                                     13
in recessions.9
    Table 2 quantifies this finding. Although the impact multipliers in recessions are about
the same as their linear counterparts, the max multipliers for government spending range
between 2 and 3, about two to three times as large as in the linear case. The multipliers
holding confidence fixed, in contrast, are significantly smaller and close to one. While the
confidence bands are indeed wide, the evidence suggests that spending multipliers are much
larger in recessions than in normal times and that conventional confidence measures are
related to it.

               Table 2: Government Spending Multipliers in Recessions

                                                  Recession       Without Confidence
                    Consumer Confidence
                    Impact Multiplier             0.388           0.260
                                                  [0.12, 1.91]    [-0.22, 1.97]
                    Max Multiplier                3.08            0.260
                                                  [0.42, 3.21]    [0.14, 2.60]
                    CEO Confidence
                    Impact Multiplier             1.019           0.835
                                                  [0.15,1.53]     [0.29, 1.72]
                    Max Multiplier                2.498           0.835
                                                  [0.92,5.57]     [0.61, 3.88]

See notes to Table 1. The “Recession” column corresponds to the recession estimates from the non-linear
specification, and the following column presents multipliers in the case where the response of confidence is
held fixed. The numbers have the interpretation as the dollar impact on output (either on impact – ‘Impact
Multiplier’ – or the maximum effect – ‘Max Multiplier’ – over 16 quarters) for a one dollar increase in
spending. The numbers in brackets are 90 percent bootstrap confidence intervals.


   9
     In Appendix A.2 we show that consumer uncertainty has similar effects in the transmission of government
spending shocks. It appears that government spending shocks not only help to restore confidence, but also
decrease uncertainty about the future.
   Also, see Appendix A.5 for a discussion of how robust this result is to an alternative specification based on
seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR). One might be concerned that the difference we find in the hypothetical
output responses between normal times and recessions is due to government spending being less persistent,
when confidence is shut down in recessions (see Figures 10 and 11). This could render the output response
to a spending shock smaller. To test whether this drives our results, we run a SUR specification, where the
systematic response of government spending does not depend directly on confidence, but only on output and
its own lags. Our conclusions remain the same.




                                                      14
5    Why and How Does Confidence Matter?
The evidence from the previous section suggests that measured confidence of households and
firms may play an important role in the transmission of government spending shocks into
output during times of economic slack. Prime facie, this finding might be viewed as evidence
for “animal spirits” type explanations or as evidence for many of the quotations listed in the
Introduction and in Appendix A.1. However, a closer inspection of Figures 8 and 9 reveals
that confidence reacts strongest on impact after a government spending shock in a recession,
whereas the output response is slowly-building. In a world with “animal spirits” we would
likely see a similarly strong impact response of output.
    Barsky and Sims (2011a) show that unexpected autonomous increases in measured con-
sumer confidence are associated with slowly-building and persistent increases in output,
consumption, and productivity. They argue that confidence innovations reflect news about
future economic fundamentals. Nevertheless, they do show a large fraction of empirical
confidence fluctuations is not explained by news shocks, leaving room for a potentially im-
portant pure sentiment channel. We next investigate whether it is again news about future
fundamentals or pure sentiment that makes the systematic response of confidence important
in the fiscal policy transmission to economic activity.
    We start, in the spirit of their analysis, by including an empirical measure of productivity
into the set of variables xt in our estimated VAR. We use the BLS measure of output per
hour in the non-farm business sector. Formally, the VAR to be estimated includes govern-
ment spending, confidence, output, and productivity. To have a longer sample size, we focus
on the results using consumer confidence. Figure 10 shows responses to the spending shock
from this four variable system, both for the linear case (solid line) and in a recession from
the non-linear estimation (dashed lines). As in the smaller system, confidence increases on
impact in a recession and the output response is much larger, particularly at long horizons.
The productivity response to a spending shock is much the same as the output response –
essentially zero on impact followed by a large and protracted increase. Put differently, a
government spending shock in a recession apparently leads to a very persistent and econom-
ically large increase in productivity. In contrast, the response of productivity to a spending
shock in the linear specification is essentially zero at all horizons.
    Figure 11 shows the estimated impulse responses to a spending shock in a recession as
well as the responses when confidence is held fixed. We again use confidence innovations
ordered second in a Choleski decomposition in order to construct these hypothetical re-
sponses. As in Figures 9 and 10, eliminating the endogenous confidence response renders
the hypothetical output response to a spending shock significantly smaller. Also, the pro-
ductivity response to a spending shock is close to zero at all horizons in this case. That

                                              15
the productivity response is so different (particularly at longer horizons) indicates that the
large role we attribute to confidence in the transmission mechanism may indeed be due to
a “fundamentals” rather than a pure “sentiment” channel. In particular, it is possible that
government spending shocks during recessions work to stimulate productivity, which in turn
raises measured confidence.
    To determine whether measured confidence matters for the transmission of spending
shocks through a “sentiment” or a “fundamentals” channel, we identify four structural shocks
from the four variable system with productivity. The first shock is the government spending
shock, identified using the maintained recursive restriction that spending not react within
period to any of the three other shocks. The second shock is what we call a “fundamen-
tals” shock. It is identified as having the maximum effect on the forecast error variance of
productivity at a horizon of twenty quarters.10 This can be thought of as an approximation
to a long run restriction; it is proposed in Francis, Owyang, Roush, and DiCecio (2010),
who show that it has superior finite sample properties over conventional long run restric-
tions. The third shock is what we call a “sentiment” shock. The sentiment shock is the
confidence innovation orthogonalized with respect to the government spending and “funda-
mentals” shocks. The idea is that it reflects pure sentiment, i.e. movements in confidence
unrelated to movements in productivity several years out into the future. The final shock is
identified as contemporaneously affecting output but not productivity on impact; it has no
direct structural interpretation.
    We consider two separate cases. In the first case we create a hypothetical sequence of
“sentiment” shocks to hold confidence fixed and to identify the indirect effect in response
to an increase in government spending. The procedure is conceptually identical to the one
laid out in Section 3.3 under the assumption that government spending influences measured
confidence only through “sentiment”. In the second case we create a hypothetical sequence
of “fundamentals” shocks to hold confidence fixed. This identifies the indirect effect if
government spending influences measured confidence only through “fundamentals”. Figure
12 shows the responses during a recession estimated from the non-linear specification. The
solid lines are the actual responses to a spending shock, the dashed lines are the responses
without confidence where confidence is held fixed with “sentiment” shocks, and the dotted
lines are the responses without confidence where confidence is held fixed with “fundamentals”
shocks. We see that the dotted line responses with hypothetical “fundamentals” shocks show
output and productivity essentially not reacting at any horizon; these responses are very
similar to the responses without confidence shown in Figure 11. In contrast, the dashed lines
with hypothetical “sentiment” shocks are fairly similar to the actual responses. Eliminating
 10
      We have experimented with other horizons, like 30 quarters, without much effect on our results.


                                                     16
the confidence effect with “sentiment” innovations does relatively little to the responses of
output and productivity to a spending shock – these are still slowly-building and large,
particularly at longer horizons.
    These findings suggest that pure “sentiment” is a relatively unimportant component of
the transmission of spending shocks into real output in a period of economic slack. Rather
than through stimulating sentiment, government spending shocks appear to have differential
effects on economic activity during recessions via a channel that manifests itself through
labor productivity, particularly several quarters after the shock.
    It is not difficult to imagine theoretical economies in which increases in public expenditure
stimulate private sector productivity. For example, spending on infrastructure and education
may lead to complementarities which encourage private sector capital accumulation, thereby
stimulating private sector labor productivity.11 We investigate this possibility by decom-
posing total government spending into its two main constituent components – consumption
and investment. Government consumption “consists of the goods and services that are pro-
duced by the general government, less sales to other sectors” while government investment
“consists of purchases of new structures and of equipment and software both by the general
government and government enterprises.”12 We estimate a four variable system featuring
the following variables: total government spending, consumer confidence, real output, and
the log ratio of government investment to consumption expenditure. We are interested in
whether overall spending shocks differentially affect the mix of expenditures in recessions as
opposed to normal times.
    Figure 13 compares the impulse responses to a spending shock from the linear system
(solid line) with the recession responses from the same system, estimated in the non-linear
specification (dashed line). We see that in the linear case the ratio of investment to con-
sumption expenditure rises on impact following a spending shock, but thereafter quickly
reverts back to its pre-shock level. In contrast, the response of the government invest-
ment/consumption ratio in a downturn is quite different. Rather than reverting back to its
pre-shock value, the investment/consumption ratio remains permanently higher following a
spending shock during a recession. This suggests that there is an important difference in the
longer term consequences for the composition of government spending following a spending
shock in a recession – during recessions government spending shocks are more persistently
geared towards investment rather than consumption. This differential mix could explain the
much larger output response during a downturn. The large output multiplier estimated here
is consistent with the results in Feyre and Sacerdote (2011), who emphasize the different
 11
      See Aschauer’s (1989) seminal contribution.
 12
      See A Guide to the NIPAs at http://www.bea.gov/national/pdf/nipaguid.pdf.



                                                17
multipliers for different kinds of government spending. In particular, they report multipliers
associated with infrastructure spending in the neighborhood of 2.
     Figure 14 shows the hypothetical impulse responses in a recession. As in Figure 12, we
consider two separate cases – one without “sentiment” and one without “fundamentals”.
These shocks are identified as described above, though the “fundamentals” shock is iden-
tified off of the medium run behavior of output, since productivity is not in the estimated
VAR.13 The impulse responses without sentiment are very similar to the actual response in a
recession; in contrast, the responses where confidence is shut down with the “fundamentals”
innovation are much closer to the baseline linear estimates. This suggests that the key chan-
nel through which government spending shocks have a differential effect on output during
recessions is that spending shocks in a recession are geared more towards investment, which
in turn stimulates private sector productivity, output, and confidence.14 Pure sentiment
appears to play at best a minor role.


6      Conclusion
In this paper we tackle the following question: Does the transmission of fiscal spending
shocks depend on systematic movements in consumer and business confidence? In doing so,
we shed some new light on how expansionary fiscal policy stimulates the economy, and, to the
best of our knowledge, study for the first time the role of systematic movements in consumer
and business confidence for aggregate economic fluctuations. We find that the endogenous
response of conventional measures of confidence explains almost all of the output stimulus in
recessions, whereas its role in normal times is minor. Importantly, the positive response of
output and productivity to a fiscal stimulus during times of slack is mild on impact, gradual
and prolonged. This suggests that fiscal stimulus in recessions is really different from fiscal
stimulus in normal times in that it boosts long-term productivity. Indeed, we find that fiscal
expansions in recessions are more persistently geared towards government investment. It is
this long-term productivity boost that is reflected in the important role of the systematic
response of conventional confidence measures for recessionary fiscal transmission, not pure
sentiment.




  13
    If we replace output with productivity we get nearly identical results.
  14
    This also means that Robert Russell got it wrong (see his quote in Appendix A.1): the government
building bridges and new roads per se will restore confidence inasmuch this increases future productivity.


                                                   18
References
 [1] Ackerlof, George and Robert Shiller. Animal Spirits. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
     versity Press, 2008.

 [2] Aschauer, David. “Is Public Expenditure Productive?” Journal of Monetary Economics
     23, 177-200, 1989.

 [3] Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
     Policy.” Forthcoming in American Economic Journal - Economic Policy, 2011.

 [4] Bachmann, Rüdiger and Jinhui Bai. “Public Consumption Over the Business Cycle.”
     Mimeo, University of Michigan, 2011.

 [5] Bachmann, Rüdiger, Steffen Elstner and Eric Sims. “Uncertainty and Economic Activ-
     ity: Evidence from Business Survey Data.” NBER-WP 16143, 2010.

 [6] Bai, Yan, Victor Rios-Rull, and Kjetil Storesletten. “Demand Shocks That Look Like
     Productivity Shocks.” Mimeo, University of Minnesota 2011.

 [7] Barsky, Robert B. and Eric Sims. “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning
     of Innovations in Consumer Confidence.”Forthcoming in American Economic Review,
     2011a.

 [8] Barsky, Robert B. and Eric Sims. “News Shocks and Business Cycles.” Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics 58:2, March 2011b.

 [9] Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. “News, Stock Prices, and Economic Fluctuations.”
     American Economic Review 96: 1293-1307, 2006.

[10] Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Mark Watson. “Systematic Monetary Policy and
     the Effects of Oil Price Shocks.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 91-157,
     1998.

[11] Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti. “An Empirical Characterization of the Dy-
     namic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics. 107: 2002, 1329-1368.

[12] Carroll, Christopher, Jeffrey Fuhrer, and David Wilcox. “Does Consumer Sentiment
     Forecast Household Spending? If So, Why?” American Economic Review. 85(5): 1994,
     1397-1408.


                                          19
[13] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. “When is the Govern-
     ment Spending Multiplier Large?” NBER WP 15394, 2009.

[14] Cochrane, John. “Fiscal Stimulus, Fiscal Inflation, or Fiscal Fallacies?” commentary,
     Version 2.5 Feb 27 2009.

[15] Farmer, Roger. The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies. Boston, MA: MIT
     Press, 1998.

[16] Feyrer, James and Bruce Sacerdote. “Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Real Time Estimates
     of the Effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” NBER Working Paper
     16759, 2011.

[17] Francis, Neville, Owyang Michael; Roush, Jennifer; and Riccardo DiCecio. “A Flexible
     Finite-Horizon Alternative to Long Run Restrictions with an Application to Technology
     Shocks.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working paper 2005-024F, 2010.

[18] Fuster, Andreas, David Laibson, and Brock Mendel. “Natural Expectations and Macroe-
     conomic Fluctuations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24-4, Fall 2010, 67-84.

[19] Hall, Robert. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2009, 2009, 183-231.

[20] Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory. 1936.

[21] Kilian, Lutz. “Small Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions.”
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 1998, 218-230.

[22] Kilian, Lutz and Logan Lewis. “Does the Fed Respond to Oil Price Shocks?” Forthcom-
     ing, The Economic Journal, 2011.

[23] Lorenzoni, Guido. “A Theory of Demand Shocks.” American Economic Review 99,
     2009, 2050-2084.

[24] Luzzetti, Matthew and Lee Ohanian. “The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
     and Money After 75 Years: The Importance of Being in the Right Place at the Right
     Time”, in Keynes General Theory: Seventy-Five Years later, 2010, Tom Cate, editor,
     Edward Elgar: London.

[25] Matsusaka, Johan, and Argia Sbordone. “Consumer Confidence and Economic Fluctu-
     ations.” Economic Inquiry, 33(2), 1995, 296-318.


                                           20
[26] Mertens, Karel and Morton Ravn. “Fiscal Policy in an Expectations Driven Liquidity
     Trap” Mimeo, Cornell University, 2010.

[27] Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
     from U.S. Regions” Mimeo, Columbia University, 2011.

[28] Ramey, Valerie. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 1-50.

[29] Rossi, Barbara and Sarah Zubairy. “What is the Importance of Monetary and Fiscal
     Shocks in Explaining US Macroeconomic Fluctuations?” Working paper, Duke Univer-
     sity, 2010.

[30] Shapiro, Matthew and Valerie Ramey. “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
     of Government Spending.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 48,
     1998, 145-194.

[31] Shoag, Daniel. “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multi-
     plier from State Pension Plan Returns” Mimeo, Harvard University, 2010.

[32] Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha. “Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?”
     Macroeconomic Dynamics, 10, 2006, 231-272.

[33] Woodford, Michael. “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.”
     NBER Working Paper 15714, 2010.




                                          21
                                    Figure 1: Consumer Confidence

                  110


                  100


                   90


                   80


                   70


                   60


                   50


                   40
                        60    65     70   75    80     85   90    95     00    05



This figure plots the Index of Consumer Expectations from the Michigan Survey of Consumers. Shaded gray
areas are recessions as defined by the NBER.


                                      Figure 2: CEO Confidence

                  80


                  70


                  60


                  50


                  40


                  30


                  20
                             1980     1985     1990     1995     2000      2005



This figure plots the composite CEO confidence index from the Conference Board. Shaded gray areas are
recessions as defined by the NBER.




                                                  22
                                        Figure 3: f (zt ) Across Time

                   1.0



                   0.8



                   0.6



                   0.4



                   0.2



                   0.0
                         50   55   60    65   70   75    80   85   90   95   00   05   10


                             exp(−γzt )
This figure plots f (zt ) = 1+exp(−γz  t)
                                          , γ = 1.5, where zt is defined as the seven quarter moving average of
real GDP growth. Shaded gray areas are recessions as defined by the NBER. The dashed black line is our
cutoff for calling a period a “recession”: f (zt ) = 0.8.




                                                        23
                      Figure 4: Government Spending and Consumer Confidence

                             Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                       Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.014                                                       2

              0.012                                                     1.5

               0.01                                                       1

              0.008                                                     0.5

              0.006                                                       0

              0.004                                                     −0.5

              0.002                                                      −1

                 0                                                      −1.5
                               5         10        15         20                   5         10            15   20


                         −3     Output to Gov. Spending
                      x 10
                10


                                                                               Linear IRF
                 5                                                             Linear IRF w/o Confidnece



                 0



                 −5

                               5         10        15         20


This figure shows impulse responses to a government spending shock from the benchmark system with gov-
ernment spending, consumer confidence, and real GDP. The solid lines are the estimated impulse responses.
The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands, using the bias-corrected Bootstrap of Kilian (1998).
The dashed lines are the impulse responses when confidence is held fixed.




                                                                   24
                         Figure 5: Government Spending and CEO Confidence

                             Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                        Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.012                                                      1.5

               0.01                                                       1

                                                                         0.5
              0.008
                                                                          0
              0.006
                                                                        −0.5
              0.004
                                                                         −1
              0.002                                                     −1.5

                 0                                                       −2
                                5        10        15         20                     5        10           15    20


                         −3
                      x 10      Output to Gov. Spending
                10

                 8
                                                                               Linear IRF
                 6
                                                                               Linear IRF w/o Confidnece
                 4

                 2

                 0

                −2

                −4
                                5        10        15         20


This figure shows impulse responses to a government spending shock from the benchmark system with
government spending, business confidence, and real GDP. The solid lines are the estimated impulse responses.
The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines are the impulse responses when
confidence is held fixed.




                                                                   25
            Figure 6: Government Spending and Consumer Confidence: Recessions

                             Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                    Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.014                                                     3

              0.012
                                                                        2
               0.01

              0.008                                                     1

              0.006                                                     0
              0.004
                                                                        −1
              0.002

                 0                                                      −2
                               5         10        15         20                5            10     15       20


                         −3     Output to Gov. Spending
                      x 10
                10


                                                                             Linear IRF
                 5                                                           Recession IRF



                 0



                 −5

                               5         10        15         20


The dashed lines in this figure are impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession estimated
from a non-linear system with government spending, consumer confidence, and real GDP. The solid lines
are the estimated impulse responses from the linear system, and the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent
confidence bands from the linear system. The size of the shock in the non-linear system has been normalized
to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                   26
               Figure 7: Government Spending and CEO Confidence: Recessions

                             Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                    Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.012                                                     1.5

               0.01                                                       1

                                                                        0.5
              0.008
                                                                          0
              0.006
                                                                        −0.5
              0.004
                                                                         −1
              0.002                                                     −1.5

                 0                                                       −2
                                5        10        15         20                5         10        15       20


                         −3     Output to Gov. Spending
                      x 10
                10

                 8

                 6                                                             Linear IRF
                                                                               Recession IRF
                 4

                 2

                 0

                 −2

                 −4
                                5        10        15         20


The dashed lines in this figure are impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession estimated
from a non-linear system with government spending, CEO confidence, and real GDP. The solid lines are the
estimated impulse responses from the linear system, and the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent confidence
bands from the linear system. The size of the shock in the non-linear system has been normalized to be the
same as in the linear system.




                                                                   27
 Figure 8: Government Spending and Consumer Confidence: Recessions with and without
                                    Confidence

                             Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                     Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.025                                                     4

                                                                        3
               0.02
                                                                        2
              0.015                                                     1

               0.01                                                     0

                                                                        −1
              0.005
                                                                        −2

                 0                                                      −3
                               5         10        15         20                 5         10        15       20


                         −3     Output to Gov. Spending
                      x 10

                20
                                                                             Recession IRF
                15                                                           Recession IRF w/o Confidence

                10

                 5

                 0

                 −5
                               5         10        15         20


The solid lines in this figure are estimated impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession
estimated from the non-linear specification. The shaded gray regions are 90 percent confidence bands.
The dashed lines are the impulse responses when confidence is held fixed. The underlying system features
consumer confidence. The size of the shock has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                   28
 Figure 9: Government Spending and CEO Confidence: Recessions and with and without
                                    Confidence
                         −3
                      x 10 Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                     Confidence to Gov. Spending
                 15                                                   4

                                                                      3
                 10
                                                                      2

                                                                      1
                  5
                                                                      0

                                                                      −1
                  0
                                                                      −2

                 −5                                                   −3
                              5        10        15         20                  5        10        15       20



                              Output to Gov. Spending

               0.02

              0.015
                                                                           Recession IRF
               0.01                                                        Recession IRF w/o Confidence

              0.005

                  0

              −0.005

               −0.01
                              5        10        15         20


The solid lines in this figure are estimated impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession
estimated from the non-linear specification. The shaded gray regions are 90 percent confidence bands. The
dashed lines are the impulse responses when confidence is held fixed. The underlying system features CEO
confidence. The size of the shock has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                 29
                Figure 10: Government Spending, Confidence, and Productivity

                              Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                          Confidence to Gov. Spending
               0.02                                                      3


                                                                         2
              0.015

                                                                         1
               0.01
                                                                         0

              0.005
                                                                         −1


                 0                                                       −2
                                5            10         15     20                      5          10         15       20


                         −3         Output to Gov. Spending                      −3   Productivity to Gov. Spending
                      x 10                                                    x 10
                20
                                                                         10
                                                                                           Linear IRF
                15                                                       8                 Recession IRF

                                                                         6
                10
                                                                         4
                 5                                                       2

                                                                         0
                 0
                                                                         −2
                 −5
                                5            10         15     20                      5          10         15       20


This figure shows impulse responses from a VAR featuring government spending, consumer confidence, real
output, and labor productivity. The solid black lines are the impulse responses to a spending shock from
the linear system; the shaded gray regions are the associated 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines
are the impulse responses to a spending shock in a recession. The size of the shock in the non-linear system
has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                    30
    Figure 11: Government Spending, Confidence, and Productivity: with and without
                                     Confidence

                       Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                          Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.025                                               5

                                                                  4
               0.02

                                                                  3
              0.015
                                                                  2
               0.01
                                                                  1

              0.005
                                                                  0

                  0                                               −1
                         5            10         15     20                      5           10         15          20



                             Output to Gov. Spending                      −3   Productivity to Gov. Spending
                                                                       x 10
               0.03

              0.025                                               15                Recession IRF
               0.02                                                                 Recession IRF w/o Confidence

                                                                  10
              0.015

               0.01
                                                                  5
              0.005

                  0                                               0
              −0.005
                         5            10         15     20                      5           10         15          20


This figure shows impulse responses from a VAR featuring government spending, consumer confidence, real
output, and labor productivity. The solid black lines are the estimated impulse responses in a recession and
the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines are the impulse responses when
confidence is held fixed. The size of the shock has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                             31
        Figure 12: Government Spending, Confidence, and Productivity: Alternative
                                    Decomposition

                        Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                          Confidence to Gov. Spending
               0.025                                                5

                                                                    4               Recession IRF
                0.02
                                                                                    Recession IRF w/o Sentiment
                                                                    3               Recession w/o Fundamental
               0.015                                                2

                0.01                                                1

                                                                    0
               0.005
                                                                   −1

                  0                                                −2
                         5            10         15      20                     5           10          15        20



                                                                           −3
                             Output to Gov. Spending                    x 10    Productivity to Gov. Spending
                0.03

               0.025
                                                                   15
                0.02

               0.015                                               10

                0.01
                                                                    5
               0.005

                  0
                                                                    0
              −0.005
                         5            10         15      20                     5           10          15        20


This figure shows impulse responses from a VAR featuring government spending, consumer confidence, real
output, and labor productivity. The solid black lines are the estimated impulse responses in a recession and
the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines are the estimated responses
when confidence is held fixed using a hypothetical sequence of “sentiment” shocks. The dotted lines are the
responses when confidence is held fixed using a hypothetical sequence of “fundamentals” shocks. The size of
the shock has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                              32
   Figure 13: Government Spending, Confidence, and Spending Components: Recessions

                              Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                         Confidence to Gov. Spending
              0.014                                                         2

              0.012                                                        1.5

               0.01                                                         1

              0.008                                                        0.5

              0.006                                                         0

              0.004                                                       −0.5

              0.002                                                        −1

                 0                                                        −1.5
                                5         10         15        20                     5         10          15           20



                         −3
                      x 10       Output to Gov. Spending                         Gov. Inv/Cons. Ratio to Gov. Spending
                10
                                                                         0.025
                 8
                                                                          0.02
                 6
                                                                         0.015
                 4
                                                                          0.01
                 2                                                       0.005
                 0                                                          0
                                                                                          Linear IRF
                −2                                                   −0.005
                                                                                          Recession IRF
                                                                         −0.01
                −4
                                5         10         15        20                     5         10          15           20


This figure shows impulse responses from a VAR featuring government spending, consumer confidence, real
output, and the log-ratio of government investment to consumption expenditure. The solid black lines are
the estimated impulse responses in the linear system and the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent confidence
bands. The dashed lines are the estimated responses in a recession from our non-linear specification. The
size of the shock in the non-linear system has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                    33
    Figure 14: Government Spending, Confidence, and Spending Components: with and
                                 without Confidence

                       Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                      Confidence to Gov. Spending
                0.02                                               4

                                                                   3
               0.015
                                                                   2

                                                                   1
                0.01
                                                                   0

                                                                  −1
               0.005
                                                                  −2

                  0                                               −3
                         5            10         15     20                  5         10          15           20



                             Output to Gov. Spending                   Gov. Inv/Cons. Ratio to Gov. Spending
               0.025
                                                                                       Recession IRF
                0.02                                         0.035
                                                                                       Recession IRF w/o Sentiment
               0.015                                          0.03                     Recession IRF w/o Fundamental

                                                             0.025
                0.01
                                                              0.02
               0.005
                                                             0.015
                  0
                                                              0.01
              −0.005
                                                             0.005
               −0.01
                         5            10         15     20                  5         10          15           20


This figure shows impulse responses from a VAR featuring government spending, consumer confidence, real
output, and the log-ratio of government investment to consumption expenditure. The solid black lines are
the estimated impulse responses in a recession and the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent confidence bands.
The dashed lines are the estimated responses when confidence is held fixed using a hypothetical sequence of
“sentiment” shocks. The dotted lines are the responses when confidence is held fixed using a hypothetical
sequence of “fundamentals” shocks. The size of the shock has been normalized to be the same as in the
linear system.




                                                             34
A     Appendix
A.1     Quotes
“We must be certain that programs to solve the current financial and economic crisis are
large enough, and targeted broadly enough, to impact public confidence.” – Robert Shiller,
Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2009

“Yale’s Bob Shiller argues that confidence is the key to getting the economy back on track.
I think a lot of economists would agree with that. [...]. The sad truth is that we economists
don’t know very much about what drives the animal spirits of economic participants. Until
we figure it out, it is best to be suspicious of any policy whose benefits are supposed to work
through the amorphous channel of ’confidence.’” – N. Gregory Mankiw, Blog, January 27,
2009

“Enacting such a conditional stimulus would have two desirable effects. First, it would im-
mediately boost the confidence of households and businesses since they would know that a
significant slowdown would be met immediately by a substantial fiscal stimulus.” – Mar-
tin Feldstein, Testimony to the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives,
December 5, 2007

“But the economy is not stagnant because of a lack of spending. The economy is stagnant
because of a lack of confidence in the future. Government spending on bridges, roads and
new schools will stimulate the construction industry. But without confidence, the benefits will
not spread to the rest of the economy.” – Russell Roberts, Forbes.com, January 23, 2009

“The stimulus was too small, and it will fade out next year, while high unemployment is
undermining both consumer and business confidence.” – Paul Krugman, New York Times,
November 23, 2009

“Economic activity in the United States turned up in the second half of 2009, supported by
an improvement in financial conditions, stimulus from monetary and fiscal policies, and a
recovery in foreign economies. These factors, along with increased business and household
confidence, appear likely to boost spending and sustain the economic expansion.” – Ben
Bernanke, Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, February 24, 2010

“Confidence today will be enhanced if we put measures in place that assure that the coming
expansion will be more sustainable and fair in the distribution of benefits than its predeces-
sor.” – Larry Summers, Responding to an Historic Economic Crisis: The Obama Program
Brookings Institution, March 13, 2009

                                              35
“President Obama’s top priority has been to stop the vicious cycle of economic and financial
collapse, stem the historic rate of job loss, restore confidence and put the economy on a path
to recover.” – Larry Summers, memo to Members of Congress Re: Status Report on Rescuing
and Rebuilding the American Economy, August 4, 2009

“The subsequent global sell-off in equity markets suggested that governments would need to
take action with more immediate impact to restore confidence in the markets.” – James
Bullard, The U.S. Economy and Financial Market Turmoil, October 14, 2008


A.2      Government Spending and Consumer Uncertainty
In the benchmark approach we investigate the role of consumer confidence in the transmission
of government spending shocks. Consumer confidence is essentially a cross-sectional average
of the qualitative survey responses to questions like “Now looking ahead - do you think that
a year from now you (and your family living there) will be better off financially, or worse off,
or just about the same as now?”. The answers are quantified as +1 if the answer is “better
off”, as −1 if “worse off” and as 0 otherwise.15
    Researchers have used the cross-sectional standard deviation of these qualitative survey
responses to measure consumer uncertainty or the dispersion of beliefs in the population (see
Bachmann, Elstner and Sims, 2010, as an example). In this Appendix we test whether the
transmission of government spending shocks into aggregate economic activity might work
through an impact on consumer uncertainty (as measured through the dispersion of the
“personal finance” question above), rather than consumer confidence.16
    Figures A-1 to A-3 repeat the same three steps as with confidence: the linear actual
and hypothetical impulse responses (see Figure 4), the linear and recession actual impulse
responses (see Figure 6) and the recession actual and hypothetical impulse responses (see Fig-
ure 8). Three findings are noteworthy: 1) a surprise increase in government spending leads to
a decrease in consumer uncertainty, and when the indirect effect through uncertainty is taken
out the output stimulus is weaker, albeit only slightly so; 2) the uncertainty-decreasing effect
of government spending is (if not stronger on impact) much more prolonged in a recession
compared to normal times; 3) taking out the indirect effect of government spending through
uncertainty renders the positive output response weaker, more so than in normal times, but
not significantly so. We conclude that fiscal stimulus has a similar effect through a reduction
in consumer uncertainty as it has through a boost in measured consumer confidence.
  15
     The Michigan Index of Consumer Expectations that we are using is an average of these cross-sectional
averages across several forward-looking questions, such as the “personal finance” question above.
  16
     We experimented with the one-year-ahead and five-year-ahead business expectation questions, which
make up the other two questions from the Index of Consumer Expectations with similar results.


                                                   36
Figure A-1: Government Spending and Consumer Uncertainty
                                       Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                         −3   Dispersion to Gov. Spending
                                                                                        x 10
                        0.015                                                      5




                         0.01                                                      0




                        0.005                                                      −5




                           0                                                      −10
                                         5         10        15         20                          5         10         15      20


                                   −3     Output to Gov. Spending
                                x 10

                          10

                                                                                                    Linear IRF
                                                                                                    Linear IRF w/o Dispersion
                           5



                           0



                           −5
                                         5         10        15         20




Figure A-1 shows impulse responses to a government spending shock from the benchmark system with
government spending, consumer uncertainty, and real GDP. The solid lines are the estimated actual impulse
responses. The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines are the hypothetical
impulse responses when uncertainty is held fixed.


         Figure A-2: Government Spending and Consumer Uncertainty: Recessions
                                       Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                      −3      Dispersion to Gov. Spending
                                                                                       x 10
                        0.015                                                      5




                         0.01                                                      0




                        0.005                                                     −5




                           0                                                      −10
                                         5         10        15         20                          5         10         15      20


                                   −3     Output to Gov. Spending
                                x 10
                          10


                                                                                                   Linear IRF
                           5                                                                       Recession IRF



                           0



                           −5
                                         5         10        15         20




The dashed lines in Figure A-2 are impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession estimated
from a non-linear system with government spending, consumer uncertainty, and real GDP. The solid lines
are the estimated impulse responses from the linear system, and the shaded gray areas are the 90 percent
confidence bands from the linear system. The size of the shock in the non-linear system has been normalized
to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                             37
Figure A-3: Government Spending and Consumer Uncertainty: Recessions with and without
Uncertainty




                                Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                     Dispersion to Gov. Spending
                        0.02                                                0.01

                                                                           0.005
                       0.015
                                                                              0

                        0.01                                           −0.005

                                                                           −0.01
                       0.005
                                                                       −0.015

                           0                                               −0.02
                                  5         10         15        20                5          10         15       20



                                   Output to Gov. Spending
                       0.025

                        0.02

                       0.015                                                       Recession IRF
                                                                                   Recession IRF w/o Dispersion
                        0.01

                       0.005

                           0

                       −0.005

                        −0.01
                                  5         10         15        20




The solid lines in Figure A-3 are estimated impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession
estimated from the non-linear specification. The shaded gray regions are 90 percent confidence bands. The
dashed lines are the hypothetical impulse responses when uncertainty is held fixed. The size of the shock
has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.



A.3      Accounting for Fiscal News
Ramey (2011) stresses that conventional VAR-identified government spending shocks are
often predictable. As a remedy, she produces a time series of “news” about the present dis-
counted value of expected changes in future defense spending, based on a narrative reading
of the historical record (readings of Business Week and other periodicals). This can be incor-
porated into the VAR, with the system of variables to be estimated Yt = [gta gt conft xt ],
where gta is the defense news variable. We can then identify impulse responses to two differ-
ent spending shocks: defense news (the innovation in the defense news series ordered first),
and the conventional unanticipated government spending shock (the innovation in actual
government spending ordered after the news variable). We can construct the hypothetical
impulse responses in which the response of confidence is held fixed just as in the usual case.
Figure A-4 shows the actual and hypothetical responses of actual spending, confidence, and
real GDP to the defense news shock. Figure A-5 does the same for a surprise spending shock.




                                                                      38
                                  Figure A-4: Impulse Responses to Defense News
                         −3
                      x 10        Gov. Spending to Gov. News                            Confidence to Gov. News
                  8                                                           2.5

                                                                               2
                  6
                                                                              1.5
                  4                                                            1

                  2                                                           0.5

                                                                               0
                  0
                                                                             −0.5

                 −2                                                           −1
                                  5            10         15       20               5            10         15    20


                         −3
                      x 10             Output to Gov. News

                  8

                  6
                                                                                    Linear IRF
                  4
                                                                                    Linear IRF w/o Confidence
                  2

                  0

                 −2

                 −4

                                  5            10         15       20




                  Figure A-5: Impulse Responses to Unanticipated Spending
                             −3   Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending
                       x 10                                                         Confidence to Gov. Spending
                  15                                                            2

                                                                              1.5
                  10
                                                                                1

                                                                              0.5
                   5
                                                                                0

                                                                             −0.5
                   0
                                                                               −1

                  −5                                                         −1.5
                                   5            10           15    20               5            10         15    20


                             −3
                       x 10            Output to Gov. Spending



                   5
                                                                                    Linear IRF
                                                                                    Linear IRF w/o Confidence
                   0


                  −5


                 −10
                                   5            10           15    20


Figure A-4 shows the impulse responses to a defense news shock as defined in Ramey (2011). Figure A-
5 shows impulse responses to an unanticipated government spending shock. The system features defense
news, total government spending, consumer confidence, and real GDP. The solid lines are the estimated
impulse responses. The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines are the impulse
responses when confidence is held fixed.


    Eliminating the indirect effect of confidence leaves the output response to the defense
news shock smaller than in the actual impulse response, as we might expect, though the
difference is statistically insignificant. Comparison of Figure A-5 with the corresponding
figure in the case where we do not include the defense news variable (Figure 4) reveals
that the responses to a surprise spending shock are very similar. Figure A-6 below shows
the recession and linear impulse responses to an unanticipated government spending shock;
these are also very similar to the benchmark case (see Figure 6).



                                                                        39
     Figure A-6: Impulse Responses to Unanticipated Spending - Linear and Recession
                              −3 Gov.   Spending to Gov. Spending
                           x 10                                                    Confidence to Gov. Spending
                     15                                                        3


                                                                               2
                     10

                                                                               1
                      5
                                                                               0

                      0
                                                                              −1


                     −5                                                       −2
                                  5            10         15        20              5         10          15     20



                                    Output to Gov. Spending
                   0.015


                    0.01


                   0.005
                                                                                          Linear IRF
                                                                                          Recession IRF
                      0


                  −0.005


                   −0.01
                                  5            10         15        20



This figure shows impulse responses to an unanticipated government spending shock, both in the linear case
(solid lines) and in a recession (dashed lines). The system features defense news, total government spending,
consumer confidence, and real GDP. The solid lines are the estimated impulse responses. The shaded gray
areas are 90 percent confidence bands. The dashed lines are the impulse responses when confidence is held
fixed. The size of the shock in the non-linear system has been normalized to be the same as in the linear
system.



A.4      An Alternative Approach to Isolating the Role of Confidence
In the main part of the paper, we fix the underlying economic environment and isolate the
role of confidence in the transmission of policy shocks by decomposing the observed average
effect of government spending on output into its direct effect and its indirect effect through
confidence. An alternative interpretation of the question “Does Confidence Matter in the
Transmission of Government Spending Shocks?” would be to restrict the coefficients of the
underlying VAR in such a way as to force the response of confidence to a spending shock
to be zero, and then compare the restricted impulse responses with the unrestricted ones.
There is a subtle difference to the baseline approach: there we fix the underlying economic
environment and study particular hypothetical shock combinations that hit this economy,
here we postulate a different (restricted) economic structure, i.e. confidence is structurally
not allowed to respond to government spending and output shocks, and reestimate. Then we
compare how different the unrestricted and the restricted economy behave after a surprise
increase in government spending.
    A necessary condition for confidence to not react to a spending shock at any horizon is
a2,1 = 0, so that it not react on impact. This plus restricting the AR coefficients on lagged
output and spending in the confidence equation to zero will be sufficient for imposing that
confidence not react to a spending shock at any horizon. We implement these restrictions


                                                                         40
by estimating the benchmark three variable system using seemingly unrelated regressions,
with the additional restriction that confidence not react to a spending shock on impact. The
impulse responses for the benchmark system with consumer confidence are shown below, for
the linear case (Figure A-7) and recessions (Figure A-8).


  Figure A-7: Impulse Responses to Spending Shock: Restriction on Confidence - Linear
                                  Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                    Confidence to Gov. Spending
                  0.012                                                       1.5

                   0.01                                                        1
                  0.008
                                                                              0.5
                  0.006
                                                                               0
                  0.004

                  0.002                                                      −0.5

                      0                                                       −1
                                      5        10         15       20                5            10     15       20


                                 −3
                          x 10        Output to Gov. Spending

                      6

                      4                                                                  Unrestricted
                                                                                         Restricted
                      2

                      0

                    −2


                                      5        10         15       20


The solid line in Figure A-7 shows the unrestricted impulse responses to a spending shock from the three
variable linear system with government spending, confidence, and output. The dashed lines show responses
to a spending shock from a SUR system in which the coefficients on lagged output and government spending
in the confidence equation are restricted to be zero. The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands.


Figure A-8: Impulse Responses to Spending Shock: Restriction on Confidence - Recession
                                  Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                    Confidence to Gov. Spending
                  0.015                                                        4


                                                                               3

                   0.01
                                                                               2


                                                                               1
                  0.005

                                                                               0


                     0                                                         −1
                                      5        10         15       20                5            10     15       20


                             −3       Output to Gov. Spending
                          x 10


                    15

                                                                                         Unrestricted
                    10                                                                   Restricted


                     5


                     0


                                      5        10         15       20



The solid line in Figure A-8 shows the unrestricted impulse responses to a spending shock from the three
variable non-linear system in a recession. The dashed lines show responses to a spending shock from a SUR
system in which the coefficients on lagged output and government spending in the confidence equation are
restricted to be zero. The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands. The size of the shock has been
normalized to be the same as in the linear system.


                                                                        41
   Both figures, which show the linear and the recession response to a government spending
shock, respectively, are almost identical to what obtains in our benchmark approach (see
Figures 4 and 8).


A.5     Seemingly Unrelated Regressions
In the main text, we find that government spending multipliers are much larger in recessions
compared to normal times. In addition, we find that the hypothetical output response
without confidence is much smaller. One potential concern is that the response of government
spending to its own shock is not the same in the hypothetical case. For example, see the
impulse responses in Figure 8 (in the upper left panel). There we observe that a spending
shock in a recession leads to a much less persistent response of spending when confidence is
held fixed.
    In principle, the output response to a spending shock could be much smaller simply be-
cause the government spending response to its own shock is less persistent. This is consistent
with two different views of the world. On the one hand, the government spending response
could be smaller because the output response is weaker when confidence is held fixed. If
government spending responds positively to output fluctuations with a delay (see Bachmann
and Bai, 2011), a weaker and less persistent response of government spending to its own
shock should be expected. On the other hand, it could also be the case that government
spending is responding directly to lagged confidence. While this is possible, one might be
concerned that imprecisely estimated coefficients on lagged confidence could cause the gov-
ernment spending response to be less persistent and thus artificially cause the smaller output
response.
    To address this possibility, we re-estimate the system using seemingly unrelated regres-
sions (SUR), in which we impose a restriction that the coefficients on lagged confidence in
the government spending equation be zero. The identification of the spending shock and the
construction of the hypothetical impulse response where the indirect output effect is elimi-
nated are otherwise the same. Figure A-9 shows the linear actual and hypothetical responses;
Figure A-10 shows the linear vs. recession impulse responses, and Figure A-11 shows the
actual and hypothetical recession responses from the non-linear estimation. Although there
are some minor differences with the benchmark estimates, the qualitative responses are the
same, as are the conclusions about the role of confidence in the transmission of spending
shocks during a recession.




                                             42
                    Figure A-9: Impulse Responses to Spending Shock: SUR
                          Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                   Confidence to Gov. Spending
                   0.02                                              3

                                                                     2
                  0.015

                                                                     1
                   0.01
                                                                     0

                  0.005
                                                                     −1


                     0                                               −2
                            5         10        15         20                5        10         15      20


                             Output to Gov. Spending

                   0.01


                  0.005                                                   Linear IRF
                                                                          Linear IRF w/o Confidence
                     0


                 −0.005


                  −0.01
                            5         10        15         20


Figure A-9 shows impulse responses to a government spending shock from the benchmark system with
government spending, consumer confidence, and real GDP, but estimated via seemingly unrelated regressions
(SUR) imposing that lagged confidence does not appear in the government spending equation. The solid
lines are the estimated impulse responses. The shaded gray areas are 90 percent confidence bands. The
dashed lines are the impulse responses when uncertainty is held fixed.


      Figure A-10: Impulse Responses to Spending Shock: SUR, Recession vs. Linear
                          Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                   Confidence to Gov. Spending
                   0.02                                              3

                                                                     2
                  0.015

                                                                     1
                   0.01
                                                                     0

                  0.005
                                                                     −1


                     0                                               −2
                            5         10        15         20                5        10         15      20


                             Output to Gov. Spending

                   0.01


                  0.005
                                                                                      Linear IRF
                     0                                                                Recession IRF


                 −0.005


                  −0.01
                            5         10        15         20


The dashed lines in Figure A-10 are impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession
estimated from a non-linear system with government spending, consumer confidence and real GDP via
seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) imposing that lagged confidence does not appear in the government
spending equation. The solid lines are the estimated impulse responses from the linear system, and the
shaded gray areas are the 90 percent confidence bands from the linear system. The size of the shock in the
non-linear system has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                43
Figure A-11: Impulse Responses to Spending Shock: SUR, Recession with and without
Confidence
                           Gov. Spending to Gov. Spending                       Confidence to Gov. Spending
                   0.02                                               4

                                                                      3
                  0.015
                                                                      2

                                                                      1
                   0.01
                                                                      0

                                                                      −1
                  0.005
                                                                      −2

                      0                                               −3
                             5         10        15         20                   5         10        15       20


                              Output to Gov. Spending

                   0.02
                  0.015                                                    Recession IRF
                                                                           Recession IRF w/o Confidence
                   0.01
                  0.005
                      0

                  −0.005
                   −0.01

                             5         10        15         20


The solid lines in Figure A-11 are estimated impulse responses to a government spending shock in a recession
estimated from the non-linear specification via seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) imposing that lagged
confidence does not appear in the government spending equation. The shaded gray regions are 90 percent
confidence bands. The dashed lines are the impulse responses when uncertainty is held fixed. The size of
the shock has been normalized to be the same as in the linear system.




                                                                 44
