NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DOCTOR MIGHT SEE YOU NOW:
THE SUPPLY SIDE EFFECTS OF PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE EXPANSIONS
Craig L. Garthwaite
Working Paper 17070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17070

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

I am grateful for the helpful comments on this draft from Jen Brown, Meghan Busse, Kerwin Charles,
Leemore Dafny, David Dranove, Mark Duggan, and Bill Evans as well as seminar participations at
the Olin Business School at Washington University, the Harris School of Public Policy at the University
of Chicago, and the Indiana University School of Policy and Environmental Affairs. In addition, I
am thankful to Kosali Simon for providing valuable data and suggestions on the entire project. All
errors remain my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Craig L. Garthwaite. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public Health Insurance Expansions
Craig L. Garthwaite
NBER Working Paper No. 17070
May 2011
JEL No. H0,H4,I1,I18
ABSTRACT
In the United States, public health insurance programs cover over 90 million individuals. Changes
in the scope of these programs, such as the Medicaid expansions under the recently passed Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, may have large effects on physician behavior. This study finds
that following the implementation of the State Children’s Health Insurance Program, physicians decreased
the number of hours spent with patients, but increased their participation in the expanded program.
Suggestive evidence is found that this decrease in hours was a result of shorter office visits. These
findings are consistent with the predictions from a mixed-economy model of physician behavior with
public and private payers and also provide evidence of crowd out resulting from the creation of SCHIP.
Craig L. Garthwaite
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

I.

Introduction
In the United States, public health insurance programs provide coverage to over 90

million individuals (United States Census, 2010). Due to the prominence of these programs in
the healthcare sector, their expansion may have large effects on physician behavior such as labor
supply. For example, the recent health care reform debate in the United States culminated with
the signing of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)—which is expected to,
among other things, increase enrollment in public health insurance programs by 16 million
(Congressional Budget Office, 2010). Given the existing predictions of physician shortages, the
expected increase in the utilization of medical services by these millions of newly insured
Americans has generated concerns among policymakers and health professionals about the
potential for dramatically longer waiting times for appointments, lower quality of care, and
overloaded physician practices (AAMC, 2010). These concerns will only be magnified if public
health insurance expansions decrease the labor supply of existing physicians.
Any negative effects of decreased physician labor supply may be worse for Medicaid
patients who are already covered by a program that is increasingly not accepted by physicians.
Cunningham and May (2006) found that from 1996 to 2005 the percentage of physicians
reporting no Medicaid patients (as defined by practice revenue) increased by 13 percent. Over
the same time period, the percentage of physicians reporting that they were not accepting new
Medicaid patients increased from 19.4 to 21 percent. The increase was largest for physicians who
reported receiving little revenue from Medicaid.
It is, therefore, important to understand how large expansions of public health insurance
programs affect physician labor supply and participation in the newly-expanded programs.
However, there is little existing evidence about the impact of an increase in the size of a public

1

insurance program on the behavior of physicians. The creation and implementation of the State
Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) in the 1990s provides an opportunity to
investigate this question. SCHIP was a partnership between federal and state governments
intended to increase insurance coverage for low-income Americans under the age of 19.
I apply the Sloan, Mitchell, and Cromwell (1978) model of a mixed economy with
private and public payers to this question and predict that physicians affected by the
implementation of SCHIP should decrease the quantity of medical services they provide and
increase their participation in the public insurance program. This results from the fact that, for a
portion of the physicians who were not previously participating in the public insurance program,
the implementation of SCHIP changes the marginal patient from one covered by private
insurance to one covered by the lower-reimbursing government program.
I test the predictions of this mixed economy model using a difference-in-differences (DD)
identification strategy that exploits the practice patterns of different types of physicians. Because
of the age limit for SCHIP beneficiaries (children under the age of 19), pediatricians were
disproportionately affected by the new insurance program. Physicians in other specialties are
used to control for secular trends and contemporaneous events that may have influenced the time
path of outcomes. To capture state level differences in program generosity which may affect
physician behavior, I use the simulated SCHIP eligibility measure in Gruber and Simon (2008).
In this analysis I use two different nationally-representative datasets. Each of these
datasets has strengths and weaknesses with respect to this analysis. The primary dataset for this
analysis, the Community Tracking Study physician survey (CTS), contains data on physician
hours spent on patient care, insurance acceptance patterns, and practice level revenue data. In
addition, this dataset also allows researchers to track a group of physicians over time and

2

contains state identifiers—both of which are critical for the proposed identification strategy.
However, the CTS does not contain any visit level data detailing the length of office visits or the
number of diagnostic services performed—limiting my ability to investigate the mechanism by
which physicians alter their labor supply in response to a public health insurance expansion.
The second dataset, the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS), is a visitlevel survey of office-based physicians. These data cover, among other things, physician
demographics, patient insurance status, and the amount of time the physician spent with the
patient. However, this dataset does not contain state identifiers or provide the ability to track
physicians over time. It also has no practice level information about Medicaid acceptance or the
hours worked by physicians. These weaknesses decrease the precision of estimates of the effect
of SCHIP.
Implementing the DD strategy utilizing the state-based measures of simulated eligibility,
I find that SCHIP decreased the number of hours spent on patient care. In addition, this
expansion of public health insurance increased the percentage of pediatricians that reported
seeing any Medicaid patients, accepting new Medicaid patients, and the amount of revenue
received from Medicaid. Examining the visit-level data from the NAMCS, I find suggestive
evidence that this decrease in labor supply comes from shorter visit lengths for Medicaid patients
after the implementation of SCHIP—in particular, I find a decrease in the number of visits
lasting more than 10 minutes (p-value < 0.10).
Taken together, the above results support the predictions of the mixed economy model
across several different outcomes including labor supply, accepting patients from the new public
insurance program, and the amount of revenue received from the new program. The consistency

3

across these wide ranging outcomes, which are not intuitively connected through a means other
than those proposed by the model, provides support for the totality of the findings.

II.

The State Children’s Health Insurance Program
SCHIP is a state-administered health insurance program financed jointly by state and

federal governments. Created as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, it was intended to
provide health insurance coverage to low-income children without health insurance who did not
qualify for coverage under the income limits for traditional Medicaid. The legislation gave states
three options for creating a program. States could enroll progressively higher income children in
the existing Medicaid program, create a separate state insurance program, or implement a
combination of these two approaches. Separate SCHIP programs were allowed more flexibility
in program rules.1 Initial enrollments in the program grew quickly and by 1999 there were 2
million children enrolled in the program (Herz, Fernandez, and Peterson, 2005). As of 2009, the
program covered 4.9 million children (Smith et al. 2010).

III. Previous Research on Physician Labor Supply and Medicaid Participation Decisions
There are two main strands of research upon which this study builds. The first analyzes
the determinants of physician procedure intensity and labor supply. There is a long theoretical
literature studying the ability of physicians to induce demand for their services (Fuchs, 1978;
Pauly, 1980; Dranove, 1988). The essence of the induced demand model is that following a
negative shock to earnings, doctors take advantage of the information asymmetry between

1

For a detailed description of the different structures of SCHIP programs see Allen (2007).

4

physicians and their patients to increase the intensity of treatment. To date, the empirical support
for models of physician-induced-demand has been mixed.2
The induced demand literature primarily addressed questions related to treatment
intensity and revenue generating activities—not specifically labor supply (although the concepts
are clearly correlated). An outstanding question in the literature is: What is the effect of income
shocks on the actual amount of labor supplied by physicians, as opposed to simply their revenue
generating activities such as increased testing or referrals? Enterline, McDonald, and McDonald
(1973) interviewed random samples of Canadian physicians before and after the introduction of a
universal health care program in Quebec. In this context, physicians decreased their hours
worked following the implementation of the universal health care program. More recently,
Staiger, Auerbach, and Buerhaus (2010) found that the observed decline in the reported number
of hours worked for physicians from 1996 to 2008 was related to declines in physician fees.
In addition to the literature describing physician-induced-demand and labor supply, this
analysis builds on previous work estimating the physician Medicaid participation decision.
Sloan, Mitchell and Cromwell (1978) provided one of the first models of physician participation
in Medicaid. Their mixed-economy model, which serves as the starting point for this paper, is
described in detail below. In addition to their theoretical contribution, the authors analyzed

2

Many of the original empirical tests of induced demand used two-stage least squares methods to estimate the effect
of the supply of physicians on the demand of services (Fuchs, 1978; Cromwell and Mitchell, 1986). The authors
attempted to identify plausibly exogenous variation in the location decision of physicians, and then used this
exogenous increase in supply to determine the effect on the consumption of medical services. Dranove and Wehner
(1994) highlighted potential econometric flaws in this approach and, as a falsification test, applied the same method
to childbirth—an area where there is likely little induced demand. The empirical approach still found an effect,
casting doubt on the validity of earlier estimates. A second strand of research into physician induced demand
examined differences in diagnostic testing patterns based on physician ownership of the testing equipment—
physicians receive more revenue from each diagnostic test performed when they own the equipment. Several
authors have found the physician ownership of this equipment increases the utilization of these services (Hillman et
al. 1990; Hillman et al., 1992; Crane, 1992; Mitchell and Scott, 1992). Other authors have using quasi-experimental
variation in physician income and found that physicians respond to income shocks by increasing treatment intensity
(Gruber and Owings, 1996).

5

survey data and found that factors which changed the relative reimbursement from the public
program (either higher Medicaid fee schedules or lower reimbursement rates in the private
market) were associated with increased participation in the government program. Subsequent
studies have also found that non-participation was sensitive to the reimbursements and
administrative burdens involved with Medicaid (Garner, Liao, and Sharpe, 1979; Mitchell,
1991), the size of the Medicaid eligible population in the geographic area (Mitchell, 1991), other
community level characteristics such as per capita income and segregation (Perloff et al., 1997),
and physician specific political believes (Sloan, Mitchell, and Cromwell, 1978).
Two previous works have examined the effect of an increase in Medicaid eligibility on
physician behavior. Baker and Royalty (2000) found that the Medicaid expansions for pregnant
women led to improved access to public clinics and hospitals. Bronstein, Adams, and Florence
(2004) examined physician participation responses to SCHIP in communities in Alabama (who
expanded their existing Medicaid program) and Georgia (who implemented a separate state
SCHIP program). They found that physicians in Georgia increased their participation in the
government insurance program while those in Alabama did not. The analysis did not examine
physician labor supply or practice patterns beyond public health insurance participation.

IV. The Effect of Public Health Insurance Expansions on the Private Insurance Market
Policy makers are often concerned with “crowd out,” a phenomenon whereby many of
the newly insured individuals following an expansion previously had coverage from another
source. Cutler and Gruber (1996) found that following the original Medicaid expansions, the
uninsurance rate fell by only half as much as the increase in those covered by the expansion—a
crowd out rate of 50 percent. Building on this foundational study, a sizeable literature emerged

6

estimating the presence and magnitude of crowd out following the expansion of public health
insurance programs. Using a variety of methods, authors have also found evidence of varying
levels of crowd-out (Dubay and Kenney, 1996 and 1997; Yazici and Kaestner, 2000). A second
set of authors have used the longitudinal data in Survey of Income Program Participation (SIPP),
and found little evidence of crowd out (Bloomberg et al., 2000; Card and Shore Sheppard, 2004;
Ham and Shore Sheppard, 2005).
These earlier studies estimated the crowd out from the original expansions to the
Medicaid program in the late 1980s. Since that time, a number of authors have examined the
amount of crowd out from SCHIP. Similar to Cutler and Gruber’s original work, LoSasso and
Buchmueller (2004) found a crowd out rate of 50 percent. More recently, Gruber and Simon
(2008) found a crowd out rate from SCHIP of approximately 60 percent.

V.

A Mixed-Economy Model of Physician Behavior
I apply the model of physician pricing in a mixed economy introduced by Sloan,

Mitchell, and Cromwell (1978) to examine how physicians respond to an increase in the size of
the government’s role in the insurance sector. In this model, a physician faces two markets: one
with privately-insured patients displaying a downward sloping demand curve and another with
government-insured patients whose insurance pays a fixed reimbursement. Physicians will
accept patients in the private market until the marginal revenue equals the government
reimbursement rate. After that threshold, they will accept Medicaid patients until their marginal
costs are equal to the Medicaid reimbursement rate. For simplicity, the model traditionally
assumes that physicians provide a homogenous good, which can be thought of as office visits or
other standard medical services. Extensions to this assumption are discussed below.

7

Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of this model. In the pre-expansion time
period, the marginal revenue curve faced by a physician is the bold line composed of segments
of the MRp curve (which represents the marginal revenue from treating privately insured or selfpay patients) and the Pm curve (which represents the fixed reimbursement from the government
insurance program). In this case, physicians with marginal costs curves of MC and MC’ would
not accept patients from the government market.3 A physician with the curve in the
neighborhood of MC’’, however, would see a mixture of both private and public sector patients.
The most obvious effect of the expansion of a public insurance program is an increase in
the number of people covered by the program. In addition, crowd-out will shift individuals from
private to public health coverage. Under the simplifying assumption that the crowd-out from
SCHIP occurs randomly across insured individuals regardless of their pre-expansion willingness
to pay for medical services, the effect on the private market can be seen by the inward rotation of
the demand curve in Figure 1.4 As a result, the post-expansion marginal revenue curve faced by
the physician is constructed by the dotted lines marked by the curves MR’ and its intersection
with the Pm curve.
A physician’s response to this expansion is determined by his or her marginal cost curve
and its intersection with the post-expansion marginal revenue curve. Consider a physician with a
marginal cost curve in the neighborhood of MC. In the pre-expansion time period, this physician
would not treat Medicaid patients. After the expansion, this doctor’s behavior is predicted to
change in two ways: (1) the physician will provide a lower quantity of medical services (moving
3

These physicians are easily observable in the CTS, where 12.33 percent of physicians report receiving no revenue
from Medicaid and 19 percent of physicians report they are not accepting new Medicaid patients during the first
panel of the survey.
4
The simplifying assumption is reasonable and makes the following analysis more intuitive. The qualitative
predictions from the model will carry through under more complicated assumptions about the pattern of crowd out.
The most realistic alternate assumption would be that the crowd out would primarily occur among individuals who
had the least generous insurance coverage. If this were to occur, the magnitude of the predicted effect would
increase.

8

from Q1 to Q2) and (2) the physician will begin to participate in the Medicaid program by
accepting new Medicaid patients. Physicians with marginal cost curves similar to MC’’ and
MC’ should not alter their labor supply or Medicaid participation—they will continue to provide
the same quantity of services and only see private patients because their marginal patient is not
affected by the crowd out of individuals from the private market. Similarly, physicians with
marginal costs similar to MC’’ should provide the same quantity of medical services.
The mixed-economy model provides the following predictions regarding a public health
insurance expansion:

Prediction 1: The implementation of SCHIP should decrease the quantity of medical services
provided by physicians with little pre-SCHIP Medicaid contact who treat patients under age 19.5
Prediction 1a: Holding their marginal cost curve constant, similar physicians who are
already heavily participating in Medicaid should see no change in the quantity of medical
services provided.
Prediction 2: The implementation of SCHIP should increase physician participation in Medicaid
among physicians with little pre-SCHIP Medicaid contact who treat patients under age 19.
Prediction 2a: Similar physicians who are already heavily participating in the Medicaid
program should not see any change in their participation or nonparticipation decision.
Prediction 2b: The implementation of SCHIP should increase the percentage of revenue
received from Medicaid patients for all physicians with patients under the age of 19.

5

In contrast, earlier studies examining induced demand suggest that physicians should increase, rather than
decrease, the quantity of medical services provided in response an income shock such as the implementation of
SCHIP. It is important to note, however, that the predictions of the mixed economy model above do not involve a
shift in the labor supply curve of physicians.

9

The model described above is used traditionally to describe the provision of office
services or other discrete medical activities. As is the case in this study, the quantity of medical
services underlying the model above can also be extended to the broader concept of physician
labor supply and hours worked. In this case, the marginal revenue curve represents the expected
reimbursements received by the physician for the next hour of work seeing a patient covered by
either private or the public health insurance. One might worry that physicians respond to
exogenous changes in the insurance market by spending more time with each patient without
billing them for the extra care. However, since physicians trade-off patient hours for leisure time,
it is reasonable to assume they would not react to changes in the insurance market by providing
more unreimbursed labor. Under this assumption, the quantity of medical services in predictions
(1) and (1a) can be thought of as hours spent with patients.
It is important to note that the mixed economy model, in a situation of no crowd-out,
predicts either no change (or an increase) in the number of hours worked by affected physicians
and no effect on physician participation. Without any crowd out, there is no inward rotation of
the upper segment of the demand curve. Instead, the increase in the number of individuals
eligible for Medicaid comes primarily from the downward sloping portion of the demand curve
below the reimbursement rate of Medicaid. In this case, only physicians with a marginal cost
curve in the neighborhood of MC’’’, if they exist, should experience a change in reimbursements
from their marginal patient. Since this marginal patient was either uninsured or privately insured
by an insurer paying reimbursement rates lower than those offered by Medicaid, there should be
no decrease in labor supply or increase in program participation. Therefore, finding results
consistent with the model’s predictions serve as further evidence of crowd-out caused by SCHIP.

10

The mixed economy model was first developed to explain physician responses to the
expansion of an existing fixed reimbursement government insurance program. Given that this
paper focuses on the creation of a new government program, it is natural to question the
appropriateness of the model in this context. As discussed above, states were given the freedom
to implement SCHIP through various means. Therefore, the magnitude of the effect of SCHIP
on physician behavior may differ depending on the type of state-level implementation.6 To
address this concern, I provide separate analyses of samples containing all states and those
containing states that increased their existing Medicaid program (hereafter referred to as
“Medicaid expansion states”). These states are also those most comparable to the model above.

VI. Data
The primary dataset for this analysis is the Community Tracking Study Physician Survey
(CTS). This dataset is a nationally-representative random sample survey of physicians who
provide at least 20 hours of direct patient care per week. The sample is constructed from the
master files of the American Medical Association and the American Osteopathic Association.
Data from 60 communities are in the primary sample. Among these communities, 12 are
designated as “high intensity” locations that have a larger sample size. To allow for national
estimates, the data from the remaining 48 communities are supplemented with responses from a
random national sample of physicians. The dataset oversamples primary care physicians and

6

However, it is not the case that the absolute level of the Medicaid reimbursement rate in any particular state should
drive, in isolation, the estimated response of physicians. The estimated physician response to an expansion in this
model is determined jointly by the distribution of marginal costs among physicians and the difference between the
reimbursements received in the private market and those from Medicaid for patients who are crowded out. States
with high pre-expansion reimbursement rates should be expected to have a different concentration of physicians
whose marginal costs place them at the participation margin relative to the concentration in states with lower preexpansion reimbursements. There is no clear prediction about the size of this concentration based on the
reimbursement rate and there no expectations about the direction of estimated direction of the effect of public health
insurance expansions on physician labor supply based solely on the prevailing Medicaid reimbursement rate.

11

includes non-federal physicians in a wide variety of practice settings including group practice,
health clinics, hospitals, government facilities, and universities.
The analysis uses the longitudinal component of three waves of the survey (1996-1997,
1997-1998, and 2000-2001). The longitudinal component of each wave, which interviewed a
smaller group of physicians, allows for the use of physician-level fixed effects. Moreover, I can
estimate the heterogeneous effect of SCHIP based on the initial conditions of physicians (in
particular their pre-expansion Medicaid participation). The increase in information from the
panel does, however, reduces to sample size to 5,060 physicians.
The CTS contains data on the number of hours per week physicians spend on patient care
and medical care, respectively.7 Two questions pertain to participation in the Medicaid program:
whether the physician is accepting “new Medicaid patients” and the percentage of the practice
revenue from Medicaid. Data on Medicaid reimbursement rates are available for 1993, 1998,
and 2003 from the Urban Institute’s survey of physician fees (Zuckerman and Norton, 2000;
Zuckerman et al., 2004). These data are matched to the closest respective years in the CTS.8
The longitudinal component of the CTS allows physicians to be tracked over time and
includes data about hours worked, insurance participation, and practice revenue. However, the
data contain no information on the number of patients seen, office visits provided, or services
rendered during a visit. In addition, the revenue data is at the practice rather than the physician

7

Physicians are asked for the number of hours spent on “medically related activities” and “direct patient care
activities” during the last completed week of work. Because the number of hours spent on patient care is a subset of
all medical activities, the patient care variable is replaced with the medical care data if the reported number of hours
on patient care exceeds the reported number for medical activities. This occurred for only 0.14% of observations in
the sample.
8
These data are for the Medicaid fee for service (FFS) system. Many Medicaid enrollees are now covered by
managed care, but in general the reimbursements for the physicians under these systems are intended to be similar to
those for the FFS system. A small number of observations were dropped in years when Medicaid fee data are not
available for a physician.

12

level. I address this last limitation by using a subset of data from small group practices with one
or two physicians—a group whose practice income is closely related to their personal income.
Since the CTS does not contain a visit-level component, it is not possible to analyze the
effect of SCHIP on visit-level practice patterns. Therefore, I use data from the 1993-2002
National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS).9 NAMCS is a nationally-representative
survey designed to provide information on the use of ambulatory medical care services in the
United States. The survey is administered by the Centers for Disease Control. Similar to the
CTS, the sampling frame from the NAMCS comes from the masterfiles of the AMA and the
AOA, and contains physicians who are classified as providing “office-based, patient care.” A
random sample of these physicians is surveyed about their practice patterns during one randomly
selected week. Data are collected on a variety of dimensions, including patient demographics,
insurance status, and visit length.
Because it does not contain longitudinal data, the NAMCS cannot be used to classify
physicians based on their pre-expansion participation in Medicaid. The survey also lacks state
identifiers and, therefore, eliminates any ability to use the simulated eligibility measure of
variation in SCHIP generosity—reducing the precision of estimates from these data.

VII. Empirical Strategy
The sample for the difference-in-differences analysis described below is composed of
physicians with low pre-expansion participation in Medicaid. From the CTS, I categorize
physicians as low-Medicaid participators if the percentage of their revenue from Medicaid prior

9

This covers the period of five years of data before and after the creation of SCHIP.

13

to SCHIP is less than or equal to five percent. In the first panel of the CTS, 42 percent of all
physicians and 31 percent of pediatricians fall into this category.10
To implement the difference-in-differences strategy, I must identify a treatment group of
physicians who are affected by the public health insurance expansion and a control group of
physicians whose practices were not affected by the policy change. As discussed above,
pediatricians, whose caseload is primarily composed of individuals under the age of 19, form the
treatment group. Identifying a comparison group requires selecting a set of physicians whose
time path of outcomes would be, in the absence of the implementation of SCHIP, similar to that
of pediatricians. I use physicians in all other specialties as the control group.
The lack of several periods of pre-treatment data in the CTS eliminates any direct tests of
the parallel trends assumption underlying the DD identification strategy. Instead, I provide
descriptive statistics by specialty to assess the similarity of these two groups. Table 1 presents
these statistics for the first panel of the CTS based on both specialty and pre-expansion Medicaid
participation. Focusing on the physicians reporting less than five percent of their pre-expansion
practice revenue from Medicaid, pediatricians are most similar to internists and general
practitioners. They are less similar to physicians in the general specialties, surgical specialties,
obstetrics and gynecology, and psychiatrists. The outcome variables defining Medicaid
participation appear in the last two columns. On average, the percentage of revenue that
pediatricians earn from Medicaid is similar to the physicians with “internal medicine” and

10

Data on the percentage of revenue from Medicaid have large concentrations of respondents clustered on round
numbers (5, 10, 15). Ideally, I would identify physicians that report no pre-SCHIP revenue from Medicaid.
However, in the first panel of CTS only 10 percent of pediatricians fall into this category. Another possible measure
of a low Medicaid provider is not accepting new Medicaid patients in the time period prior to the implementation of
SCHIP. The sample size of this group is larger than those reporting no revenue from Medicaid, but still relatively
small, creating concerns of Type II errors. Estimating the main results of the paper using either of these two
alternate pre-SCHIP Medicaid participation produces estimates that are qualitatively similar in magnitude but less
precise than those presented below. The estimates are also robust to a range of other cutoffs between 5 and 10
percent.

14

“general and family practice” specialties. The outcomes of new Medicaid patient acceptance are
also similar between the groups—though here there is a larger difference between pediatrics and
general and family practice. Pediatricians appear to work slightly fewer hours than physicians in
other specialties, although this difference is small in magnitude.11
Without several periods of pre-expansion data on physicians, it is not possible to examine
the pre-treatment trends of CTS outcomes by physician specialty. However, using the NAMCS,
I can examine differences in the trends between the treatment and control groups for visit-level
outcomes such as amount of time spent with the physician. Figure 2 shows the average duration
of a physician visit by specialty between 1993 and 2002. The dashed vertical line represents the
implementation year of SCHIP for the vast majority of states.12 Prior to the implementation of
SCHIP, the average duration for each specialty followed generally similar trends. After 1998,
the average duration for a visit between physician types exhibits a sharp break. Although they
are for a different outcome and data, combined with the descriptive statistics in Table 1, these
similar pre-treatment trends provide additional support for the DD strategy.
Recall that states were given discretion over the size of their program, including setting
income eligibility limits. If physicians’ responses to the expansion of a public insurance
expansion are related to the scale of the program, then this variation in program sizes provides
valuable information. One naïve method of exploiting the state-based variation in program size
classifies states by the number of children actually enrolled in the program. This method,
however, conflates other factors such as changes in local economic conditions with
11

The most striking way in which pediatricians differ from other physicians is that pediatricians are almost all
primary care physicians. While the main results of my analysis will pertain to a comparison group of all physicians,
I also estimated results containing only primary care physicians. This smaller sample size decreases precision but
produces results of similar magnitude. Finding similar results with this more limited control group provides
suggestive evidence that using the full sample of physicians is not biasing the estimates.
12
NAMCS does not contain state identifiers and, therefore, it is not possible to perfectly identify when SCHIP was
implemented for each physician. Examining data from the simulated eligibility measure, I find that 1998 marks the
first year of a large increase in the percentage of children who are eligible for Medicaid and SCHIP in most states.

15

programmatic changes such as income eligibility limits. If local economic conditions are
correlated with physician behavior, using enrollment as a measure program size would generate
biased estimates of the effect of public health insurance expansions on supplier behavior.
This problem in identifying state variation in the size of Medicaid expansions was first
identified in Cutler and Gruber (1996). To overcome the problem, the authors generated a
simulated eligibility measure. Gruber and Simon (2008) implemented a similar procedure for
SCHIP. Under this procedure, the Medicaid and SCHIP eligibility was determined for a
nationally-representative sample of children under the age of 19 from the 1996 CPS (whose
family income was adjusted for inflation in subsequent years). This eligibility was determined
using program rules in place in 1996, 1999, and 2001—the years for which there is
corresponding CTS data. Simulated eligibility was then aggregated to the state level to
determine the percentage of children under the age of 19 from the CPS sample eligible for either
Medicaid or SCHIP in each year in each state.13 Changes in this percentage provide an unbiased
measure of state-level differences in program rules. The following analysis explores whether
physicians’ responsiveness varies with the magnitude of state expansions.
Table 2 contains descriptive statistics of the simulated eligibility measure of SCHIP
expansion. Between 1996 and 2001, the average increase in the percentage of children from the
national sample eligible for this public insurance coverage was 20.9 percentage points. For
states included in the CTS, the smallest increase was 5.4 percentage points in North Dakota and
the largest was 49.48 percentage points in Missouri.14 I use this measure of simulated eligibility
in the following OLS regression:

13

Gruber and Simon (2008) contains a more detailed description of this method of determining state-level changes
in program size.
14
As of September 30, 2001, the income limit for eligibility for the SCHIP program in North Dakota was 140% of
the poverty line, while the limit in Missouri was 300% of the poverty line.

16

HOURS it  0  1 REIMBit  1SIMELIGit   2 SIMELIGit * PEDi  i  t   it

(1)

where HOURSit is equal to the number of hours spent on either patient care or direct medical
services during the last full week of work by physician i during CTS panel t, REIMB it is the
Urban Institute Medicaid reimbursement index, μi is an physician fixed effect, pt are CTS survey
year dummies, and it is an idiosyncratic error term. PEDi is an indicator variable for a physician
reporting a primary specialty of pediatrics, and SIMELIGit is the simulated eligibility measure
described above. The coefficient of interest is β2. Under the assumption that the pre-expansion
trends in hours worked are common across all physicians, this coefficient represents the effect of
the expansion of SCHIP on the number of hours worked by a pediatrician.
Equation (1) is estimated for low-Medicaid participating physicians, defined as those
reporting five percent or less of their practice revenue from Medicaid prior to SCHIP. As
discussed above, states that created a separate state program instead of expanding Medicaid were
also allowed to make programmatic changes such as different provider networks, administrative
burdens on providers, and reimbursements. In general, these changes were intended to increase
physician participation in the program by decreasing the difference between the public and
private insurance plans. Another significant difference is that in states with a separate program,
physicians could choose to treat SCHIP patients without opening their practice to all Medicaid
patients—limiting the impact of the decision to participate in the program. To address any
concerns of bias from these programmatic differences, I generate estimates for a sample
containing only Medicaid expansion states.
The underlying assumption of the differences-in-differences model is that the behavior of
the comparison sample provides an estimate for the time path of outcomes for the treatment
group had the intervention, in this case the creation of SCHIP, not been implemented. If there

17

were other unmeasured and time varying factors differentially affecting only pediatricians in the
low-Medicaid exposure sample, β2 would provide a biased measure of the effect of SCHIP. This
potential bias can be overcome by using the behavior of another group of pediatricians who
should react similarly to secular trends and contemporaneous shocks but are unaffected, or less
affected, by the implementation of SCHIP. Under the predictions of the mixed economy model
above, SCHIP should not affect either the Medicaid participation or labor supply decisions of
physicians who are already heavily participating in the Medicaid program. Therefore, these
physicians can be used as an additional control for specialty specific secular trends or
contemporaneous shocks that may be affecting pediatricians but are unrelated to the public
health insurance expansion. The equation of interest in this difference-in-difference-indifferences (DDD) identification strategy is:
HOURS it   0   1 REIMBit  1 SIMELIGit   2 SIMELIGit * PEDi 

 3 SIMELIGit * 5% MCAIDi   4 PEDi * SIMELIGit * 5% MCAIDi   i  pt   it

(2)

where 5%MCAIDi is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a physician reports receiving 5 percent or
less of their pre-expansion practice revenue from Medicaid. All other variables are defined as in
equation (1) and the DDD parameter of interest is η4.
In addition to predictions regarding labor supply, the mixed-economy model predicts that
the implementation of SCHIP should change the participation of physicians in the program.
Therefore, I also estimate specifications of equation (1) and (2) with dependent variables for
several measures of Medicaid participation. These estimates will be provided for different
samples of physicians based on the type of SCHIP expansion in their state and the practice
setting of the physician.
The shortcomings of the NAMCS make the empirical strategy above infeasible with these
data, and I propose an alternative empirical strategy here. Instead of using state and time
18

variation in SCHIP, I exploit the fact that most states implemented their program in 1998 and use
temporal variation to identify the effect of the program on physician practice patterns. Because
physicians cannot be grouped based on their pre-expansion Medicaid revenue in the NAMCS
data, the sample for these estimates will contain a large number of high Medicaid participating
physicians whose labor supply is predicted to be unaffected by the implementation of SCHIP.
This generates a bias away from finding an effect of the program on visit duration. With these
caveats in mind, I estimate the following equation:

DURATION i   0  1 X i   1 POSTSCHIPi * PEDi   i

(3)

where DURATIONi will be a series of variables describing the length of time patients spent with
a physician, Xi is a set of demographic controls for such factors as physician specialty, doctor
type (MD or DO), whether the physician practices in an MSA, patient age and race, and indicator
variables for each NAMCS survey year, PEDi is an indicator variable equal to one if a physician
reports a primary specialty of pediatrics, and POSTSCHIPt is an indicator variable equal to one
in the post-1997 NAMCS survey years. The coefficient of interest, γ1, represents the change in
the visit length for patients visiting pediatricians following the implementation of SCHIP
compared to visit length for patients visiting other specialists. Given the large sample size of the
NAMCS, this equation will be estimated on a sample of physicians most likely to be primary
care physicians: general practitioners, internists, and pediatricians.
The inability to track physicians over time in the NAMCS rules out the DDD
identification strategy used in equation (2). However, one might still worry that within-specialty
factors may bias the DD estimates. To address this concern, I implement a DDD identification
strategy using the visit lengths for privately insured patients to control for other factors

19

influencing the duration of visits to pediatricians.15 Under the assumption that in the absence of
the implementation of SCHIP the visit duration for patients with different insurers would have
had similar trends, this DDD strategy will provide consistent estimates of the effect of the
implementation of SCHIP on visit length. Figure 3 contains the average visit length for patients
visiting pediatricians by insurance status and year. Except for a separation in 1996, the preexpansion trends in visit length for these two groups of patients are similar, providing support for
the underlying assumption of the DDD identification strategy.
The validity of the estimates hinges on the parallel trend assumption. While Figure 2
and 3 provide some evidence of these trends, a more rigorous exploration of this assumption is
provided by the event time graphs shown in Figure 4 and 5. These graphs provide the
parameters estimates the DD and DDD identification strategy for the interaction term between
the indicator variable for being treated and each respective survey year (excluding 1993) for each
measure of visit duration: length in minutes, the natural log of visit length, and office visits
shorter than 10 minutes. Year 0 in these graphs represents 1998, the first year of SCHIP. For
reasons described in Section VI, the estimates are generally imprecise and volatile. However, the
figures do provide some suggestive evidence: for both the log of the visit length and a visit
length being less than or equal to ten minutes, the trend prior to 1998 is relatively smooth.
Following 1998, for both figures, there is a general decrease in visit length and increase in the
probability of a visit length of less than ten minutes. This pattern is most apparent for visits
shorter than 10 minutes in Figure 5. I cannot reject the null hypothesis that the parameter
estimates on the interaction term for the years before 1998 is equal to zero at a p-value of 0.10.

15

This DDD strategy would not work if physicians provided similar visit lengths regardless of insurance type.
Examining the NAMCS, however, shows that visit lengths with pediatricians are shorter for Medicaid patients then
they are with private patients.

20

VIII. The Effect of SCHIP on the Quantity of Medical Services Provided
The top panel of Table 3 reports the OLS estimates for specifications of equations (1) and
(2) with dependent variables for the two measures of physician labor supply. Recall that the
coefficient of interest is the interaction term for being a pediatrician and the simulated eligibility
variable. The average increase in the percentage of children from the national sample that are
newly eligible for SCHIP between 1996 and 2001 was 20.9 percentage points. Therefore, the
effect of SCHIP on physician labor supply for physicians in states implementing an expansion of
the average magnitude is determined by multiplying the estimated coefficient by this measure of
the average increase. Column (1) contains the estimated effect of SCHIP on the number of hours
spent each week on patient care for a sample of low Medicaid participating physicians. The
coefficient for these pediatricians is -9.57, statistically significant at a p-value of 0.05. Under the
assumption that pediatricians will react similarly to physicians in other specialties, the average
post-SCHIP increase in simulated Medicaid eligibility decreased the hours spent on patient care
by affected pediatricians by approximately two hours.16 For states at the 25th percentile of the
increase in SCHIP, the policy change decreased hours by approximately 1.6 hours; for those at
the 75th percentile the decrease was 2.3 hours. In the pre-expansion time period, these
pediatricians reported spending an average of 41.9 hours on patient care, suggesting that
physicians exposed to the average increase decreased their patient care hours by nearly 5 percent.

16

While the demographic data from the CTS discussed above show that pediatricians are similar to other doctors on
a number of dimensions, they are disproportionately more likely to be a primary care physician than are specialists
in other areas. If primary care physicians reacted differently to contemporaneous shocks or had different pretreatment trends in the dependent variables, the results will be biased. Unreported results from a sample of primary
care physicians in Medicaid expansion states returned a statistically significant (p-value <0.10) coefficient of -7.996
(4.268). This corresponds to a decrease of 1.7 hours per week spent on direct patient care for physicians exposed to
the average expansion. Overall, the estimates from the sample of primary care physicians in Medicaid expansion
states are similar in magnitude but less precisely estimated than the corresponding estimates in Table 3. This finding
should not be surprising given the smaller sample size when only considering primary care physicians.

21

Column (2) reports the DDD estimates for all physicians. These results show a
statistically significant (p-value<0.10) decrease in labor supply for low Medicaid participating
pediatricians. A similar decrease was not seen for high Medicaid participating pediatricians.
Columns (3) and (4) contain the estimates for the number of hours spent on medical care. These
results are smaller in magnitude and less precise than those for hours spent on patient care. For
example, column (4) contains the DDD coefficient, which show a statistically insignificant
decrease of 1.36 hours spent on medical care for low-Medicaid participating physicians exposed
to the average increase in program size.
The top panel of Table 3 reports the labor supply results for physicians in all states.
These estimates involve a tradeoff between the precision generated by the larger sample size and
a possible bias introduced by the simultaneous change in both the size of the public health
insurance market and the different rules for the separate state program. The bottom panel of
Table 3 contains estimates for physicians practicing in Medicaid expansion states. These point
estimates are uniformly larger and more precisely estimated than those for the sample of all
physicians. For example, the estimated effect on hours spent on patient care for low Medicaid
participating pediatricians is 3.48 hours—a decrease in hours of 7.5 percent. While the equality
of the two estimates cannot be rejected with 95 percent confidence, this result is statistically
significant at the 0.05 level and 50 percent larger than the estimate for all physicians. In contrast
to the sample of all physicians, the estimates for hours spent on medically related activities for
pediatricians in Medicaid states are large and statistically significant at a p-value of 0.05. Given
the difference in program structure, it should not be surprising that the estimated decrease in
hours for the Medicaid expansion states are larger in magnitude and more precise.

22

While the results from the CTS clearly show reduced physician labor supply in
response to SCHIP, the mechanism by which this reduction occurs remains an open question.
Column (1) of Table 7 contains the DD estimates from equation (3) for the effect of SCHIP on
visit length. While none of these estimates are statistically significant, all are large and in the
hypothesized direction. Specifically, SCHIP is associated with negative point estimates on
duration and positive estimates for the linear probability model indicating a visit length of less
than or equal to ten minutes.
Column (2) of Table 7 contains the DDD estimates. In general these estimates are
slightly larger and are more precisely estimated than the estimates in column (1). For example,
the estimate for visit length suggests a 1.2 minute decline in visit length, with a p-value of 0.11.
In the pre-expansion time period, pediatricians spent an average of 13.12 minutes in office visits
with Medicaid patients—suggesting that SCHIP decreased visit lengths by approximately 9
percent. The estimates in the third row show that the implementation of SCHIP increased the
probability of having a visit of visit of less than or equal to 10 minutes by 6.5 percentage points.
This estimate is statistically significant at the 0.10 level.17 It is important to note that these
estimates correspond to the amount of time spent with the physician and not the length of time
the physician spends in the office. Therefore, the estimate effect could simply indicate a
substitution of physician time with services from other employees such as a nurse practitioner.
In addition to these event time graphs in Figure 4 and 5, I report a placebo regression using
pre-expansion data as another test of the parallel trends assumption. Finding no effect in this
17

It is important to note that the imprecision of these results is likely driven by the inability to group physicians by
their pre-expansion participation in Medicaid or the generosity of their state program. For example, if you reestimate the labor supply results from the CTS in Table 3 using the entire sample of physicians and not accounting
for state program generosity you get estimated effects that are approximately half the size of those in Table 3 and
only significant at the 0.10 level. If you estimate the model dropping the physician-fixed effects and using a vector
of demographic characteristics similar to equation (3) you get an estimate of -0.83 (0.622) that is statistically
insignificant at conventional levels.

23

pre-expansion data provides support for the identification strategy discussed above. Using a
sample containing the years 1993-1998 and a placebo implementation date of 1995, the
estimated DD coefficient for having a ten minute or less is -0.0541 (0.055). The DDD estimate
for the outcome of having a ten minute or less visit, which was the only estimate that was
statistically significant in Table 4, for the same sample and placebo date is -0.0018 (0.0668).
Taken together, evidence from the CTS and the NAMCS that the expansion of public
health insurance through the creation of SCHIP decreased the number of weekly hours
physicians spent with patients. In the CTS, this appears as a reduced number of hours spent on
direct patient care. This result is supported by the suggestive evidence from the NAMCS that
visit lengths for Medicaid patients seeing pediatricians declined following the implementation of
SCHIP. The activities for a physician described by the NAMCS visit length variable are
comparable to those involved in the “direct patient care” measure in the CTS.
The decrease in visit length helps to reconcile the observed change in physician labor
supply with other work documenting increased access to care as a result of previous health
insurance expansions. Most prominently, Currie and Gruber (1996) found that expansions in
Medicaid increased the probability that eligible children would have an office based doctor visit.
This result could occur at the same time as a general decline in physician labor supply if the
primary means of reducing labor supply was through shorter (rather than simply fewer) visits.

IX. The Effect of SCHIP on Physician Participation in Medicaid
In addition to decreasing hours worked, the model above predicts that the expansion of
SCHIP should increase physician participation in the public program. There are a number of
ways to measure physician participation in Medicaid. At its most basic, the model predicts that a

24

greater percentage of all physicians should treat Medicaid patients following the expansion of
SCHIP. The first column in top panel of Table 5 reports estimates for equation (1) where the
dependent variable equals 1 if a physician reports receiving any income from Medicaid. This is
the most accurate means in the CTS of identifying if physicians see at least one Medicaid patient.
For the sample of all physicians, the proportion of pediatricians seeing any Medicaid patients
increased by 2.93 percentage points with the implementation of SCHIP (p-value < 0.05).
Another measure for Medicaid participation is changing patient acceptance policies to
accept new patients from the program. The CTS asks physicians if their practice is currently
accepting patients from Medicaid. The middle panel of results in Table 5 contains the estimates
for equation (1) where the dependent indicator variable equals 1 if the physician reports that their
practice accepts new Medicaid patients. For all physicians, under the assumption that
pediatricians will react similarly to those in other specialties, the implementation of SCHIP
increased the probability of accepting new Medicaid patients by 3.6 percentage points.18 As
predicted, the estimates in column (2) and (3) suggest that this change is driven primarily by
physicians who were previously low-Medicaid participators. The DDD estimate in column (3) is
statistically significant (p-value <0.05) and similar in magnitude to the DD estimate.
Following the implementation of SCHIP, the CTS did not ask separate questions
regarding a physician’s involvement with SCHIP and Medicaid. That is, there are no data
describing physician participation in SCHIP separate from Medicaid. However, this problem
18

Similar to the labor supply results, there may be a concern that a differing concentration of primary care
physicians among pediatricians may bias these Medicaid participation estimates. In order to examine this question, I
re-estimated the results in Table 5 using a sample of physicians who are classified in the CTS as being primary care
physicians. The unreported coefficient for low-Medicaid participating physicians was a statistically significant (pvalue <0.05) 0.5335 (0.2771) suggesting that the expansion of SCHIP caused an increase in Medicaid participation
among low-Medicaid participating physicians of approximately 11 percent. This is very similar in magnitude to the
corresponding estimate in Table 5. Overall, the unreported results using only primary care physicians provide
evidence that the estimates above are not the result of differing pre-SCHIP trends between the treatment and control
group resulting from pediatricians being more likely to be primary care physicians.

25

does not affect physicians located in states that did not create a separate state SCHIP program.
The bottom panel of Table 5 reports estimates from the same equations as the top panel for
pediatricians in these Medicaid expansion states. The estimates in the bottom panel are larger in
magnitude than their counterparts in the top panel. For example, the increase in the probability
of treating any new Medicaid patients is approximately 50 percent larger in these states.19
The final measure of Medicaid participation is the amount of revenue received by the
practice from the public program. Recall from above that one concern with the CTS is that the
revenue data refer to practice rather individual physician revenue. While there is a large amount
of correlation between physician and practice revenue in many settings, this correlation is likely
weaker in setting such as large multi-specialty practices, hospitals, or clinics. Therefore, Table 6
contains the estimates from equation (1) with a dependent variable equal to the percentage of
practice revenue from Medicaid for a sample of physicians who report being in either solo or two
physician practices. In these settings, the practice revenue closely reflects the revenue of an
individual physician. Column (1) of Table 6 contains the estimates for a sample of physicians in
all states. The passage of SCHIP is associated with a 1.45 percentage point increase (p-value <
0.10) in revenue from Medicaid. The effect for low-Medicaid participating pediatricians was a
2.6 percentage point increase (p-value < 0.05).
As discussed above, in addition to the concern over practice level revenue the CTS does
not ask questions about SCHIP revenue separate from Medicaid revenue. Therefore, revenue
data for physicians in states with separate SCHIP programs should not account for revenue from
these programs. Columns 2, 3 and 4 of Table 6 present separate analyses for three types of
19

A key difference between the larger effects for the participation results (compared to the hours worked results) in
Medicaid expansion states, is that the increase in magnitude is a combination of a change in physician behavior
resulting from differences in program structure and a data reporting issue related to the lack of a separate question
for SCHIP. In the hours worked results above, these data reporting issues are not a concern and therefore the
difference in the estimates for those results is related solely to program structure.

26

SCHIP expansions: separate state programs, Medicaid expansions, and states which implemented
a combination of these programs. The estimated effect on the percentage of revenue from
Medicaid increases monotonically as the role of Medicaid in the expansion increases. For states
with only a state SCHIP program, the revenue increase is not statistically significant for lowMedicaid participation pediatricians. For physicians practicing in states with a combination of
the two expansion types, there is a 1.97 percentage point increase that is statistically significant
at a p-value of 0.05. I find the largest effect for low-Medicaid participating physicians in a
Medicaid expansion states—a 9.34 percentage point increase (p-value < 0.05).20
One might also ask whether adjustments in physician participation in Medicaid reflect
changes in physician business practices across dimensions that are unrelated to SCHIP. If this
were true, then we might expect to find changes in the percentage of revenue or the probability
of treating at least one patient from other insurance programs. The CTS asks questions on the
percentage of revenue from managed care insurers or from pre-paid capitated insurers. Table 7
contains estimates of the effect of SCHIP expansions on physician participation in these other
programs for all physicians and those in small practice settings. None of the estimates are
statistically significant, suggesting that the main participation results are not simply reflecting a
general change in business practices.21

20

It is important to note that this pattern of results is likely due to revenue reporting and not a necessarily a
reflection of differences in physician behavior. An increase in revenue from SCHIP in states with a separate state
program would not necessarily be reported to the CTS as “Medicaid revenue,” while the increase in revenue from
SCHIP in Medicaid expansion states would be included. Therefore, revenue estimates from states with a separate
state program should be considered an underestimate of the revenue effect.
21
Given that some patients are shifting from the private market to Medicaid following SCHIP, it might be
reasonable to expect a decrease for some of these insurance programs. Since the CTS does not distinguish between
Medicaid managed care and private manage care, it is not clear if these managed care patients are solely from the
private sector or if they are part of Medicaid managed care. The estimated effects for the pre-paid capitated systems
are negative for each instance.

27

X.

Conclusions
Under a simple set of assumptions, a mixed-economy model of physician behavior

predicts that a public health insurance program should lead to a decrease in the quantity of
medical services provided by physicians and an increase in physician participation. In this paper,
I provide empirical evidence supporting these predictions. Following the implementation of
SCHIP, pediatricians with little previous participation in the Medicaid program decreased the
number of weekly hours spent on patient care. Evidence from the NAMCS suggests that
physicians’ labor supply decrease plays out through shorter visits with each patient. Overall, the
introduction of new public health insurance programs may simply change the nature of patientphysician interactions—for example, physicians could rely on physician assistants and registered
nurses to provide more basic medical services. Additional research is needed to investigate the
welfare effects of the program change.
Results from this paper can help economists and policymakers understand physician
responses to policy changes such as the public health insurance expansion contained in the
recently-passed PPACA in the United States. While many policies are being implemented
simultaneously in the PPACA, results from my current study suggest that the effect of the public
insurance expansion-related changes should increase physician participation in the program but
lower physician labor supply. This information should be integrated into any analysis of the
overall effect of the legislation.
It is important to note that this study focuses on a policy’s short run effects on Medicaid
participation and physician labor supply. Further research is needed to understand the long run
general equilibrium effects, particularly the impact on the total number of physicians and overall
physician quality. As government involvement in the healthcare sector changes and policy-

28

makers discuss the possibility of a “public option” government insurance program in the
forthcoming insurance exchanges, these long run effects become increasingly important. For
example, changes in the expected return to physicians may decrease the total number or quality
of individuals applying to medical school. While not addressing this question directly, my
finding that patient hours decreased following SCHIP is not encouraging.
In addition to building our understanding the effects a public health insurance expansion
on physician behavior, results of the current paper shed light on the target efficiency of SCHIP.
The existing literature contains a wide range of estimates of the degree of crowd-out, including
some studies that find that all newly enrolled public health insurance recipients did not
previously have health coverage. The pattern of results with respect to labor supply and public
program participation that I identify suggests market effects are being driven by changes in the
marginal patient and not by changes in the physician labor supply curve. Since these results
could only occur in the presence of some degree of crowd out, this paper provides further
evidence supporting the crowd-out hypothesis.

29

References
Adams, Kathleen. 1994. “The Effect of Increased Medicaid Fees on Physician Participation and Enrollee
Service Utilization in Tennessee.” Inquiry 31:173-89.
Allen, Kathryn, G. 2007. “State Experiences in Implementing SCHIP and Considerations for
Reauthorization,” Government Accountability Office.
Association of American Medical College. 2010. “Physician Shortages to Worsen Without Increases in
Residency Training,” available online at:https://www.aamc.org/download/150584/
data/physician_shortages_to_worsen_without_increases_in_residency_tr.pdf.
Baker, Laurence, and Anne Royalty. 2000. “Medicaid Policy, Physician Behavior, and Health Care for
the Low-Income Population,” The Journal of Human Resources, 35: 480-502.
Blumberg, Linda, Dubay, Lisa, Norton, Stephen, 2000. “Did the Medicaid expansions for children
displace private insurance? An analysis using the SIPP.” Journal of Health Economics 19 (1), 33–60.
Bronstein, Janet, Kathleen Adams, and Curtis Florence. 2004. “The Impact of S-CHIP Enrollment on
Physician Participation in Medicaid in Alabama and Georgia.” Health Services Research, 39: 301-318.
Card, David and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2004. “Using discontinuous eligibility rules to identify the effects
of the federal Medicaid expansions on low income children,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (3),
752–766.
Congressional Budget Office. 2010. “Cost Estimate of H.R. 4872, the Reconciliation Act of 2010,”
March 20, 2010.
Crane, Thomas. 1992. “The Problem of Physician Self-Referral under the Medicare and Medicaid
Antikickback Statute,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 268: 85-91.
Cromwell, Jerry and Janet Mitchell. 1986. “Physician-induced Demand for Surgery,” The Journal of
Health Economics, 5: 293-313.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 431-466.
Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 391-430.
Cunningham, Peter and Jessica May. 2006. “Medicaid Patients Increasingly Concentrated Among
Physicians,” Center For Study Health System Change, Tracking Report No. 16.
Dranove, David. 1998. “Demand Inducement and the Physician/Patient Relationship,” Economic Inquiry,
26: 281-298.
Dranove, David and Paul Wehner. 1994. “Physician-induced Demand for Childbirths,” The Journal of
Health Economics, 13: 61-73.
Dubay, Lisa and Genevieve Kenney. 1996. “Revisiting the issues: the effects of Medicaid expansions on
insurance coverage of children,” The Future of Children, 6 (1), 152–161.
30

Dubay, Lisa and Genevieve Kenney. 1997. “Did Medicaid expansions for pregnant women crowd out
private insurance?” Health Affairs, 16 (1), 185–193.
Enterline, Philip, Corbett McDonald, and Alison McDonald, “Effects of Free Medical Care on Medical
Practice—The Quebec Experience,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 288: 1152-1155.
Fuchs, Victor. 1978. “The Supply of Surgeons and the Demand for Operations.” The Journal of Human
Resources,” S: 35-56.
Garner, Dewey, Winston Liao, and Thomas Sharpe. 1979. “Factors Affecting Physician Participation in a
State Medicaid Program,” Medical Care, 17: 43-58.
Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd out 10 years later: Have recent public insurance
expansions crowded out private health insurance?.” Journal of Health Economics, 27: 201:217.
Gruber, Jonathan, Kathleen Adams, and Joseph Newhouse. 1997. “Physician Fee Policy and Medicaid
Program Costs,” The Journal of Human Resources, 32: 611-634.
Gruber, Jonathan, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin. 1999. “Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity: The Case
of Cesarean Delivery,” Journal of Health Economics, 18: 473-490.
Gruber, Jonathan and Margaret Owings. 1996. “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Section
Delivery,” RAND Journal of Economics, 27: 99-123.
Ham, Jon and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2005. “The effect of Medicaid expansions for low-income children
on Medicaid participation and private insurance coverage: evidence from the SIPP,” Journal of Public
Economics 89: 57–83.
Herz, Elicia, Bernadette Fernandez, and Chris Peterson. 2005. “State Children’s Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP): A Brief Overview.”
Hillman, Bruce, Catherine Joseph, Michael Mabry, Jonathan Sunshine, Stephen Kennedy, and Monica
Noether. 1990. “Frequency and Costs of Diagnostic Imaging in Office Practices: A comparison of SelfReferring and Radiologist Referring Physicians,” New England Journal of Medicine, 323: 1604-1608.
Hillman, Bruce, George Olson, Patricia Griffith, Jonathan Sunshine, Catherine Joseph, Stephen Kennedy,
William Nelson, and Lee Bernhardt. 1992. “Physicians’ Utilization and Charges for Outpatient
Diagnostic Imaging in a Medicare Population.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 268: 20502054.
Lo Sasso, Anthony, Thomas Buchmueller. 2004. “The effect of the state children’s health insurance
program on health insurance coverage,” Journal of Health Economics, 23(5): 1059-1082.
McGuire, Thomas and Mark Pauly. 1991. “Physician Response to Free Changes with Multiple Payers,”
Journal of Health Economics, 10: 385-410.
Mitchell, Jean and Elton Scott. 1992. “Physician Ownership of Physical Therapy Services; Effects on
Charges, Utilization, Profits, and Service Characteristics.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
268: 2055-2059.
31

Mitchell, Janet. 1991. “Physician Participation in Medicaid Revisited.” Medical Care, 29: 645-653
Mitka, Mike. 2007. “Looming Shortage of Physicians Raises Concerns About Access to Care.” Journal of
the American Medical Association, 297: 1045-1046.
Pauly, Mark. 1980. Doctors and Their Workshops. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pear, Robert. 2009. “Obama Signs Children’s Health Insurance Bill.” New York Times.
Perloff, Janet, Phillip Kletke, James Fossett, and Steven Banks. 1997. “Medicaid Participation Among
Urban Primary Care Physicians.” Medical Care, 35: 142-157.
Salganicoff, Alina, Patricia Seliger Keenan, and David Liska. 1998. “Child Health Facts:
National and State Profiles of Coverage,” A Report of the Kaiser Commission on the Future of Medicaid.
Sloan, Frank, Janet Mitchell, and Jerry Cromwell. 1978. “Physician Participation in State Medicaid
Programs.” The Journal of Human Resources, 13: 211-245.
Smith, Vernon, Dennis Roberts, David Rousseau, and Tanya Schwartz. 2010. “CHIP Enrollment June
2009: An Update on Enrollment and Policy Directions,” Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the
Uninsured.
Staiger, Douglas, David Auerback, Peter Buerhaus, “Trends in the Work Hours of Physicians in the
United States,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 303: 747-753.
United States Census. 2010. Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the
United States: 2009. Washington, DC: United States Census.
Yazici, E., Kaestner, R., 2000. “Medicaid expansions and the crowding out of private health insurance
among children,” Inquiry 37: 23–32.
Zuckerman, Stephen, Joshua McFeeters, Peter Cunningham, and Len Nichols. 2004. “Changes in
Medicaid Physician Fees, 1998-2003: Implications for Physician Participation,” Health Affairs, W4-374W4-384.
Zuckerman, Stephen and Stephen Norton. 2000. “Trends in Medicaid Physician Fees, 1993-1998,” Health
Affairs, 19: 222-232.

32

Figure 1

Physician
Reimbursement

MC’
MC
MC’’
MC’’’

Pm

MRp
MR’p
Q2 Q1

Q3 Q4

Quantity of Medical Services

33

Figure 2
Mean Visit Duration for Medicaid Patients by Physician Type, NAMCS 1993-2002
20

Mean Visit Duration (Minutes)

19
18
17
16
15
14
13

Pediatrician

12
All Other
Physicians

11
10

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Figure 3
Mean Pediatrician Visit Duration by Insurance Status, NAMCS 1993-2002
18

Mean Visit Duration (Minutes)

17
16
15
14
13
12
11
Medicaid

10

Private
9
8
1993

1994 1995

1996

1997 1998

1999

2000

2001 2002

34

Figure 4
Parameter Estimate of Interaction Term of Treatment Variable and Year Effect for Difference-inDifferences Identification Strategy
Pediatricians, Internists, and General Practitioners, NAMCS 1993-2002
0.3

3

Log of Visit Length
Ten Minute or Less Visit

0.2

2

Visit Length in Minutes
0.1

1

0

0
‐4

‐3

‐2

‐1

0

1

2

3

4

‐0.1

‐1

‐0.2

‐2

‐0.3

‐3

Figure 5
Parameter Estimate of Interaction Term of Treatment Variable and Year Effect for Difference-inDifference-in-Differences Identification Strategy
Pediatricians, Internists, and General Practitioners, NAMCS 1993-2002
0.25

3
Visit Length Ten Min or Less

0.2

2

Log of Visit Length
0.15

Visit Length of Minutes
1

0.1
0.05

0

0
‐0.05
‐0.1

‐4

‐3

‐2

‐1

0

1

2

3

4

‐1

‐2

‐0.15
‐3
‐0.2
‐0.25

‐4

35

Internal Medicine
GP and Family
Pediatrics
Medical Specialties
Surgical Specialties
OB/GYN
Psychiatry

Table 1
Physician Characteristics by Specialty Type
Less than or equal to 5 percent of revenue
More than 5 percent of revenue from
from Medicaid in 1997
Medicaid in 1997
Accept
Practice
Weekly
Accept
Practice
Weekly
New
Revenue
Hours
Primary
New
Revenue
Hours
Primary
Medicaid
from
Spent on
Care
Medicaid
from
Spent on
Care
Medicaid Patients
Patient
Phys.
Patients
Medicaid
Patient
Phys.
(%)
(%)
Care
(%)
(%)
(%)
Care
(%)
99.58
45.82
2.69
56.1
99.37
45.93
19.39
78.82
100.00
43.38
2.43
48.74
100.00
44.67
21.47
93.37
100.00
41.92
2.31
59.14
99.22
42.34
33.7
95.59
2.98
44.35
3.01
72.19
0.00
46.54
20.45
97.7
0.00
45.5
3.16
74.6
0.00
48.87
15.65
98.72
0.00
36.46
1.12
27.06
0.00
37.65
30.81
92.0
0.00
48.07
2.47
49.68
0.00
49.17
28.4
99.4
Source: Consumer Tracking Study Physician Survey 1996-97

Table 2
Simulated Eligibility Measure of Medicaid and SCHIP Eligibility
Mean
25th Percentile 75th Percentile
Min
Max
0.2956
0.2663
0.2957
0.2504
0.5977
1996
0.4525
0.431
0.4834
0.282
0.7961
1999
0.5041
0.4497
0.5377
0.3359
0.7922
2001
0.2085
0.162
0.235
0.054
0.4948
Δ 2001 – 1996
Source: Current Population Survey Calculations

36

Table 3
Fixed Effect Estimates of the Effect of the Expansion of SCHIP on Physician Labor Supply
Hours Spent on Patient Care
Hours Spent on Medical Care
All Physicians
All Physicians
Rev. from
Rev. from
Medicaid ≤ 5%
Medicaid ≤ 5%
(4)
(2)
(3)
(1)
PED*SIMELIG
-9.5702**
-0.0818
1.2285
-5.268
(3.576)
(3.5866)
(3.867)
(3.2817)
PED*SIMELIG *5%MCAID
-9.6344*
-6.512
(5.4317)
(4.851)
N
2,142
5,060
2,142
5,060
N*T
6,107
14,345
6,107
14,345
Medicaid Expansion States Only
-16.962**
2.144
0.8263
(6.206)
(5.329)
(4.269)
PED*SIMELIG*5%MCAID
-18.275**
-16.966**
(7.77)
(7.361)
N
454
1,090
454
1,090
N*T
1,284
3,148
1,284
3,148
Entries in the table are the estimates coefficients from a fixed effects panel regression. Unreported
covariates include indicator variables for CTS interview panel and controls for changes in the Medicaid
reimbursement rate. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the individual level and
regressions are weighted using CTS national sample weights.
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001
PED*SIMELIG

-16.574**
(5.7602)

Table 4
Summary of Estimates on the Effect of SCHIP on Visit Duration
National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey 1993-2002
DD Estimate
DDD Estimate
(n= 93,670)
(n= 10,704)
Duration
-0.9776
-1.193
(0.7967)
(0.7432)
Ln(Duration)
-0.0687
-0.056
(0.0496)
(0.0469)
Visit Shorter than 10
0.0326
0.0649*
Minutes
(0.0479)
(0.038)
Entries in the tables are the estimated coefficients from an OLS model. Unreported covariates
include controls for visit month, day, year, patient race, patient ethnicity, patient age, practice
region, practice MSA status, physician type, and whether ambulatory surgical services were
performed. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered on the primary sampling unit.
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001

37

Table 5
Fixed Effect Estimates of the Effect of the Expansion of SCHIP on Medicaid Participation
All States
Treating at Least One Medicaid Patient
All Physicians
Rev. from Medicaid ≤ 5%
All Physicians
(1)
(2)
(3)
PED*SIMELIG
0.1403**
0.3283**
0.057
(0.0533)
(0.1366)
(0.0367)
PED*SIMELIG *5%MCAID
0.286**
(0.1421)
Accepting New Patients from Medicaid
PED*SIMELIG
0.1735**
0.4446**
0.07189
(0.0565)
(0.0626)
(0.1398)
PED*SIMELIG *5%MCAID
0.3606**
(0.1501)
N
5,060
2,142
5,060
N*T
14,345
6,107
14,345

PED*SIMELIG

Medicaid Expansion States Only
Treating at Least One Medicaid Patient
All Physicians
Rev. from Medicaid ≤ 5%
(1)
(2)
0.1969*
0.6322**
(0.1082)
(0.3140)

PED*SIMELIG *5%MCAID
PED*SIMELIG

0.1497
(0.1153)

All Physicians
(3)
0.0012
(0.0605)
0.638**
(0.3211)

Accepting New Patients from Medicaid
0.5549**
(0.2697)

0.0009
(0.111)
PED*SIMELIG *5%MCAID
0.5405*
(0.2907)
N
1,090
454
1,090
N*T
3,148
1,284
3,148
Entries in the table are the estimates coefficients from a fixed effects panel regression. Unreported covariates
include indicator variables for CTS interview panel and controls for changes in the Medicaid reimbursement rate.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the individual level and regressions are weighted using
CTS national sample weights.
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001

38

Table 6
Fixed Effect Estimates of the Effect of the Expansion of SCHIP on Percentage of Revenue from Medicaid
Solo or Two Physician Practices
Separate State
Medicaid Expansion
Combination Program
Program
States
(3)
(2)
(4)
All
Medicaid
All
Medicaid
All
Medicaid
Medicaid
All
Physicians
Rev.
Physicians
Rev.
Physicians
Rev.
Rev.
Physicians
≤ 5%
≤ 5%
≤ 5%
≤ 5%
12.083**
4.094
7.948*
9.52**
11.917
45.478**
PED*
6.127*
-0.584
(17.723)
SIMELIG
(3.809)
(4.76)
(7.089)
(5.997)
(4.89)
(3.405)
(10.302)
N
2,311
1,163
792
374
1,095
600
421
193
N*T
5,439
2,821
1,756
854
2,546
1,521
934
446
Entries in the table are the estimates coefficients from a fixed effects panel regression. Unreported covariates include
controls for CTS panel and controls for changes in the Medicaid reimbursements. Standard errors are in parentheses
and are clustered at the individual level and regressions are weighted using CTS national sample weights.
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001
All States
(1)

Table 7
Fixed Effect Estimates of the Effect of the Expansion of SCHIP on Revenue from Non-Medicaid Insurers
Physicians Reporting Medicaid Revenue ≤ 5% prior to SCHIP
Percent
Percent revenue
At least one patient At least one patient
revenue from a
from pre-paid
from a managed care
from a pre-paid
managed care
capitated insurer
organization
capitated insurer
organization
-0.114
-0.1545
0.821
-10.9
PED*SIMELIG
(9.409)
(0.0825)
(0.1239)
(9.954)
2,142
2,142
2,142
2,142
6,107
6,107
6,107
6,107
Solo or Two Practice Physicians Only
PED*SIMELIG

0.0449
(0.0703)

-0.239
(0.1889)

4.948
(11.4)

1.762
(7.061)

N
1,163
1,163
1,163
1,163
N*T
2,821
2,821
2,821
2,821
Entries in the table are the estimates coefficients from a fixed effects panel regression. Unreported covariates include
controls for CTS panel and controls for changes in the Medicaid reimbursements. Standard errors are in parentheses
and are clustered at the individual level and regressions are weighted using CTS national sample weights.
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001

39

