                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TAX REFORM AND FINANCIAL MARKETS



                      Patric H. Hendershott



                      Working Paper No. 1707




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1985




Prepared for a conference on the Impacts of Tax Reform sponsored by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.   I am indebted to Thomas Downs
for his assistance in the analysis of stock prices, to Stephen
Buser for his insights on corporate finance, and to Edward Kane for
editorial comments and discussions regarding the entire manuscript.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and Taxation and
projects in Government Budget and Taxation and Capital Formation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #1707
                                                            September 1985




                        Tax Reform and Financial Markets

                                    ABSTRACT




      Four tax reform proposals have been advanced in recent years: Bradley—

Gephardt, Kemp—Kasten, Treasury—Department and the Administration plan. These

plans could have significant impacts on financial markets. Reductions in

investment incentives and marginal tax rates would tend to lower before—tax

interest rates, and lower taxes on existing corporate capital would tend to

increase stock prices. The pattern of security issues would be altered by

resulting changes in the composition of investment between real estate and

nonreal estate assets and in desired loan—to—value ratios. The paper compares

and contrasts the likely impacts of each of the four reform proposals on

interest rate (taxable and tax—exempt), security flows, and stock prices.




                                                     Patric H. Hendershott
                                                     321 Hagerty Hall
                                                     The Ohio State University
                                                     1775 College Road
                                                     Columbus, Ohio 43210
                                                      (614) 422—0552
                       Tax Reform and Financial Markets

                             Patric H. Hendershott

                     The Ohio State University and the NBER



      Four major tax reforms have been proposed in recent years: Bradley—

Gephardt, Kemp—Kasten, Treasury I and Treasury II. These reforms seek to

improve economic efficiency by taxing different capital assets and sources of

income more equally. Each reform is purported to be revenue—neutral from the

perspective of the U.S. Treasury and distributionally neutral across

households. While this alleged neutrality is probably (certainly, in some

instances) overstated, it is analytically convenient to assume revenue and

distribution neutrality. It is also convenient to abstract from growth and

inflation effects.

      Even with revenue and growth neutrality, the reforms could substantially

impact financial markets. Reductions in investment incentives and marginal tax

rates would tend to lower before—tax interest rates,1 and lower taxes on

existing corporate capital would tend to increase stock prices.2 The pattern

of security issues would be altered by resulting changes in the composition of

investment between real estate and nonreal estate assets and in desired loan—

to—value ratios. The paper compares and contrasts the likely impacts of each

of the four reform proposals on interest rates (taxable and tax—exempt),

security flows, and stock prices.
                                       —2—



                         I. Tax Reform and Interest Rates

        The analysis is built around a diagram in which the interaction of the

demand for and supply of (funds for) real capital determines before—tax

interest rates. Tax reforms can reduce the level of before—tax interest rates

by lowering the demand for real capital (reducing investment incentives) and/or

by raising the supply of funds for real capital accumulation (lowering marginal

tax rates on saving). Whether a specific tax reform will lower before—tax

interest rates and by how much depends on how the reform is structured.

        Comparative—static analysis focuses on the separate impact of the various

reforms on the supply and demand curves for real capital. The supply—curve

analysis evolves into a discussion of how reforms will likely alter the

relation between tax-exempt and taxable yields. Putting the separate shifts

together provides specific estimates of rate declines under the various

reforms. These estimates depend heavily on the assumed interest elasticities

of the the domestic and net foreign supplies of capital (saving). Because wide

disagreement exists over these elasticities, any estimate of the expected

decline in interest rates in response to tax reform is bound to be

controversial.

                             A. A Graphical Analysis

        The demand for real capital depends positively on the level of real

output and negatively on the rental price of capital (c). This price is

related to the economic depreciation rate (d) ,    the required real return the
firm must earn (r), and various business tax parameters (Hall and Jorgenson,

1967)

                                     l—k—T Z
                            c = (rf-d)         '
                                                                            (1)
                                       1_
                                      —3—



where k is the investment tax credit, T is the business income tax rate and z

 is the present value of tax depreciation deductions. The required real return,

in turn, depends on personal tax rates and risk factors, as well as the level

of before—tax interest rates and the expected inflation rate. An increase in

before—tax interest rates raises r and thus c, thereby lowering the demand for

capital.

      Figure 1 illustrates the impact of tax reform on the level of interest

rates and the allocation of real capital between residential and nonresidential

uses in a fixed—capital allocation model. The negative impact of interest

rates on quantity—demanded is plotted; the other components of the rental

price —— business tax rates, r, tax depreciation schedules, z, and the

investment tax credit, k, —— are shift parameters in the demand functions.

Under current law (T°, z0 and k°), the level of interest rates is i°,

residential capital is RES°, and nonresidential capital is K°—RES°. The supply

schedule is drawn as a vertical line to reflect the fixed capital stock. With

all of the schedules interpreted as fractions of income, the analysis can be

reinterpreted in a growth context.

      I begin with a simple tax change: the elimination of the investment tax

credit (setting k=O) espoused in all tax reform proposals. The total demand

schedule, K(T0,z0,k0), drops down to K(t0,z010), the interest rate declines to

i', the quantity of residential capital increases to RES and the quantity of

nonresidential capital decreases to K°—RES'. The fixed—capital assumption is

appropriate for analyzing the impact of tax reform on interest rates if the

interest elasticity of domestic saving is zero and either the interest

elasticity of net foreign saving is zero or foreign central banks move foreign

interest rates such that net foreign saving is unchanged.
                                       —4—



      The opposite assumption would be to make the supply of capital perfectly

elastic. Summers (1981) notes that the long—run interest rate elasticity of

saving is infinite in an unfettered life—cycle model where households have a

strong bequest motive. Figure 2 has been constructed so that it can illustrate

the impact of tax reform on interest rates in this opposite case, where the

supply elasticity comes from domestic, not foreign, saving. The horizontal

supply of capital is drawn at 0 p/(l—t0), where p is the fixed after—tax

return to savers and to is the tax rate built into taxable interest rates. If

the tax reform is the removal of the investment tax credit analyzed in Figure

1, the demand curve would drop and the quantity of nonresidential capital would

decrease. The interest rate and quantity of residential capital would be

unchanged. A more interesting reform is analyzed in Figure 2: a decrease in t

from to to t'. For simplicity, the decrease is assumed not to affect the

demand for capital, although this is virtually an impossible case owing to the

relationship between t and -r.   The interest rate declines from 0 to i' =

p/(l—t'),   and the total stock of capital rises from K0 to K'. Residential and

nonresidential components of capital increase in proportion to their interest—

rate sensitivities.

      I next examine a world where domestic saving has zero interest elasticity

but international capital flows are perfectly interest elastic. In this model,

the level of world interest rates is determined by a fixed supply of world

capital and the demand for real capital in all countries. The RES demand curve

in Figure 1 could be redefined as the total American demand for capital and the

K curve as the world demand for capital. In this case, a tax reform that

reduced fter—tax returns to American savers (such as the decrease of to to t')

would not alter either the aggregate supply of capital or the level of American

(world) interest rates. As before, the level of American rates (world rates

generally) would decline in response to a negative change in a demand shift
                                          —5—




parameter, such as the removal of the investment tax credit analyzed in Figure

1. However, the decline would be smaller for an open economy than a closed one

because the demand for world capital should be more responsive to interest rate

changes than should be the demand for American capital alone. In effect,

American nonresidential capital is reallocated to foreign capital as well as to

American residential capital.

      Figure 3 portrays the presumably realistic case of positive, but finite,

interest rate elasticities in both the domestic (Sd) and net foreign (S_Sa)

supplies of capital. Limitations on the domestic elasticity follow from adding

capital market constraints to the life—cycle model and restricting the bequest

motive. Limitations on the foreign elasticity recognize the major role the

U.S. plays in world capital markets. The supply schedules are drawn so that a

positive net foreign supply of capital, K0 —
                                                K,   exists at the initial level of

American interest rates, i0. A decrease in t from to to t' (the reader should

ignore the shift in the demand schedule for the moment) lowers the domestic

supply schedule vertically to p/(l—t) and shifts the total supply schedule

sympathetically. The net result is a decline in i to 1', an increase in the

total American capital stock to K, and a reduction in net foreign holdings of

American capital to K'_Kd'. The latter translates into an improvement in the

U.S. trade deficit.

      Combining the previous analyses, I now deduce the interest rate response

to a broad tax reform that shifts both the supply and demand schedules.

Specifically, the tax credit is eliminated, and t is cut to t'. For

convenience, the demand curve is assumed to shift downward by exactly enough to

maintain the existing level of the American capital stock at K0. As the

schedules are drawn, the net foreign demand for American capital, which was

originally positive, is   zero,   and the interest rate has declined to i'.
                                       —6—



      The impact of any tax reform on the level of American interest rates is

thus seen to depend fundamentally on the size of the resulting downward shifts

in the demand and domestic—supply curves. Three interest rate elasticities are

also important:   (1) the interest elasticity of foreign saving (after allowance

for foreign central bank actions to adjust foreign interest rates to

vexogenousI? shifts in American rates) , (2) the interest rate elasticity of

domestic saving, and (3) the interest elasticity of the demand for capital.

The next two sections of the paper explain how to obtain estimates of the

downward shifts in the domestic supply of capital and the demand for capital.

The supply—side analysis treats the yield on tax—exempt securities as the

return to high—income savers and asks how far the level of taxable interest

rates would have to fall under the various reforms to maintain tax—exempt

yields at prereform levels. The demand—side analysis asks how far the level of

rates would have to fall to maintain the aggregate demand for capital (and thus

the level of net investment) at its prereform level, assuming a fixed total

supply of capital.

     B. Tax Reform, Tax—Exempt Yields, and the Supply of Domestic Saving

      Most saving is almost certainly done by high—income households who

consider tax—exempt securities to be a competitive investment. Thus a

reasonable measure of the downward shift in the supply of domestic saving

schedule is the decrease in the level of taxable interest rates necessary to

prevent the level of tax—exempt yields from rising above their prereform level.

Calculation of the magnitude of this shift requires specification of both the

determinants of tax—exempt yields (new issue coupon rates) and the impact of

the tax reforms on each determinant.
                                           —7—



Determinants of Relative Yields on Tax—Exempt Securities

         The greatest difference between securities issued by the federal

government and by state and local governments is the tax treatment of their

coupon income: the federal government taxes the income earned on its

securities, but not that earned on state and local securities. If municipal

and Treasury securities were identical in every other respect, the relationship

between coupon rates on par—valued municipals (Rm) and Treasuries (Rt) of

maturity j would be given by



  Rxn. + (i—t )Gm + ØmtRm. = (l—T.)Rt. + (l—T.)Gt + Øt.T.Rt,,          (2)
     3         g         jj   :i      3     j    J        JJ J

where the G's are expected annual rates of capital gains over the investor's

.holding period, Tg is the concurrent effective capital gains tax rate, and the

0 terms reflect expected tax savings from optimally trading bonds

 (Constantinides and Ingersoll, 1984). The expected gains depend on expected

future one—period coupon rates (and other factors), and the expected tax

savings parameters vary negatively with transaction costs and positively with

the maturity of the securities. For one—period securities, the expected gains

and tax savings are zero and the familiar



                          Rm1/Rt1 =       — 11                         (3)




obtains.

         Miller (1977) combines two equilibrium conditions to specify Ti:

equality between the expected risk—adjusted after—tax marginal costs of

corporate debt [(l—t)i] and equity (e) and between the after—personal—tax

risk—adjusted return on equities { (l_Te)e] and that on municipal securities

 I (l—r1) i]. Solving,
                                                 —8—



                                = i—Cl—i )       (i—i
                            1           c               e




That is, the tax rate implicit in one—period tax—exempt coupons equals unity

less the product of one less the statutory corporate federal tax rate and one

less the tax rate on corporate equity.3 With a corporate tax rate of 0.46 and

an equity tax rate of 0.0742, t         = 0.5,    and the rate ratio is also 0.5.

Allowing for the excess of contracting costs on corporate debt over equity

would raise this ratio during periods of substantial risk of corporate

bankruptcy.4

        In recent years, this ratio has been slightly above 0.5 for one—year

bonds, roughly 0.7 for ten—year securities, and 0.8 for twenty—year securities

 (Peek and Wilcox, 1985). For one—year bonds, the ratio has been consistent

with equation (3). For longer term bonds, the rate ratio is, from (2),




         =
        Rm.
        Rt.
          J
              l—i+Øt,i.
                 J   jj
                    JJ
                l+Øm.i.
                           +
                                (i—i ) (Gt—Gm)
                                    g
                                         JJ
                                                   .
                                                                                     4




An important question is whether tax savings from trading are sufficient in

magnitude to reconcile observed rate ratios for longer term bonds with

Miller's specification of         at roughly 0.5 under current law.         (On average,

the second term in (3) is small and thus can be ignored.)

        Constantinides and Ingersoll calculate Øt. for 10 year securities to be

about 0.5, assuming no transaction costs. With r, =            0.5,   the first term in

(1') becomes 0.75/1.25 =   0.6,    assuming Øm. is also 0.5. Taking transaction

costs into account would lower the 0's, especially that for municipal

securities. Constantinides and Ingersoll compute a 20 percent reduction in the

value of trading ten—year Treasuries if transaction costs equal              percentage
polnt   and roughly twice this reduction if costs are a full percentage point.
                                         -.9—




Because quoted bid/ask spreads on Treasury securities are only a quarter

percentage point, transaction costs are relatively unimportant for long—term

Treasuries. In contrast, quoted bid—ask spreads are 3 to 4 percentage points

for municipal securities and would greatly reduce the gains from trading them.

With Øt. = 0.45 for Treasuries and Øm. =        0.1 for municipals, the first term in
(1') becomes Q7•5 Thus, the observed increase in the tax—exempt/taxable rate

ratio as maturity increases can be explained without varying r. across

maturities.

Tax Reform and the Ratio of Exempt to Taxable Coupons

      The first two columns of Table 1 list the corporate tax rate and the

personal tax rate on equity under current law and the reforms. All the reforms

would significantly lower the corporate rate and thus raise the ratio of tax

exempt to taxable coupons. Moreover, under the original Treasury plan, only

the real component of interest would be deductible. More specifically, only

of nominal interest would be deductible, where 8 =          .06/(.06   + r) and r is the

inflation rate. At a five percent inflation rate, the tax saving from a dollar

of interest would be only 19 cents ——    0.35(6/li).        Because the tax rate at

which corporate interest expense is deductible is relevant to the determination

of     Treasury I would surely increase the interest—rate ratio more than the

other three reforms.

      The equations used to project the rate ratios for one— and ten—year

securities under current law and all reforms are:




                        Rm1/Rt1 =   I—
                                      l-T1      + O.4STlt
                        Rm10/Rt10 =
                                         l+0.lTlt
                                        —10—




               —(l—8T) (_Te) and 8 = 1.0
where      =                               except in the original Treasury plan.

The tax rate upon which trading gains are based (Tit) is specified similarly,

but with 8      1 even under Treasury I. The calculated rate ratios for one— and

ten—year maturities are listed in the fourth and fifth columns of Table 1. The

ratios rise under all reforms, especially the original Treasury plan.

        The final task is determination of the magnitude of the downward shift in

the domestic supply schedule drawn in Figure 3. This magnitude is computed as

the difference between the current assumed level of taxable rates, 0.11, and

the average of the levels of taxable interest rates at which savers would earn

the same returns on one— and ten—year tax—exempts under the various reforms

that they earn under current law. These levels are calculated from




where the r and c superscripts, respectively, denote values under a reform and

current law, and are listed in columns six and seven of Table 1.6 The

differences between 0.11 and the average of these levels are substantial:

nearly three percentage points for Treasury I and about one and a half points

for the other three reforms.

                   C. Tax Reform and the Demand for Real Capital

        I now turn to the demand side. The question investigated is: how far

would interest rates have to fall in response to the different reforms to

maintain aggregate investment at current levels (how far would the demand

schedule in Figure 3 shift downward)? A detailed listing in Table 2 of the

provisions of the reforms pertinent to investment is the starting point.

        All reforms lower the maximum corporate and personal tax rates and

eliminate the investment tax credit. Proposed capital gains taxation and tax

depreciation changes vary widely, however. Bradley—Gephardt treats     these items
                                       —l 1—




 less favorably than current law: capital gains would be taxed at the regular

 income tax rate which translates into a 30 percent rate vis—a--vis the current

 20 percent, and tax depreciation lives would be lengthened significantly, 40

 years for structures rather than the current 18 and 10 years for equipment

 rather than the current 5. Even with greater acceleration (250%DB versus

 l75%DB), first—year tax deductions for structures would decline from 10 percent

 to 6 percent and for equipment the decline would be from 30 to 25 percent.

 Kemp—Kasten would treat capital gains and tax depreciation far more generously

 than either current law or the other proposals. On capital gains, a choice

 would exist between having nominal gains taxed at 60% of the lowered regular

 rate or having only real gains taxed at regular rates. Moreover, property

 investments could be effectively written off entirely in the year of purchase.

• Nonfinancial neutrality would then exist for depreciable properties because net

 (of depreciation) investment hurdle rates would equal the weighted average cost

of capital for all such assets (with k    0 and z = 1 in equation (1), c =   r+d).
       Treasury I attempts to neutralize the tax system for inflation by

indexing everything. Only real capital gains, including those on inventories,

would be taxed, depreciation would be on a replacement, rather than historic,

cost basis, and only the real part of interest expense would be taxed and could

be deducted (nominal home mortgage interest being the exception). Treasury I

also attempts to tax all assets and business forms (except owner—occupied

housing) equally. To this end, tax depreciation for each depreciable asset

would equal the Treasury's best estimate of true economic depreciation, the

investment tax credit would be dropped, real capital gains would be taxed at

the regular income tax rate, and half of corporate dividends would be

deductible at the corporate level. The indexation of inventory gains,

elimination of the tax credit, and the proposed tax depreciation treatment

would result in all net investment hurdle rates, except that for owner—occupied
                                          —12—



housing, equalling the cost of capital divided by 1 less the relevant tax rate

 (with k = 0 and z =   d/(r+d)   in equation (1), c =   r/(1—r) +d). The partial
dividend exclusion would reduce discrepancies between the cost of capital for

corporate and noncorporate investments.

      Treasury II retreats from these principles in significant respects: all

interest would continue to be deductible, investors in nondepreciable assets

would have the option of paying taxes on nominal capital gains at one—half of

the regular income tax rate, tax depreciation would exceed economic

depreciation, and only one—tenth of dividends would be deductible. Tax

depreciation would be especially generous for equipment that continues to be

classified as 3 or 5 years and for public utility structures; allowable

depreciation would exceed that under current law even at zero inflation.

However, much 5—year equipment would be reclassified as longer lived. For

industrial structures, tax depreciation would be more favorable only at

inflation rates of 6 percent or greater.

      To get a rough fix on how much the reforms would tend to lower interest

rates through their negative impact on the demand for capital, I have

calculated how the interest rate would have to change for investment hurdle

rates, and thus the level of investment in each asset category, to remain

constant.7 The results are listed in Table 3. An interest rate below 11

percent means that the reform is negative for that asset category if interest

rates don't change; a rate above 11 percent means the opposite.

      All assets except noncorporate inventories receive less favorable

treatment under Bradley—Gephardt, with equipment suffering the most followed by

utilities (both lose the investment tax credit) .       This   is not the case with

Kemp—Kasten. While equipment is hit (much less than under Bradley—Gephardt),

structures are favored. The pattern of interest rates implied by Treasury I

looks much like that of Bradicy—Gephardt, but the levels are even lower (except
                                      —13—



for owner—occupied housing). Treasury II gives back much that Treasury I took

away. Depreciation allowances are more generous than current law for equipment

and utilities to offset partially the removal of the investment tax credit, and

deletion of the interest indexation provision vastly dampens the negative

effect of Treasury I on highly leveraged depreciable real estate.

      To determine the single interest rate that would maintain investment in

the aggregate, a simulation model was constructed (Hendershott, 1985). The

model contains seven types of nonresidential capital, rental housing and

owner—occupied housing. Households in six income classes with endogenous

tenure choices are considered. The model allocates a given capital stock among

the various capital components based upon the investment hurdle rates for the

capital components, the price elasticities of demand with respect to the hurdle

rates, and the elasticities of homeownership with respect to the cost of owning

versus renting. The interest rate adjusts in response to tax changes so as to

maintain the aggregate demand for capital at its initial level. As can be seen

in the bottom row of the table, the rate declines are roughly three percentage

points with Treasury I, two points with Bradley—Gephardt, one point with

Treasury II and no decline with Kemp—Kasten.

                 D. Reform—Induced Changes in Interest Rates

      The first two columns of Table 4 reproduce, for each reform, the interest

rates provided by simulations of the capital allocation model and by

calculations of the taxable rates that would freeze average tax—exempt coupons

at their prereform level. As can be seen, the interest rates produced by the

two methods differ by less than a quarter point for Bradley—Gephardt and

Treasury I and only about a half point for Treasury I. These calculations

indicate that the demand and domestic supply schedules in Figure 3 would drop

about equally except in the Kemp-Kasten case. With Kemp—Kasten, the demand for
                                          —14—



capital does not decline, owing to provision of substantial investment

incentives. However, marginal tax rates fall significantly, so that the supply

schedule shifts downward.

      The third column    is   my best estimate of the impact of the various reforms

on the level of taxable interest rates. The low end of the range is roughly an

average of the first two columns; the high end allows for an rffsetting

influence of declines in net foreign saving. The rate declines (mid—point)

range from a half percentage point with Kemp—Kasten to two and a half points

with Treasury I. The fourth and fifth columns contain my best estimate of the

impacts on one— and ten—year tax—exempt coupons. These are obtained as the
                                                                             8
product of the taxable rate in column 3 and the rate ratio listed in Table 1.

Under Kemp—Kasten, short—term exempt rates are expected to rise by about a

percentage point and long rates are unchanged. Under the other reforms, the

increase in short—term rates is only a half percentage point, and long—term

rates decline slightly.

                                  II. Financial Flows

      The structure of financial flows would be altered by tax reforms in three

ways. First, the composition of the underlying real capital stock and net

investment flows could be changed; types of security issues are that tend to

mirror specific investment outlays would be affected correspondingly. Second,

basic financing patterns could be reshaped, owing either to tax—reform induced

desired changes or to prohibitions against financing investment in specific

ways (most notably by tax—exempt issues). Third, to the extent that the

various reforms would improve or reduce the competitive position of particular

institutions, the level and form of financial intermediation would be affected.

Treasury I would have far and away the greatest impact on financial flows of
                                       —15--




 the four reforms, largely because of its interest indexation provision.

 Recognizing this, the discussion treats Treasury I separately from the other

 reforms.



                                 A. Treasury I

       Table 5 contains simulated estimates of the impacts of the four reforms

 on the distribution of the capital stock among owner—occupied housing,

 depreciable real estate (residential and commercial), and other structures

 (industrial and utility) and equipment.9 As can be seen, Treasury I would have

an enormous impact on this distribution. Owner—occupied housing, fueled by a

15 percent increase in the homeownership rate (8 percentage points), would

increase by 28 percent: depreciable real estate would decline by 21 percent

 (most being due to the decline in renting); and equipment and corporate

structures would fall by 10 percent. This startling impact follows from the

indexation of interest income and expense, except for home mortgage deductions.

In a world of five percent inflation, the indexation would lead to a sharp

reduction in interest rates. That home mortgage interest would still be fully

deductible would trigger a marked shift toward homeownership and a general

increase in the demand for housing services by owners.

      The real—capital shifts of Treasury I imply a sharp increase in home

mortgage issues and declines in other mortgage and bond issues and in business

loans. The impact of these real—capital shifts would be reinforced by changes

in household and corporate loan—to—value ratios. Households would have a

strong incentive to arbitrage the differential indexation ——   to   borrow more

fully—deductible mortgage funds than they would under current law and invest

the overage in partially—taxed debt assets. In contrast, corporate loan—to—

value ratios should decline in response to the reduction in the tax advantages

of debt caused by both interest indexatiori and the deductibility of half of
                                           —16—



corporate dividends. Issues of home mortgages would be further stimulated by

the restriction against issues of single—family tax—exempt mortgage revenue

bonds which averaged 10 billion in 1982 and 1983.10 With a 28 percent increase

in owner—occupied housing flows and a 30 percent increase in the loan—to—value

ratio, home mortgage issues would be two—thirds greater in the new "steady—

state" than under current law. During the transition to this state, issues

would more than double.

      The percentage reduction in issues of other mortgages, taxable bonds and

business loans would be less than the percentage increase in home mortgages

because the decline in the underlying real capital is expected to be smaller

and because restrictions on tax—exempt financing of these activities would

significantly increase taxable issues. Tax—exempt multifamily rental housing

bonds, private nonprofit hospital and education bonds, student loan bonds and

industrial development bonds aggregated over $40 billion in 1983. This was

fully a third of taxable business net debt issues in 1983 (only about a sixth

in 1984). As a result, declines in taxable issues in the steady state of only

10 to 20 percent should be expected. In contrast, long—term tax—exempt issues

would likely be halved; the nongovernmental tax—exempt bond issues that the

reform proposal would sharply curtail constituted 61 percent of 1983 long—term

tax—exempt issues.

      Treasury I's interest indexation feature would also have a notable impact

on financial intermediation. A single example serves to illustrate the point.

Consider a depository intermediary that invests solely in taxable instruments

earning i (net of expected issues) and finances y of this with deposits paying

d and the remaining l—y with equity. The after—tax income per dollar of assets

is

            After—Tax =
            Income        (l—T)1   -.
                                        (l—T)yd   —   (l—T)O,
                                         —17—



where T   is   the relevant marginal tax rate, 8 is the fraction of interest taxed

and deducted (currently =l), and o is the ratio of "net other expenses" to

assets. Let i= 0.12, d= 0.10, o 0.02, r         0.3, and y= 0.95, numbers roughly

consistent with current data. Then



               After—Tax =
               Income      .7(.12—.095—.02) = .0035.



With indexation and an inflation rate of 0.05, 8 = 0.545 and



               After—Tax =
               Income      .82(.12—.095) —   .7(.02)   = .0069.




Under these circumstances, the intermediary's profit rate would double. The

increase in profitability would lead to relatively higher deposit (and lower

loan) rates and greater financial intermediation.



                                B. The Other Reforms

      I turn now to the other three reforms, looking first at the data in Table

5 on the real capital stock effects. Bradley.-Gephardt would generally be

favorable for real estate and unfavorable for other forms of capital. This

follows directly from the removal of the investment tax credit for equipment

and utility structures. Kemp.-Kasten and Treasury II would have nearly

identical effects at this level of aggregation. Because these plans partially

offset the removal of the ITC with more favorable depreciation allowances, the

negative impact on nonreal estate assets is negligible. The declines in

owner—occupied housing reflect a 5 percent decrease in the home ownership rate.
                                        —18—



      All three reform proposals include the same general restrictions on tax—

exempt financing as Treasury I; thus net tax exempt issues would be roughly

halved. Multifamily and commercial mortgages issues would tend to increase

under all three reforms, due to both the increase in real capital and the shift

from tax—exempt to taxable financing.

      The restriction on issues of tax—exempt single—family housing bonds would

increase regular home mortgage issues, roughly offsetting the declines under

Kemp—Kasten and Treasury II caused by slight decreases in owner—occupied

housing. Home mortgage issues would tend to rise under Bradley—Gephardt due to

both the increase in housing and the shift out of the exempt market.

Nevertheless, a decline in home issues should be anticipated. Like the

Treasury plans, Bradley—Gephardt has three personal tax brackets, 0.14, 0.26

(income above $40,000) and 0.30 (income above $65,000). While interest earned

by high—income households would be taxed at the higher marginal rates, mortgage

interest expense would be deductible at only the base 0.14 rate. This should

stimulate considerably greater owner—equity financing of owner—occupied

housing, which would tend to reduce the demand for deposits as well as the

supply of mortgage securities.



                       III. Tax Reform and Stock Prices

      Equities are largely claims on real capital or, more precisely, the net

cash flows generated by the capital for the shareholders, and the market value

of equities should equal the risk—adjusted present value of these cash flows

(Downs, 1985). To determine the impact of tax changes, then, requires analysis

of how the changes would be expected to alter both expected net corporate cash

flows and the rate at which they are discounted to obtain market values. A

first step in this analysis is specification of the expected cash flows and
                                           —19—



market valuation under current law. The second step deals with the reforms.

The analysis is for nonfinancial corporations only; the methodology employed

is not readily applicable to financial corporations.

      The analysis computes "cash—out intrinsic values" (Brainard, Shoven and

Weiss, 1980). That is, tax reforms are presumed to affect the value of the

returns on existing capital only. To the extent that future investments are

expected to earn economic rents (investments in the past 15 years to not appear

to have earned any), the corporate tax rate cuts in all reform proposals would

increase the expected after—tax rents and thus stock prices. Also, the

calculations do not allow for an increase in the value of land, although the

possibility of such increases is discussed briefly. The projected stock market

increases, then, might be interpreted as conservative estimates.



              A. The Value of Shareholder's Claims to Existing Capital

      Under current law the sum of the after—tax cash flows from each component

(equipment and structures) of the existing fixed capital in period t, K, can

be written as



      CFt =               + TTAXDt —
               (l_T)NOI                (l_T)INTt +4DEBTt,                (5)




where NOl is net operating income, INT is interest paid, TAXD is allowable tax

depreciation, and 4DEBT is the change in outstanding debt financing fixed

capital. If firms finance a constant fraction, b, of the market value of their

fixed capital with debt at rate i, we have
                                                 —20—



                       (l_T)INTt =       (l_T)ibqK1     and                           (5a)

                        DEBT =
                                   b4(K1).                                            (5b)




where        is the ratio of the market value to replacement cost of the existing

fixed capital stock.

        To understand better what is involved in projecting CFt it is useful to

express both the tax depreciation term and Kt in terms of the current nominal

fixed capital stock, K:



                       TTAXD = t8 K and                                               (5c)

                             =
                                 Øt(l+)tK,                                            (5d)




where       is the expected inflation rate. The               are based upon tax depreciation

schedules and decline monotonically; if K consisted entirely of newly—placed,

undepreciated capital,              =   1.0.   [Because the depreciable base is not indexed

under current law, there is no inflation adjustment in (5c).] The                  measure

the portion of the fixed capital stock existing when the reform passes that is

projected to still exist t periods later and thus decline monotonically from

0   = 1.0   to 0N =   0.0,   where N is the remaining service life of the "longest

lasting" component of capital in K. Estimates of the                   and 0 depend on the
precise history of K: when it was put in place, its original service life,

and what depreciation method was chosen.

        The NOl's are also obviously related to the underlying fixed capital

stock. I express this relation as
                                                  —21—



                     NOI =      PtKti.                                                     (5e)




If technology were putty—putty and there were no costs to adjusting the capital

stock,       would equal         the current rental prices for equipment/structures

(plus a little for economic rents). With putty—clay technology and adjustment

costs,       is a weighted average of past rental prices where the weights depend

on the portion of the current capital stock put into place in past periods.

In the simulations, the NOl's stemming from equipment and structures under

current law are obtained by setting p equal to                          This procedure does not

lead to implausible current valuation. The impact of the tax reform is

computed two ways: with              unchanged and with p shifted to the value generated

by the tax reform. Because the "correct" measure for stock market valuation

should lie      between these values, the estimated impact of the reform on

valuation should be bounded.

         The present value of the cash flows produced by each component of the

existing fixed capital stock is:




                                              =          CF
                                                                                           (6)
                                                       (l+e)
                                                  tl


where e is the nominal after—tax required return on corporate equity. The

value this same stock j periods later is simply



                                 N       CF
                    pv     =                       and    q. =    PV./K..
                                                              3     3   J
                                        (l+e)tJ
                               t=j+l
                                                                      —22—



      A portfolio equilibrium condition can be used to relate e to the interest

rate, the expected inflation rate, and personal tax parameters. With the real

and inflationary equity returns to shareholders taxed at rates T                                                   and
                                                                                                                         TgI
respectively, the after—tax returns to shareholders can be written as



                 (l—T        )   (e—7r)       + (l—t r           =   R    +        ,                                      (7)
                        er                          g                 m        e



where R is the yield on risk—free tax—exempt securities and                                                     is the risk

premium required on investment in corporate equity. Historically, firms have

paid a constant share, p, of real earnings out as dividends (Auerbach, 1982).

Thus we write

                                          T
                                              er        prdiv     +      (l—p)t cg


where r         is the tax rate on dividends and r                                          is the tax rate applicable to
          div                                                                          cg
real increases in share prices and equals                                              under current law. In general, I
                                                                              Tg
assume p =      0.4,    e
                                 =   0.075,        T
                                                       div
                                                             =   r.imax/2     and r
                                                                                            cg
                                                                                                 =   (l—excl)T.imax/4, where

 imax is the maximum personal tax rate on interest income, excl is the capital
r.


gains exclusion, and the divisions by 2 and 4 reflect tax deferral and

avoidance activity.

      Table 6 represents the values assumed for key parameters under current

law and under the tax reform proposals. Two parameters do not vary across the

reforms: the loan—to—value ratio of 0.33 and the inflation rate of 0.05.

With these parameters and the other assumptions, the present value of the

existing fixed capital stock is $934 billion. This number differs little from

the rough market value estimate implicit in the Board of Governor's balance

sheet accounts (1985). The market value of fixed capital equals the market

value of equity plus debt less the market value of assets other than fixed

capital. The market value of equity at the end of 1984 was $1639 billion, and
                                          —23—




 the   market values of inventories and land were $754 and $577 billion,

 respectively. Under the assumption that the market values of debt and

 financial assets equalled their book values, the market value of the fixed

capital stock was $892 billion.



                       B. Tax Reform and the Value of Shares

         Tax reform could affect share values by fostering economic growth,

opening new, highly—profitable investment opportunities. Such effects are

highly uncertain, however, and our analysis does not attempt to quantify them.

Rather, we limit ourselves to deducing the impact of tax reform on the value of

flows stemming from the existing fixed capital stock. The market values of

land and inventories are presumed to be unaffected by the reforms.

        To account fully for the reforms, a model must incorporate all their

provisions. The initial Treasury plan proposed indexation of interest expense
—   only    of expense could be deducted, where     is negatively related to the

inflation rate —— and deductibility of y of dividend payments, DIVt. Treasury

II continued the dividend deduction, although at a lower rate, dropped interest

indexation, and added a recapture provision.

        To account for both the indexation of interest under Treasury I, the l—r

multiplying the INT variable is charged to l—$r. To incorporate the partial

dividend exclusion (the deductibility of y of dividends), the cash flows in (6)

are multiplied by l+ty, where TI   is   the tax saving from the exclusion per

dollar of cash flow to be paid out as dividends.'2 To allow for a possible

recapture provision, equation (6) is rewritten as



                       (l+ty)CF
             PV =                 — PVRECAP,                          (6')
                        (l+e)t
                                          —24—



where the last term is the present value of this provision.13 In this

framework, the tax reforms affect the market value of equities by changing the

corporate tax rate, T, by introducing interest indexation (8         1) and/or a

partial dividend exclusion (y), by changing personal tax rates (t), through
                                                 *
"general   equilibrium channels" (1, e, and p ), and by special features such as

and the recapture provision of Treasury II.

      The percentage changes in the market value of corporate equities due to

reforms are listed in Table 7. The changes are the sum of the impacts of the

reforms on the equipment and structure PVs, divided by the $1639 billion

yearend 1984 market value of nonfinancial corporations reported by the Federal

Reserve. Upper and lower estimates of share—price percentage changes develop

from alternative assumptions about effects of the reforms on net operating

incomes. Because the investment hurdle rates for plant and equipment are not

altered by Treasury II (or, more correctly, the increase for equipment is

offset by the decrease from structures), both assumptions generate the same

estimate. For Bradley—Gephardt and Treasury I, the upper estimate reflects an

increase in the NOl's based on the increase in hurdle rates; for Keinp-.Kasten,

the lower estimate reflects a decrease in the NOl's owing to a decline in

hurdle rates. An additional set of estimates is developed for the Treasury

plans to measure the effect of including or excluding the dividend exclusion

(and the recapture provision for Treasury II) in the reform plans.

      Because all reforms reduce the taxation on existing capital, all would

increase stock values. The implied increases are about 10 percent for

Bradley—Gephardt and Treasury II, only 5 percent for Kemp—Kasten, and a much

larger 20 to 30 percent increase for Treasury 1.14 About half of the latter

comes from the 50 percent dividend exclusion; without the exclusion, the

impact of Treasury I would not differ much from those of Treasury II and
                                            —25—



 Bradley—Gephardt. For Treasury II, the small dividend exclusion would raise

 share values by roughly 3 percent, and the recapture provision would lower them

 by slightly less.

       The data in Table 7 presume no impact of tax reform on land values. The

 reforms could raise land values significantly, however. Assume, along the

 lines of Feldstein (1980), that the net of tax return on land equals the real

tax—exempt yield plus a risk premium:



                       (l—i )F
                          L L
                          L      _TlTRm_Tr+ÔL,
                                   g



where FL is the marginal product of a unit of land,        is the effective tax

rate on real returns to land, L is the real price of land and L is the

required risk premium on land. If the tax—exempt rate is not changed by the

tax reform (an assumption supported for all reforms except Kemp—Kasten by the

analysis in Section I), the productivity of capital is unchanged, and minor

changes in T     are ignored, the percentage change in the real price of land is

               If real returns on land were taxed at the full corporate rate, land

values would rise by roughly 25 percent, and corporate equities would rise in

value by an additional 9 percent because corporate land is currently valued at

35 percent of corporate equity.



                                      IV.   Summary

      Interest rates are determined by the supply of and demand for funds to

finance real capital. Tax reforms such as cuts in marginal corporate and

personal tax rates and interest indexation lower interest rates by shifting

both the supply and demand curves downward. Reductions in "pure" investment

incentives ——   in   investment tax credits and the generosity of tax depreciation
                                     —26—



allowances ——   lower the demand curve only. The precise decline in interest
rates depends on the magnitude of these curve shifts and of the interest—rate

elasticities of investment demand, domestic saving, and net foreign saving.

      Shifts in the domestic—supply and demand schedules are calculated for

four tax reforms: Bradley—Gephardt (BG) , Kemp—Kasten (1(X), Treasury I (TI) and

Treasury II (Til). On the supply side, the downward shifts are estimated to be

roughly three percentage points for Treasury I and about one and a half points

for the other three reforms. On the demand side, the downward shifts are

roughly three points again for TI, two points for BG, one point for Til and no

decline at all for KX.   The larger shifts for TI are attributable to its

interest jndexation feature. The smaller demand shifts for Til and KK (no

shift at all) are the result of the more generous tax depreciation allowances,

especially under KK, than exist under current law. Taking into account the

shifts of both curves and allowing for a dampening effect of net foreign

saving, the rate declines from the four plans are roughly two and a half points

for TI, one and a half points for BG, one point for Til and a half point for

KK. Interest rates will decline with tax reform, but how much depends on how

the reform is structured.

      Financial flows will be altered by tax reforms to the extent that:      (1)


the composition of investment, especially between owner—occupied housing,

depreciable real estate and nonreal estate assets, is altered, (2) desired

loan—to—value ratios are changed, and (3) particular types of issues are

specifically limited by the reforms. All reforms would sharply restrict issues

of tax—exempts for nongovernmental uses, issues which have constituted sixty

percent of total long—term exempt issues in recent years. All reforms except

Treasury I would also modestly reduce home mortgages, Treasury II and Kemp—

Kasten because of a roughly five percent reduction in the demand for owner—

occupied housing and Bradley—Gephardt because of a decrease in the desired
                                      —27—



loan—to—value ratio. In contrast, other issues, especially multifamily and

commercial mortgages, would increase owing to an increase in depreciable real

estate and the restrictions on tax—exempt issues for nongovernmental uses.

      Far and away the largest changes in financial flows would occur in

response to the interest indexation provision of Treasury I. This provision

would sharply lower interest rates and, because home mortgage interest would

still be fully deductible, the cost of debt financing owner—occupied housing.

The combination of more of this housing and a higher loan—to—value ratio would

substantially increase home mortgage issues. Other taxable issues would fall

due both to the reallocation of real capital toward housing and to a decrease

in business loan—to—value ratios, owing to the reduced deductibility of

interest (and the partial deductibility of dividends for corporations). This

decline would, however, be mitigated by the shift from tax—exempt financing for

nongovernmental purposes to regular taxable financing. Finally, interest

indexation would favor growth of financial intermediaries with the greatest

excess of interest income over interest expense.

      The cut in the corporate income tax rate would raise the after—tax cash

flows stemming from the existing capital stock. This and minor changes in the

equity discount factor for these cash flows would raise stock prices by roughly

five percent under Kemp—Kasten and ten percent under the other three reforms.

The fifty percent dividend exclusion of Treasury I would raise stock prices by

about another fifteen percent ($250 billion). The smaller ten percent dividend

exclusion of Treasury II and its recapture provision about offset each other.
                                      —28—




                                     FOOTNOTES

1Feldstein and Summers (1978) develop the relationship between investment

incentives and before—tax interest rates, and Peek and Wilcox (1984) report

evidence that before—tax interest rates respond to tax rates.



2Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983) calculate that the 1981 Tax Act imposed a

capital tax of $200 billion on shareholders by taxing new capital more

favorably than old; Hendershott and Shilling (1982) calculate that the 1981

Act would raise real interest rates by a percentage point and a half.



3One could develop, at least intuitively, a noncorporate structure argument

analogous to Miller's corporate structure argument. The result would be

identification of    with "the" personal tax rate on debt. If this rate were

taken to be the maximum rate under current law and the tax reforms, the

analysis that follows in the text would not be significantly altered because

the corporate and maximum personal rates are roughly equal now and would

continue to be under all reforms.



4Buser and Hess (1985) find the corporate bond risk spread, a proxy for the

expected probability of default, to be the major determinant of variation in

the one—year rate ratio over the 1967—82 period.



5The above analysis assumes that municipal and Treasury securities are equal in

all respects other than federal taxation of their coupon income. In fact,

coupons on municipal securities must contain a premium to compensate investors

for expected shortfalls in realized yields relative to promised yields owing to

default and/or early call, and the expected shortfalls on high quality

securities tend to increase with maturity (they approximate zero on one—year
                                        —29—



securities). Further, the longer the maturity of munis, the more high tax

bracket    investors must be compensated for the possibility of their unexpectedly

becoming lower tax bracket investors (and having to pay large transaction costs

to convert to taxable securities) or of the value of municipals' tax—exempt

status declining. These factors would raise longer—term exempt coupons

relative to longer—term taxable coupons.



6The precision of the interest rates reported (basis points) in this and other

tables reflects the exactitude of the computer, not the confidence of the

author.



7mis is an application of the methodology used by Feldstein and Summers (1978)

in their calculation of the maximum potential interest rate for all corporate

investments. Modelling of the reforms is fully described in Hendershott

(1985)




8The Kemp—Kasten calculation is based upon a rate ratio of 0.730 which would

exist if the corporate tax rate were 0.4. The corporate rate is raised from

0.35 because higher tax rates would be necessary to render Kernp—Kasten revenue

neutral.



9These data are long—run calculations assuming infinite price elasticities of

factor supplies. In the short—run, asset prices will be bid up or down,

thereby inducing the necessary factor and real capital shifts. (Greater detail

by asset category is contained in Hendershott, 1985.)

'0The data in this paragraph and the next are from The President's Tax

Proposals to the Congress for Fairness, Growth and Simplicity, 1985, Table

11.01—1, 284.
                                     —30—



11lnsurance companies would benefit even more than depository institutions from

indexation because they have far more interest income than interest expense.

However, other provisions of the Treasury proposals would tax these companies

more heavily.



'2While some of the increase in cash flows may be retained and reinvested, the

present value of the cash flows will be unaffected if the new investment earns

the discount rate, e.



'3This provision puts 40 percent of the excess depreciation (tax depreciation

less the straight line number reported in earnings and profit statements) taken

in the 1980—84 period into taxable income in 1986—88 (12 percent each in 1986

and 1987 and 16 percent in 1988).



14These results assume that corporations receive full benefit of the decline in

interest rates (all debt is short—term or can be costlessly refinanced). In

the case of constant NOIs, the after—tax interest saving increases share values

by over a percentage point only under Bradley—Gephardt (1½ points) and Treasury

I (4 points)
                                           —31—



                                        References



 Auerbach, A.J. "Issues in the Measurement and Encouragement of Business

 Saving," in Saving and Goverment Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,

 Conference Series No. 25, 1982, 79—100.



 Auerbach, A.J. and L.J, Kotlikoff, "Investment Versus Savings Incentives:          The

 Size of the Bang from the Buck and the Potential for Self—Financing Business

 Tax Cuts, "   in   The Economic Consequences of Government Deficits, (ed)   L.H.

 Meyers. Boston: Kluwer—Nijhoff Publishing, 1983, 121—154.



 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheets for the U.S.

 Economy, July 1985.



 Brainard, W.C., J.B. Shoven and L. Weiss, "The Financial Valuation of the

Return to Capital," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1980, 453—502.



Buser, S.A. and P.J. Hess, "En-tpirical Determinants of the Relative Yields on

Taxable and Tax—Exempt Securities," mimeo, August 1985.



Constantjrjjdes, G.M. and J.E. Ingersoll, Jr., "Optimal Bond Trading with

Personal Taxes," Journal of Financial Economics, 13, September 1984, 299—335.



Downs, T.W., "The Determinants of Market Value," Boston College School of

Management, Working Paper 85—35, 1985.



Feldstein, M., "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Prices of Land and Gold," Journal

of   Public Economics, 14, December 1980, 309—318.
                                        —32—



Feldstein, M. and L.H. Summers, "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Long—Term

Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1978, 61—99.



Hall, R.E. and D.W. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American

Economic Review, June 1967, 56, 391—414.



}iendershott, P.H., "Tax Reform, Interest Rates and Capital Allocation," NBER

Working Paper, August 1985.



Hendershott, P.H., and J.D. Shilling, "The Impacts on Capital Allocation of

Some Aspects of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance

Quarterly, April 1982, 242—273.



Miller, M., "Debt and Taxes," The Journal of Finance, 32, May 1977, 261—275.



Peek, J. and J.A. Wilcox, "The Degree of Fiscal Illusion in Interest Rates:

Some Direct Estimates," American Economic Review, 74, December 1984, 1061—1066.



Peek, J. and J.A. Wilcox, "Tax Rates and Tax—Exempt Interest Rates," New

England Economic Review, forthcoming.



Summers, L.H., "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth

Model," American Economic Review, 71, September 1981, 533—544.
                                        —33—



    Table 1: Tax—Exempt and Taxable Coupon Rates Under Various Tax Regimes

Tax            Corporate     Tax Rate      Exempt/Taxable Rate Ratio   Taxable Rate That
Regime         Tax           on            One Year        Ten Year    Maintains Exempt Rate
                                    a
               Rate          Equity                                    One Year     Ten Year

Current          .46         .0742             .500           .690       .11           .11

Bradley—
Gephart          .30         .0940             .634           .770       .0868         O986
Kemp-.Kacten     .35         .0555             .614           .758       .0896         .1001

Treasury I       .35         .1128              718b          872b       .0766         .0870

Treasury II      .35         .0667             .607           .754       .0906         .1007




aFrom Hendershott, 1985, Table 6.

bAssumes an inflation rate of 5 percent. The ratio varies positively with the inflation rat
because the portion of interest that is taxed varies negatively with the inflation rate.
                         Table    2:   Important Tax Parameters for Business Investment
                   Current Law         Bradley—Gephardt         Kemp—Kasten        Treasury I        Treasury II
Maximum
Tax Ratesa
      Corporate         .4924                .342                    .389                 .37            .37
      Personal          .53                  .342                    .30                  .41            .41
Investment Tax           yes                  no                      no                   no             no
Credit
Capital Gains      Nominal gains       Nominal gains           Nominal gains at    Real gains        Nominal gains at
                   at 40% of           at regular              60% of regular      at regular        50% of regular
                   regular rate        rate                    rate or real        rate              rate or real
                                                               gains at regular                      gains at
                                                               rate                                  regular rate
Depreciation b     175%/150% DB        250% DB over            Near                3% per year,      DB/SL over
Tax Deductions     or SL over          40/10 years             Expensing           SL, indexed       28/6.5 years
First year:        18/5 years                                                                        indexed
      Structures        10%                   6%                      6%                   3%             4%
      Equipment         30%                  25%                     20%                  18%            27%
Interest                no                   no                      no                   yes            no
Indexation
Partial Dividend        no                   no                      no                   yes(50%)       yes(lO%)
Exclusion
aThese assume a six percent state and local tax rate, deductible at the personal level except under the
Treasury plans.
bAll tax reforms have multiple maturity equipment classes. The first (full) years depreciation rates are for
an "average't piece of equipment and for a current 18 year structure.
cMore than 100 percent, indexed for inflation, of the original value is written off at straight line rate over
25 years.  With a low 3½ percent real discount rate, this is equivalent to expensing.
                                     —35—



  Table 3: Interest Rate Levels Necessary to Maintain Investment in Different
               Assets Assuming Passage of Different Reform Plans
                   (prepassage level of interest rates = 11%)

                       Bradley—      Kemp—          Treasury       Treasury
                       Gephardt      Kasten             I              II

Corporate

      Inventories        10.4        11.1              9.9            12.7

      Equipment           5.9         9.0              5.1             7.8

      Industrial         10.4        12.9             8.2             11.2
      Structures

      Utility            8.5         11.1             7.1             11.1
      Structures

Noncorporate

      Inventories       11.0         11.6            10.5             12.9

      Equipment          6.2          8.8             5.3              7.7

      Depreciable        9.6         11.5             7.8             10.06
      Real Estate

      Owner—Occupied     9.5         10.9             9.7             10.0
      Housing

Model Simulation         9.11        11.06            8.00            10.12

aThIS is a weighted average for households with incomes of $17,500, $27,500,
$40,000, $70,000 and $130,000, where the weights are 0.12, 0.10, 0.31, 0.30,
and 0.17.
                                     —36—



           Table 4: Interest Rates Under Alternative Tax Regimes (%)

             Taxable Rate     Taxable Rate       Best Estimate    Best Estimates of
             Implied by       That Would         of 10—Year       Tax—Exempt Rates
             Fixed Capital    Maintain Average   Taxable          1—Year    10—Year
             Stock Model      Exempt Rates       Rate


Current                                               11               5•5     77
Law

                   9.11             9.27         9.25 to 9.75          6.0     7.3
Bradley—
Gephardt

                  11.06             9.49         10.25 to 10.75        6.4     7.7
Kemp—
Kasten

                   8.00             8.18            8 to 9             6.1     7.4
Treasury
   I

                  10.12             9.56          9.75 to 10.25        6.1     7.5
Treasury
   II
                                         —37—



                   Table 5: Impacts of Reforms on the Distribution
                       of the American Capital Stock (% change)

                     Treasury I    Bradley—     Treasury II   Kemp—
                                  Gephardt                    Kasten

Owner—Occupied           28          4             —3            —4
Housing

Depreciable            —21           4              6                7
Real Estate

Equipment and          —10         —5             —2             —l
Other Structures
                                           —38—



                 Table 6: Parameter Values for Stock Market Calculations

                        Current    Treasury        Treasury    Bradley—    Kemp—
                          Law          I              II       Gephardt    Kasten

Fraction of               1.0          0545a          1.0         1.0        1.0
Interest
Deductible (8)

Fraction of               0.0          0.5            0.1         0.0       0.0
Dividends
Deductible (y)

Profits ax                 .4924           .37         .37         .342       .389
Rate (t)

Interest   Rate (i)        .11             .085        .10         .095       .105

Equity Rate Ce)            .1687           .1704       .1649       .1685      .1662

Hurdle Rate for            .2260           .2733       .2468       .2621      .2424
Equipment (PE)C
Hurdle Rate for            .1542           .1586       .1405       .1440      .1302
               C
Structures (p)


aAssumes a 5 percent inflation rate.

bincorporates a 6 percent state and local tax rate deductible at the Federal level.

CThese data are computed in Hendershott (1985).
                                         —39—



                   Table 7:   Impact of Tax Reforms on Share Values (%)

                                All Reform                     Without Dividend
                                Provisions                     Exclusion and
                                                               Recapture

Bradley—Gephardt                 10—13

Kemp—Kasten                       4—7

Treasury I                       20—30                               8—16

Treasury II                        10                                 9
                                      FIGURE 1
    Interest Rate Determination:   Zero Interest Rate Elasticity for the Supply of Capital
0
                                                                                             )
                                     Ris (z)
                              REs
                                              FIGURE   2
    Interest Rate Determination:   Infinite Interest Rate Elasticity   or   the Supply of Capital
H
     t4
                                                                                                         L G)
                                                                                                    'I
     C                                                                                                   &')
                                                                   Kt              K'
                                                         FIGURE   3
     Interest Rate Determination:           Finite Interest Rate Elasticity for the Supply of Capital
                                                                                              s (t
                                                                               vvv
                                                                  N
(N
            0
                                                             '.                           /
             (S
                    a   • •   . .   .   ,   .   ,   (•
                                                                               I,,
                                                                                     4.
                                                         V                                      - (-ru, ZG )
                                                                      lJ'l
