NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OUTLOOK FOR FINANCIAL LITERACY
Annamaria Lusardi
Olivia S. Mitchell
Working Paper 17077
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17077

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

Opinions and conclusions are solely those of the author(s) and do not reflect views of the institutions
supporting the research, with whom the authors are affiliated, or the Pension Research Council. All
rights reserved. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Outlook for Financial Literacy
Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 17077
May 2011
JEL No. D91,E21
ABSTRACT
As the world becomes more financially integrated and complex, average individuals and their families
are increasingly faced with making highly sophisticated and all-too-often irreversible financial decisions.
Nowhere is this more evident than with regard to retirement decision-making. Indeed, the global financial
crisis suggests that poor financial decision-making can have substantial costs not only for individuals
but also society at large. This paper focuses on key lessons for financial decision-making in the wake
of that crisis, exploring how financial literacy can enhance peoples’ skills and abilities to make more
informed economic choices.
Annamaria Lusardi
George Washington School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

2

Introduction1
As the world becomes more financially integrated and complex, average individuals and
their families are increasingly faced with making highly sophisticated and all-too-often
irreversible financial decisions. Nowhere is this more evident than with regard to retirement
decision-making. A half-century ago, traditional defined benefit (DB) pension schemes were the
norm in the United States, Japan, Australia and much of Europe, but these have now been largely
been replaced with defined contribution (DC) pensions. In the process, employer and
government judgment regarding how much to save and where to invest has been replaced by
individuals having to make these choices on their own (or helped by advisers they select on their
own). Additionally, participants in DC plans must also decide how to spend down their pension
assets and determine whether to annuitize or take their benefits in a single lump sum. The trend
toward disintermediation and financial complexity extends into other realms of life as well, for
example regarding decisions over credit cards, adjustable rate mortgages, and when to claim
retirement benefits (Campbell 2006; Ferguson 2010).
A larger array of available financial instruments does offer new opportunities for more
tailored financial plans than available in the past, but these can also make poor decision-making
more costly to the ill-informed investors. Indeed, recent events surrounding the global crisis that
began in 2008 show that, when people and institutions make grievous financial errors, poor
financial decision-making can have substantial costs not only for individuals but also society at
large. This volume focuses on key lessons for financial decision-making in the wake of that
crisis, exploring how financial literacy can enhance peoples’ skills and abilities to make more
informed economic choices.
1

This paper is the introductory chapter of our book titled: “Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security
and the Financial Marketplace,” to be published by Oxford University Press.

3
The chapters that follow draw on cutting-edge research by eminent researchers and
practitioners engaged in examining how financial knowledge can shape cost-effective financial
planning and behavior. The research reported here suggests several main findings. First,
financial literacy is found to be a key determinant of how well people make financial decisions,
as well as how well they execute their financial transactions; and such information can inform
saving, investing, borrowing from one’s 401(k) account, and planning for retirement. Second,
new evidence is reported on the extent of financial knowledge (or lack thereof), drawing from
several surveys and showing that financial literacy’s effects on financial decision-making extend
above and beyond the effects of education, sex, race, income, and other factors often associated
with gaps in financial knowledge. Third, it is possible to parse out the nexus of causality between
financial literacy and financial decision-making. This is important, since financial knowledge
can be influenced by peoples’ choices but the directionality of the effect could also be reversed.
For instance, people might invest in financial knowledge so they can invest in complex assets,
which would not imply that investing causes the knowledge. And conversely, lack of knowledge
could prevent people from investing but it could go the other way. Accordingly, work in this
volume seeks to design controlled settings in which one can disentangle the causal links of most
interest. The final lesson from this volume is that there is now substantial evidence – in the
United States and elsewhere – that financial education programs can improve financial decisionmaking.
Our work will be of interest not only to researchers and teachers, but also policymakers
engaged in work on financial reforms in the wake of the financial crisis, and providers of
financial advice and financial services. There is increasing awareness of the need to improve
retirement security via increasing financial literacy, as noted by the U.S. President’s Advisory

4
Council on Financial Literacy (PACFL, 2008, np) who argued that: "While the crisis has many
causes, it is undeniable that financial illiteracy is one of the root causes... Sadly, far too many
Americans do not have the basic financial skills necessary to develop and maintain a budget, to
understand credit, to understand investment vehicles, or to take advantage of our banking system.
It is essential to provide basic financial education that allows people to better navigate an
economic crisis such as this one.” In Europe, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD nd) recently announced a major initiative to “identify individuals who are
most in need of financial education and the best ways to improve that education.”
Our work also responds to those seeking ways to help individuals and their families as
they embark gingerly into the modern financial system, sometimes after substantial missteps. In
what follows we briefly outline themes and highlight salient lessons.

Financial Literacy and Financial Decision-Making
In prior work as well as in the research presented in this volume, Lusardi and Mitchell
(2007a, 2007b, 2007c, 2008, 2009, 2011) have devoted extensive effort to survey peoples’
ability to understand basic financial concepts and plan for retirement. Their chapter in this
volume explores how people make financial plans, collect the information needed to make these
plans, and implement the plans in a survey of older Americans. Using these data, they show that
financial illiteracy is widespread, particularly when it comes to understanding compound interest
rates and the effects of inflation, along with the more nuanced concept of risk diversification.
They report that only half of all respondents in the survey can correctly answer two simple
questions regarding interest compounding and inflation, and only one-third correctly answer
these two questions plus a question on risk diversification. Not only is financial illiteracy

5
widespread among older Americans, but shortfalls are concentrated among women, minorities,
and the least educated. They also report that the financially savvy are more likely to plan and to
succeed in their planning, and they tend to rely on formal methods such as retirement calculators,
retirement seminars, and financial experts, instead of family/relatives or co-workers. The authors
conclude that targeted financial education efforts are likely to be most effective in filling the
knowledge gaps.
The workplace is an important source of financial education, particularly as workers
approach retirement. In their study, Robert L. Clark, Melinda S. Morrill, and Steven G. Allen
(2011) investigate the role of employer-sponsored retirement planning sessions in shaping
retirement planning. Drawing on case studies, they examine seminars offered to individuals with
mandatory defined benefit plans and voluntary defined contribution plans. In these seminars,
employees learn about retirement planning as well as details of their own benefits and pension
distribution rules. To see how the seminars work, participants are asked about their retirement
intentions prior to and after the sessions, to determine whether the seminar is associated with any
change in retirement intentions and plans.
The authors conclude that a third of those who originally indicated they would probably
take the DB lump-sum payment before the seminar, decided afterwards not to take that option.
Of those who originally planned not to take the lump sum, almost half changed their minds postseminar. As for annuitizing DC plans, almost half changed their plans and decided not to
annuitize following the information session, compared to a fifth who decided to annuitize after
learning more about their retirement options. The authors note that those who indicated they
would take the lump sum tend to have more knowledge about retirement-related finance. In this
sense, many people who indicated that they would not take the lump-sum distribution actually

6
did not know they had that option, prior to the seminar. The survey also reflects only stated
intentions rather than actual behavior, but when it comes time to actually make a final decision,
the authors show that some two-thirds of employees do opt for the lump-sum distribution.
Another way in which pension accruals are utilized includes plan loans, particularly in
the U.S. 401(k) environment. Stephen P. Utkus and Jean A. Young (2011) examine how
borrowing from one’s DC plan is linked to financial literacy and report that almost one-fifth of
401(k) participants had loans outstanding at any given time, with the loans averaging 16 percent
of plan balances. The authors also find that lower levels of financial literacy appear linked to
pension borrowing; that is, those with lower literacy test scores are also more likely to take the
loans. A surprising result of the study is that higher-income people are also more likely to
borrow from their 401(k) accounts. In sum, financial literacy is related to pension borrowing but
this behavior should not be viewed in isolation from the household’s overall balance sheet.
Financial literacy also plays a role in influencing decision-making regarding stock market
investment. Joanne Yoong’s (2011) study links lack of understanding about equity markets and
investment in stocks using the American Life Panel (ALP), an internet survey. Her analysis
shows that having no investment in stock is not associated with mistaken financial beliefs and,
further, is not linked to important variables, such as risk aversion and income. She concludes that
people shy away from the stock market primarily because they do not understand it. Thus, even
if employers design pension plans to ‘default’ people into portfolios containing equity
investments, investors would still benefit from learning about how financial markets work in
order to make sensible investment choices.

Evaluating Financial Literacy Interventions

7
It is not surprising that uneducated consumers fail to make good choices when faced with
complex decisions, risk, and lengthy time horizons, and there is at least the chance that financial
literacy can help inform the decision process. Accordingly, the volume next covers various
methods of assessing how to improve financial literacy. The chapter by Justine Hastings, Olivia
S. Mitchell, and Eric Chyn (2011) explores how to present fees and charges in pension choice,
focusing on the national mandatory DC scheme in Chile where workers elect which of five
pension funds they invest their mandatory contributions. Using a nationally representative
individual-level survey, the researchers examine respondent financial literacy and link it to how
they select from among five fund managers available to handle their retirement investments.
People respond that the top three factors they use in choosing a fund are recommendations from
a friend, fund profitability, and to help a salesman (perhaps because the salesman would, in turn,
do a favor for, or provide some sort of gift to, the participant). The empirical analysis shows that
better-educated and higher-income respondents are more likely to select fund managers
generating highest returns. This group is also more likely than others to turn to their employers
for recommendations on fund managers. Lower-income respondents rely more on advertising
and recommendations from friends. This suggests that the less-educated are more susceptible to
how information is framed, implying that it may be important to monitor information and plan
design as a protective measure for the least literate.
To the extent that people can hire advisers, they may not need to have financial
information themselves, yet many are confused about where to find it and whom to trust to
deliver it. This is the topic of the chapter by Angela Hung, Noreen Clancy, and Jeff Dominitz
(2011), who study investor knowledge and experience with advisers and brokers-dealers. In the
U.S., brokers-dealers and investment advisors have distinctly different roles: brokers conduct

8
security transactions, dealers buy and sell securities for others, investment advisors provide
financial planning services and advice regarding securities, and consultants simply provide
advice. But in practice, the lines may blur, so to gain a better sense of how well consumers
understand these distinctions, the researchers surveyed members of the American Life Panel and
conducted additional focus groups. They show that many people seem to understand how
brokers-dealers and investment advisors differ, but few can distinguish between financial
advisors and financial consultants. Furthermore, people who have worked with financial
professionals tend to have long-term relationships involving trust. Nevertheless, many
respondents believe they cannot use these services due to insufficient assets. A key challenge for
the financial industry is to find ways to provide unbiased, experienced, and high-quality
investment advice for low cost, and to serve people with widely-varying financial situations and
needs.
A more detailed examination of how individuals with limited assets use the financial
system is the subject of the study by Susan Carter, Paige M. Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman
(2011). In some sub-populations, alternative financial providers play a key role, including
payday loan offices and pawn shops offering much-needed cash but often at a heavy price. Those
who use these financing sources take out small and short-term loans, typically about $300 for a
term of two weeks, carrying very high rates. To better understand payday loans, the authors
compare credit union members having an electronic debit charge to a payday lender versus other
credit union members. Unexpectedly, those taking out payday loans had higher credit scores,
higher inferred income, and smaller loan amounts, than did their counterparts. Also these
borrowers had higher initial account balances, relative to others, and half could have used their
checking or saving accounts, or cheaper lines of credit, instead of the more expensive payday

9
loans. These findings show that it is important to examine all the financial pathways that
influence long-term financial security.
Another risk to which consumers are exposed is the possibility that they may outlive their
retirement wealth, and this too may be related to financial literacy. The study by Julie Agnew
and Lisa Szykman (2011) explores why many workers seem reluctant to annuitize their
retirement wealth, even when relatively low-cost annuities provide much-needed protection
against longevity risk. In an experimental setting, the researchers first administer a short test to
participants to assess their financial literacy levels. Next, participants play a game simulating
investment versus annuitization decisions that might unfold for someone leading up to and
through retirement. The experiment is structured to make the annuity choice simple, permitting
the comparison of participant financial literacy to self-reported levels of cognitive and emotional
overload, confidence, and satisfaction. The analysts find that individuals with higher levels of
financial literacy are more likely to pick the investment option, while those reporting emotional
overload tend to select the annuity. One implication is that plan sponsors would do well to
simplify decisions about retirement plans if they are concerned about helping to protect against
retirement insecurity. As in the case of Chile, it is important to evaluate how a retirement scheme
might unwittingly drive participants into a ‘path of least resistance’ that is contrary to their best
interests, particularly in the case of the less financially literate.
Financial illiteracy can be costly not only to individuals but also to society, which might
imply that programs could be designed to help consumers and plan providers better achieve
retirement security goals. This topic is taken up by Summit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak
Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas D. Evanoff (2011), in their exploration of
how counseling can work to influence mortgage demand patterns. The authors examine two

10
programs: a mandatory two-hour review of mortgage offers in Chicago, and a voluntary two-year
counseling program in Indiana. In the former case, the State of Illinois required borrowers in ten
zip codes to submit mortgage offers for review by HUD-certified counselors, over a four-month
period. Borrowers electing risky mortgage products or who had a low credit score were required
to attend counseling. The researchers show that, to avoid counseling, small lenders with loose
lending criteria and consumers with low borrowing capability dropped out of the market; other
potential borrowers chose less risky products so to avoid the counseling requirement. In other
words, it appears that the program may have achieved its goals without actually providing the
counseling! Under the latter voluntary program, participants could learn about credit and
budgeting, develop a financial plan, and meet with counselors one-on-one each month. If they
remained on track with their financial plan, they were entitled to receive loans from partner
lenders. In this second case, the evidence suggests that loans made to program graduates
performed much better than those of a control group. Nevertheless, there remain questions of
causality about the second example, since those who participated may have also been more likely
to be particularly motivated to succeed in the program.

Shaping the Financial Literacy Environment
Understanding retirement saving shortfalls may also be due, in part, to problems with
time perception, as discussed by Gal Zauberman and B. Kyu Kim (2011). Their work suggests
that people often tend to weigh the present more heavily than the future, even when they know
their short-term decisions will interfere with important long-term goals such as saving for
retirement. The authors characterize this psychological pattern with the term “resource slack,”
defined as the notion that one’s preference for something today versus some time in the future

11
depends on the amount of resources available now versus later. The researchers point out that
time is often viewed by economic models as a limited resource, but in experimental settings,
people claim they will have more time in the future than they actually do which help explain why
they put off saving today. A related finding, playing into the apparent disconnect between the
ability to save now for future benefits, is a lack of understanding about time itself. The authors
argue that people perceive time as being expansive in the present, but it is telescoped in the
future. Thus, if retirement is 20, 30, or 40 years away, it all seems equally far away since the
future is compressed. In addition to believing that they have more time to save than they actually
do, people think they will have more money in the future than they do now, which further
prompts them to put off saving for retirement. More generally, much psychological research
shows that people often fail to grasp the linear nature of time and hence develop hyperbolic rates
of future discounting.
One way to reduce the effect of time misperception on retirement savings is to design
programs based on pre-commitment. Accordingly, some have tried to tie retirement saving to the
annual tax filing process, so as to make saving automatic. Yet this, in turn, prompts discussion of
the question of whether it is better to use behavioral approaches to encourage saving by default,
or whether it is preferable to construct mandates or default programs that require people to
adequately fund their own retirement. This is a theme which runs throughout the volume,
emerging in several of the chapters.
An intriguing prize-based model designed to encourage retirement saving is the focus of
work by Melissa S. Kearney, Peter Tufano, Jonathan Guryan, and Erik G. Hurst (2011), who
illustrate how a lottery-like system can harness the popularity of low-probability, high-reward
schemes to build retirement saving. The approach has been demonstrated to appeal to those

12
favoring low odds to “win big,” including on their retirement saving, while preserving initial
capital. For instance, the so-called Million Adventure bonds were sold in the U.K. to finance war
debt in the 1690s, with exactly this structure. Again after World War II, the U.K. launched prizebased Premium Bonds with the slogan ‘Savings with a Thrill!’ This program today has more
than 20 million bondholders. In South Africa, a privately-run plan sponsored by the First
National Bank called the ‘Million a Month Account’ plan enjoyed a takeup rate higher than any
other bank product. The authors helped initiate a prize-based saving program operated by a U.S.
credit union called the ‘Save to Win’ which attracted many participants before it was closed
down by authorities who viewed it as competition to the state lottery.
We also seek to expand understanding about financial literacy efforts underway around
the world. In the case of New Zealand, Diana Crossan (2011) described the work the Retirement
Commission has done to design a national strategy for financial literacy along with numerous
private-sector and non-government partnerships. A national strategy to improve retirement
readiness involved work with banks and other organizations to help assess needs and develop a
strategy to improve financial literacy and retirement saving adequacy. A key role is assigned to a
well-designed and informative website which attracts the old and the young; to date over a third
of the country’s population has used the program’s calculators on the national website. In
addition, the author highlights how the government integrated financial education in schools and
in tertiary educational institutions.
In addition nongovernmental organizations are also taking an activist role around the
world to improve financial literacy and financial capability in poor populations. The work of the
World Bank is described by Robert Holzmann (2011), who notes that programs will need to be
tailored to meet attributes of low and middle-income countries rather than directly exporting

13
lessons from developed nations. For instance, many people in low income countries lack access
to financial services, and poverty focuses people more on day-to-day survival, rather than longterm planning. The rural nature of poor countries also is an important factor inasmuch as, in
these nations, assets are likely to be seeds or cattle rather than homes or investment accounts.
Poor countries also have far greater numbers of people working in the informal economy,
curtailing the reach of organized interventions to develop financial capability. Finally, risk in the
developing country context may be more complex and more personal than in richer nations,
further hampering incentives to develop long-term financial capability. Accordingly, the author
proposes that policymakers do more to monitor and evaluate programs that work. Moreover, he
favors direct approaches to change behavior including social marketing approaches that have
worked in other capacities, for instance in improving health outcomes (particularly for those with
HIV-AIDS). It may be that these tactics could also be used to improve financial capability in low
and middle-income nations.
The role of nonprofit organizations in the U.S. is the focus of the chapter by J. Michael
Collins (2011), who notes that nonprofit organizations may enjoy more public trust since these
institutions are not designed to benefit other stakeholders. In addition, nonprofits are often
viewed as a force for pluralism, because they are able to reach underserved populations. The
author reviews tax filings of tax-exempt organizations using the terms “credit counseling” or
“financial education,” and he concludes that these organizations tend to be small and very
diverse. Some are small, community-based organizations with volunteer educators, while others
are large agencies with professional staff providing multiple services. He finds it noteworthy that
few nonprofit organizations were specifically set up to deliver financial literacy programs; rather,
many began to offer financial education programs as part of some other activity. For instance,

14
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development housing counseling program has
financed over one thousand nonprofits geared to financial counseling related to housing. In
addition, the U.S. Treasury Community Development Financial Institutions Fund has launched a
financial education and counseling pilot program to provide grants to nonprofits focusing on
financial literacy. After examining what the nonprofit programs offer, the author concludes that
low-income clients do receive basic help on goal-setting and budgeting. As the organizations
increase in sophistication, they then tend to move into offering credit management, help with
access to financial institutions, and provide assistance with income tax filing and saving
strategies. Though some may believe that nonprofits are a less expensive source of financial
education than private advisers, the author can detect little evidence that nonprofits are any more
or less efficient in providing financial literacy services.

Final Considerations
As the volume documents, financial illiteracy is widespread, making it increasingly
challenging for ordinary consumers and their families to cope in an ever-more complex
economic environment. This is a problem not only for those who live in developed countries,
where it might be surmised that people should have a minimal command over simple numeracy,
basic interest computations, inflation, and risk, but also in middle- and low-income nations as
well, where financial challenges are perhaps more likely to bring hardship than in richer nations.
But as shown throughout this volume, financial illiteracy undermines not only individual
retirement security but indeed, the stability of the global financial system more generally.
For these reasons, boosting financial literacy skills may well be critically important for
economic and social welfare not only of this generation, but of those to come. Finding out which

15
sorts of programs and financial decision-making structures are most effective, as well as costeffective, is a task of supreme importance. Successful analysis will require experiments and
evidence-based research, with solid evaluation efforts, many of which we report on here. Of
course, much remains to be done to enhance financial literacy, particularly for women, those
with low incomes, and the least educated. Without increased financial literacy, people will be
increasingly at risk of making poor financial decisions which leave them to confront financial
hardship, including an insecure old age.

16
References
Agarwal, Summit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet and Douglas
D. Evanoff (2011). ‘Financial Counseling, Financial Literacy, and Household Decision
Making,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for
Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Agnew, Julie and Lisa Szykman (2011). ‘Annuities, Financial Literacy and Information
Overload,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for
Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, John (2006). “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance, 61, 1553-1604.
Carter, Susan P., Paige M. Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman (2011). ‘Pecuniary Mistakes? Payday
Borrowing by Credit Union Members,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial
Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Clark, Robert L., Melinda S. Morrill, and Steven G. Allen (2011). ‘Pension Plan Distributions:
The Importance of Financial Literacy,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial
Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Crossan, Diana (2011). ‘How to Improve Financial Literacy: Some Successful Strategies,’ in
O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement
Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Collins, J. Michael (2011). ‘Improving Financial Literacy: The Role of Nonprofit Providers,’ in
O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement
Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

17
Ferguson, Roger Jr. (2010). The 2010 Martin Feldstein Lecture. Remarks presented at the
Summer Institute. Cambridge, NBER.
www.tiaacref.org/public/about/news/gen1007_229.html
Hastings, Justine, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Eric Chyn (2011). ‘Fees, Framing, and Financial
Literacy in the Choice of Pension Manager,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds.,
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holzmann, Robert (2011). ‘Bringing Financial Literacy and Education to Low and Middle
Income Countries,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy:
Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hung, Angela A., Noreen Clancy, and Jeff Dominitz (2011). ‘Investor Knowledge and
Experience with Investment Advisers and Broker-Dealers,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A.
Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kearney, Melissa S., Peter Tufano, Jonathan Guryan, and Erik Hurst (2011). ‘Making Savers
Winners: An Overview of Prize-Linked Saving Products,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A.
Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007a). “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 54, 205-224.

18
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007b). “Financial Literacy and Retirement
Planning: New Evidence from the RAND American Life Panel.” NBER Working Paper.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007c). “Financial Literacy and Retirement
Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education.” Business Economics
42, 35-44.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2008). “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
Women Fare?” American Economic Review P&P, 98, 413-417.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2009). “How Ordinary Consumers Make Complex
Economic Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness.” Cambridge, MA:
NBER Working Paper.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2011). ‘Financial Literacy and Planning:
Implications for Retirement Wellbeing,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial
Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (nd). Financial Education.
Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs.
www.oecd.org/department/0,3355,en_2649_15251491_1_1_1_1_1,00.html

President’s Advisory Committee on Financial Literacy (PACFL). 2008. Annual Report to the
President: Executive Summary. www.ustreas.gov/offices/domestic-finance/financialinstitution/fin-education/council/exec_sum.pdf
Utkus, Stephen P. and Jean A. Young (2011). ‘Financial Literacy and 401(k) Loans,’ in O.S.
Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security
and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

19
Yoong, Joanne (2011). ‘Financial Illiteracy and Stock Market Participation: Evidence from the
RAND American Life Panel,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds., Financial Literacy:
Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Zauberman, Gal and B. Kyu Kim (2011). ‘Time Perception and Retirement Saving:
Lessons from Behavioral Decision Research,’ in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds.,
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

