                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS:
                          LOBBYING AND THE FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                            Deniz Igan
                                          Prachi Mishra
                                          Thierry Tressel

                                       Working Paper 17076
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17076


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We would like to thank the participants at the IMF Research Brown Bag Seminar, 2009 NBER Summer
Institute, Center for Analytical Finance (Indian School of Business) 2009 Summer Research Conference
in Finance, World Bank Macroeconomics Seminar, De Nederlandsche Bank 12th Annual Research
Conference, Wharton/FIRS/JFI Workshop on the Financial Crisis, IMF 10th Jacques Polak Annual
Research Conference, Toulouse School of Economics Conference on the Political Economy of the
Financial Crisis, University of Maryland, and 2010 NBER Political Economy Program Meeting for
useful discussions and suggestions. Sumit Aneja, Mattia Landoni, and Lisa Kolovich provided excellent
research assistance. Nothing contained in this paper should be reported as representing the views of
the IMF, its Executive Board, member governments, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or
any other entity mentioned herein. The views expressed in this paper belong solely to the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Deniz Igan, Prachi Mishra, and Thierry Tressel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Fistful of Dollars: Lobbying and the Financial Crisis
Deniz Igan, Prachi Mishra, and Thierry Tressel
NBER Working Paper No. 17076
May 2011
JEL No. G21,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

Has lobbying by financial institutions contributed to the financial crisis? This paper uses detailed
information on financial institutions’ lobbying and mortgage lending activities to answer this question.
We find that lobbying was associated with more risk-taking during 2000-07 and with worse outcomes
in 2008. In particular, lenders lobbying more intensively on issues related to mortgage lending and
securitization (i) originated mortgages with higher loan-to-income ratios, (ii) securitized a faster growing
proportion of their loans, and (iii) had faster growing originations of mortgages. Moreover, delinquency
rates in 2008 were higher in areas where lobbying lenders’ mortgage lending grew faster. These lenders
also experienced negative abnormal stock returns during the rescue of Bear Stearns and the collapse
of Lehman Brothers, but positive abnormal returns when the bailout was announced. Finally, we find
a higher bailout probability for lobbying lenders. These findings suggest that lending by politically
active lenders played a role in accumulation of risks and thus contributed to the financial crisis.


Deniz Igan                                           Thierry Tressel
International Monetary Fund                          International Monetary Fund
Research Department, HQ1-9-700                       European Department, HQ1-9-302,
700 19th St NW                                       700, 19th Street NW
Washington, DC                                       Washington DC
20431                                                20431
digan@imf.org                                        ttressel@imf.org

Prachi Mishra
International Monetary Fund
Research Department, HQ1-9-718
700, 19th Street NW
Washington DC
20431
pmishra@imf.org
                                                      2




                                                I. INTRODUCTION


On December 31, 2007, the Wall Street Journal reported that Ameriquest Mortgage and

Countrywide Financial, two of the largest mortgage lenders in the U.S., spent respectively $20.5

million and $8.7 million in political donations, campaign contributions, and lobbying activities

from 2002 through 2006.1 The sought outcome, according to the article, was the defeat of anti-

predatory lending legislation that could have mitigated reckless lending practices and the

consequent rise in delinquencies. Such anecdotal evidence suggests that the political influence

of the financial industry contributed to the 2007 mortgage crisis, which, in the fall of 2008,

generalized in the worst bout of financial instability since the Great Depression.2 In spite of the

importance of these claims, formal analysis of the political economy factors underlying the crisis

has so far remained scant.



This paper asks whether lobbying lenders behaved differently from non-lobbying lenders in the

2000-07 period and how they performed in 2008. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first

study that examines empirically the relationship between lobbying by financial institutions and

mortgage lending in the U.S. We construct a unique dataset combining information on mortgage

1
  Simpson, Glenn, 2008, “Lender Lobbying Blitz Abetted Mortgage Mess,” The Wall Street Journal, December 31;
available at http://online.wsj.com/public/article_print/SB119906606162358773.html. See also the Financial Times
front page coverage of the Center for Public Integrity study linking subprime originators (a large share of which are
now bankrupt) to lobbying efforts to prevent tighter regulations of the subprime market (May 06, 2009, “U.S. banks
spent $370 million to fight rules”, May 06, 2009, available at: http://www.ft.com/cfms/s/0/a299a06e-3a9f-11de-
8a2d-00144feabdc0.html?nclick_check=1).
2
    For a detailed account of the subprime mortgage crisis, see Gorton (2008a, b) and Diamond and Rajan (2009).
                                                     3




lending activities and lobbying at the federal level. By going through individual lobbying

reports, we identify all federal bills targeted by the financial industry lobbying, and focus on the

lobbying specifically aimed at rules and regulations of consumer protection in mortgage lending,

underwriting standards, and securities laws (henceforth, the “specific issues”).3



First, we analyze the relationship between lobbying and ex-ante characteristics of loans

originated. We focus on three measures of mortgage lending: loan-to-income ratio (which we

consider as a proxy for lending standards), proportion of loans sold (negatively correlated with

the quality of loans originated) and mortgage loan growth rates (positively correlated with risk-

taking).4 Controlling for unobserved lender and area characteristics as well as changes over time

in the macroeconomic and local lender and borrower conditions, we find that lenders that lobbied

more intensively (i) originated mortgages with higher loan-to-income ratios (LIR), (ii)

securitized a faster growing proportion of loans originated; and (iii) had faster growing

mortgage loan portfolios.



Next, we analyze measures of ex-post performance of lobbying lenders. In particular, we

explore whether, at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level, delinquency rates – an

3
  A sample lobbying report, shown in the appendix Table A2, filed by Bear Stearns and Co. to the Senate‘s Office of
Public Records (SOPR) documents that the company lobbied to change regulations related to mortgage lending
standards for the period January-June 2007.
4
  Securitization may weaken monitoring incentives leading to lower-quality loans, hence increasing risk in the
financial system. This is why increasing recourse to securitization may be a sign of riskier loan origination. For an
analysis of the correlation between fast credit growth and risk, see Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006).
                                             4




indicator of loan performance - were linked to the expansion of lobbying lenders’ mortgage

lending. We find that faster relative growth of mortgage loans by lobbying lenders during 2000-

06 was associated with higher delinquency rates in 2008. We also carry out an event study

during key episodes of the financial crisis to assess whether the stocks of lobbying lenders

performed differently from those of other financial institutions. We find that lobbying lenders

experienced negative abnormal stock returns at the time of the failures of Bear Stearns and

Lehman Brothers, but positive abnormal returns around the announcement of the bailout

program. Finally, we examine the determinants of how bailout funds were distributed and find

that being a lobbying lender was associated with a higher probability of being a recipient of these

funds.



We perform a number of tests to establish robustness of the results. First, we control for lender,

MSA, and time fixed effects as well as various lender-MSA-time-varying controls. Second, we

conduct falsification tests by exploiting information about lobbying on financial issues that are

unrelated to mortgage lending and securitization. Next, we adopt a difference-in-difference

strategy to test whether the characteristics of mortgage loans originated by lobbying lenders

responded differently to the introduction of anti-predatory lending laws at the state level, than

those originated by other lenders. Finally, we adopt an instrumental variable strategy using as

instrument the distance between the headquarters of the financial institution and Washington,

D.C., which is exogenous and proxies for the cost of lobbying. (Details on these are in Section

V.) While these results are robust to a number of controls and alternative estimation strategies,
                                             5




we are cautious not to interpret them as a causal link between lobbying activities and mortgage

lending. Reverse causality remains a concern: lenders that choose to lobby more intensively may

be the risky type to begin with.



Our findings indicate that lobbying was associated ex ante with more risk-taking and ex post

with worse performance. This is consistent with some lenders being more likely to benefit from

lax regulation: these lenders lobbied more aggressively; the ensuing lax regulatory environment

allowed them to engage in riskier lending; and such lending exposed them, directly or indirectly,

to worse outcomes during the crisis. Interestingly, the market anticipated lobbying lenders to

benefit more from the bailout, and they indeed did, perhaps because they were hit harder by the

crisis and/or because they had closer connections to policymakers.



Why are some lenders more likely to benefit from lax regulation? These lenders, for example,

may be specialized in catering to riskier borrowers. Or, they may be overoptimistic and may

have honestly underestimated the likelihood of an adverse shock. Then, these lenders may have

lobbied to signal their private information to the policymaker and prevent tighter regulation that

would otherwise have restricted profitable lending opportunities. If lobbying lenders are

specialized or overoptimistic, their motive for lobbying is consistent with information-based

theories. Alternatively, some lenders may have distorted incentives and might have lobbied to

create a regulatory environment that allows them to exploit short-term gains at the cost of long-

term profits. An extreme view could be that certain lenders engaged in specialized rent-seeking
                                                      6




and lobbied to increase their chances of preferential treatment, e.g., a lower probability of

scrutiny by bank supervisors or even a higher probability of being bailed out in the event of a

financial crisis.5 If lobbying lenders are short-termist or lobby to increase their chances of

preferential treatment, the motive for lobbying involves moral hazard elements and seems to fit

better with theories of rent seeking.



Overall, our findings suggest that the political influence of the financial industry played a role in

the accumulation of risks, and hence, contributed to the financial crisis.6 But, it is hard to

distinguish whether it was information-revealing or rent-seeking that drove lobbying by the

financial industry. There is evidence suggesting that lobbying was not motivated solely by

information dissemination. Still, the findings fall short of firmly establishing the existence of

rent-seeking motives.



The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the related literature. Section

III provides some background for the empirical specifications. Section IV describes the dataset.

Section V presents the results and Section VI concludes.




5
    See Acemoglu (2009) for a similar argument on how financial industry sets its own rules.
6
    See Johnson (2009) for a similar view.
                                              7




                                    II. RELATED LITERATURE


Lobbying is broadly defined as a legal activity aiming at changing existing rules or policies or

procuring individual benefits. Private benefits could materialize in the form of preferential

access to credit, bailout guarantees, privileged access to licenses, or procurement contracts

(Fisman, 2001, Johnson and Mitton, 2003, and Faccio and Parsley, 2006). Building upon the

private-interest theories of regulation (Stigler, 1971), research on lobbying has developed into

two broad strands: studies that focus on the relationship between lobbying activities and specific

policies (see, for instance, Grossman and Helpman, 1994, Goldberg and Maggi, 1999, and

Ludema, Mayda, and Mishra, 2010, for the case of trade policy, Facchini, Mayda and Mishra,

2008, for the case of immigration policy, Kroszner and Stratmann, 1998, and Kroszner and

Strahan, 1999, for financial services) and those that aim to explore the consequences of lobbying

on firm-specific economic outcomes (see, for example, Bertrand et al., 2004, and Claessens et

al., 2008). Issues specific to banking and finance have been studied by, among others, Khwaja

and Mian (2005), who find that in Pakistan politically-connected firms obtain exclusive loans

from public banks and have much higher default rates; Raddatz and Braun (2009), who present

evidence suggesting that politicians provide for beneficial regulation in exchange for a non-

executive position at a bank in the future, consistent with a capture-type private interest story;

and Faccio (2006), who shows that political connections increase firm value. Our study,

focusing on lobbying and lending behavior, fits more closely in the second strand.
                                                   8




Our paper is also related to the emerging literature on the current crisis. While this literature has

characterized the relaxation of lending standards and its link to increasing defaults in mortgage

markets, evidence on the role of political economy factors remain scarce.7 For example, Mian,

Sufi and Trebbi (2010a) focus on the consequences of financial crisis showing that constituent

and special interests theories explain voting on key bills in 2008. Similarly, Mian, Sufi, and

Trebbi (2010b) also analyze voting patterns on few key bills prior to the crisis. In contrast to

these papers, we conduct our analysis at the lender-level and study the role of political economy

factors in shaping lending behavior during the credit boom and the impact on loan outcomes

during the crisis.



                                            III. BACKGROUND


Certain firm characteristics may drive both the decision to lobby and lending behavior. Examples

of such characteristics include screening technology, underwriting and securitization techniques,

specialization of the lender, or the capacity to acquire private information regarding future states

of the world. Given such characteristics, certain lenders would make riskier loans, and also have

more to gain from a relaxation of the regulatory rules that limit risk-taking. In order to ensure

that the regulatory environment remains/becomes lax, these lenders would lobby more

7
  For instance, Mayer, Pence and Sherlund (2009) show that no-documentation, no down-payment loans represented
a large share of rapidly-growing subprime lending between 2001 and 2006. Mian and Sufi (2009) find that the
expansion in subprime lending is highly correlated with the increase in securitization, a finding consistent with
distorted incentives. Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Laeven (2008) provide evidence that areas in which lenders relaxed
loan standards more also experienced larger increases in subprime delinquency rates.
                                                   9




intensively against tighter rules and regulations so that they can continue/start making risky

loans. Consider a simple example where lender i has a comparative advantage due to a lower

cost of securitizing loans. In that case, any regulation that reduces restrictions on securitization

activities may generate higher gains for lender i compared to other lenders with higher costs.

Hence, the benefits from lobbying for such regulations would be higher for lender i . Lender i

would therefore lobby more than other lenders at time t , even if other lenders may free-ride and

also benefit (but to a lesser extent) from lax regulations because of higher gains that accrue to

him from lobbying.8 If lobbying efforts are successful and the rules are not tightened, this would

allow lender i to engage in riskier lending in period t  1 and in subsequent periods. Although

the new rules would apply to all lenders, lender i has a comparative advantage, which enables

him to take more risks under these rules compared to other lenders. Moreover, given their risky

portfolios, lender i would be more likely to experience worse loan outcomes and experience

higher losses, if hit by adverse shocks.



For example, Citigroup lobbied intensively against H.R. 1051 -- Predatory Lending Consumer

Protection Act of 2001 (spending a total of $3 million over January-June 2002 on this and other

issues related to mortgage and securities markets), which aimed to put tighter restrictions on

lenders (see Appendix for more details on the bill), and this was never signed into law. Indeed,


8
 For example, among the top twenty lenders lobbying on specific issues, six were also among the top ten
underwriters of collateralized debt obligations during 2005-08 (“Vampire squished”, The Economist, April 24
2010).
                                            10




during 1999-2006, 93 percent of all the bills promoting tighter regulation were never signed into

law. Importantly, two key pieces of legislation to promote lax lending in mortgage markets -

American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000, and American Dream

Downpayment Act of 2003 - were in fact signed into law.



The lax regulatory environment that emerged allowed lenders to engage in riskier lending during

2000-07; and end up with worse outcomes during the crisis. To illustrate with an example, the

Wall Street Journal on December 31st, 2007 reported



“Data from federal and state campaign-finance records, Internal Revenue Service filings, and the
National Institute on Money in State Politics show that from 2002 through 2006, Ameriquest, its
executives and their spouses and business associates donated at least $20.5 million to state and
federal political groups. […] Ameriquest became a player in the business of lending to low-
income homeowners. The company persuaded many homeowners to take cash out of their
houses by refinancing them for larger amounts than their existing mortgages. […] Home loans
made by Ameriquest and other subprime lenders are defaulting now in large numbers.”


This mechanism implies that one would observe lobbying in period t to be associated with

riskier lending behavior in period t+1. The empirical specifications discussed below are based

on this mechanism.



Once the financial crisis hit and the government was forced to intervene, the factors that

determined who would be bailed out included, e.g., how badly the financial institution was hurt,

how systematically important it was, how healthy the balance sheets were, and perhaps how well
                                            11




connected the institution was to the politicians. For instance, the Wall Street Journal on January

23rd, 2009 reported



“Troubled OneUnited Bank in Boston didn't look much like a candidate for aid from the
Treasury Department's bank bailout fund last fall. […] Nonetheless, in December OneUnited got
a $12 million injection from the Treasury's Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP. One
apparent factor: the intercession of Rep. Barney Frank, the powerful head of the House Financial
Services Committee. […] Some powerful politicians have used their leverage to try to direct
federal millions toward banks in their home states. "It's totally arbitrary," says South Carolina
Gov. Mark Sanford. "If you've got the right lobbyist and the right representative connected to
Washington or the right ties to Washington, you get the golden tap on the shoulder".”


The channels highlighted in such anecdotes suggest that one is likely to observe an empirical

association between lobbying and ex-post performance as well as the likelihood of bailout in

2008. This motivates our empirical analysis of outcomes during the crisis.



                                    IV. DATA DESCRIPTION


                                     A. Mortgage Lending


Mortgage lenders are required to provide detailed information on the applications they receive

and the loans they originate under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). Enacted by

Congress in 1975, HMDA data covers a broad set of depository and non- depository financial

institutions. Comparisons of the total amount of loan originations in the HMDA and industry

sources indicate that around 90 percent of the mortgage lending activity is covered in this

database. Our coverage of HMDA data is from 1999 to 2007 to match the lobbying database.
                                                   12




We collapse the data to MSA-lender level with 378 MSAs and almost 9000 lenders. Then, we

construct our variables of interest: loan-to-income ratio at origination, loan securitization rates,

mortgage loan growth rate, and the extent of activity by lobbying lenders at the MSA level.



                                                B. Lobbying


Lobbyists in the U.S. - often organized in special interest groups - can legally influence the

policy formation process through two main channels. First, they can offer campaign finance

contributions, in particular through political action committees (PACs). These activities have

received a fair amount of attention in the literature.9 Second, they are allowed to carry out

lobbying activities in the executive and legislative branches of the federal government. These

lobbying activities, albeit accounting for the bulk of politically-targeted expenditures, have in

contrast received scant attention in the literature. Individual companies and organizations have

been required to provide a substantial amount of information on their lobbying activities starting

with the introduction of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995. Since 1996, all lobbyists

(intermediaries who lobby on behalf of companies and organizations) have to file semi-annual

reports to the Secretary of the Senate’s Office of Public Records (SOPR), listing the name of

each client (firm), the total income they have received from each of them, and specific lobbying

issues. In parallel, all firms with in-house lobbying departments are required to file similar

reports stating the total dollar amount they have spent (either in-house or in payments to external

9
    See, for instance, Snyder (1990), Goldberg and Maggi (1999), Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000).
                                                      13




lobbyists). Legislation requires the disclosure not only of the dollar amounts actually

received/spent, but also of the issues for which lobbying is carried out. Thus, unlike PAC

contributions, lobbying expenditures of companies can be associated with very specific, targeted

policy areas. Such detailed information is reported by roughly 9000 companies, around 600 of

which are in the finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE) industry.



                                                  C. Other Data


We supplement the information from the lobbying and HMDA databases with MSA-level and

state-level data on economic and social indicators such as income, unemployment, population,

and house price appreciation.10 We also obtain data on delinquent loans from LoanPerformance,

a private data company. The stock price return is computed using data from Compustat. The

information on the enactment of anti-predatory lending laws is from Bostic et al (2008).11

Finally, the data on the 2008 bailout program is based on original records provided by the

Treasury through the Office of Financial Stability.12




10
 Data sources include the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the Census
Bureau, and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO).
11
  North Carolina was the first state to pass an anti-predatory lending law in 1999 and other states followed suit. By
2007, all but six states have some form of anti-predatory lending law in place.
12
     The data can be downloaded from http://bailout.propublica.org/main/list/index.
                                             14




                                 D. Construction of the Dataset


Matching Lobbying Firms to Lenders


The matching of the lobbying and HMDA databases is a tedious task. We use an algorithm that

finds common words in lender names to narrow down the potential matches in HMDA of lenders

in the lobbying database and then go through these one by one to determine the right match. We

examine meticulously the corporate structure of the firms in the lobbying database and that may

be a match to a HMDA lender based on our algorithm (see Appendix for more details). We

create four lobbying identifiers reflecting several types of matches: (i) exact matches; (ii)

matches to parent firm; (iii) matches to affiliated firms; and (iv) matches to subsidiaries. The

lobbying variables used in the regressions combine these four variables.



We also consider lobbying expenditures by associations. The list of member firms for each

association in the lobbying database is compiled by going on each association’s website. A

portion of the associations’ lobbying expenditures is assigned to each member firm based on the

share of its own spending in the total of all members.



Identifying Lobbying Activity Targeted to the Mortgage Market


Our analysis distinguishes between lobbying activities that are related to mortgage-market-

specific issues from other lobbying activities. We first concentrate only on issues related to the

five general issues of interest (accounting, banking, bankruptcy, housing, and financial
                                                     15




institutions) and then gather information on the specific issues, which are typically acts proposed

at the House or the Senate, that were listed by the lobbyists as the main issue for the lobbying

activity.13 Then, we go through these specific issues one by one and determine whether an issue

can be directly linked to restrictions on mortgage market lending. For example, H.R. 1163 of

2003 (Predatory Mortgage Lending Practices Reduction Act) and H.R. 4471 of 2005 (Fair and

Responsible Lending Act), regulating high-cost mortgages, are bills that we deem to be relevant

to the mortgage market. On the other hand, H.R. 2201 of 2005 (Consumer Debt Prevention and

Education Act) and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, although in general related to financial

services, do not include any provisions directly related to mortgage lending and are not classified

as mortgage-market-specific issues.



After classifying all listed issues, we calculate lobbying expenditures on specific issues by

splitting the total amount spent evenly across issues. To be more precise, we first divide the total

lobbying expenditure by the number of all general issues and multiply by the number of general

issues selected. Then, we divide this by the total number of specific issues listed under the five

general issues and multiply by the number of specific issues of interest.14 In order to illustrate

the construction of the final lobbying variable, suppose firm A spends $300, and lobbies on 3


13
  ‘General issue area codes’ are provided by the SOPR and listed in line 15 of the lobbying reports while the
‘specific lobbying issues’ are listed in line 16. See Appendix for more details on what the reports look like and a
full list of general issues as well as that of specific issues selected for the analysis.
14
  For robustness, we adopt an alternative splitting approach that distributes expenditures using as weights the
proportion of reports that mention the specific issues of interest. The results remain the same.
                                             16




general issues (banking and housing – general issues of interest -- and trade – not a general issue

of interest); it lists 2 specific issues under banking and housing (H.R. 1163, which is a relevant

specific issue and H.R. 2201, which is not relevant). In this example, the final lobbying

expenditure variable is calculated as ((300/3)*2)/2)*1=$100.



                                     E. Summary Statistics


As shown in Table 1, between 1999 and 2006, interest groups have spent on average about $4.2

billion per political cycle on targeted political activity, which includes PAC campaign

contributions and lobbying expenditures. Lobbying expenditures represent by far the bulk of all

interest groups’ money spent on targeted political activity (close to 90 percent). Expenditures by

FIRE companies constitute roughly 15 percent of overall lobbying expenditures in any election

cycle. Approximately 10 percent of all firms that lobbied during this time period were associated

with FIRE. Moreover, the lobbying intensity for FIRE increased at a much faster pace relative to

the average lobbying intensity over 1999–2006 (Figure 1). Similar inspection of the HMDA

database reveals time trends indicating higher LIR and increased recourse to securitization

(Figure 2).



Our matching process ends up matching around 250 firms in the lobbying database to one or

more lenders in the HMDA database, corresponding to roughly 40 percent of FIRE firms that

lobby. In the final MSA-lender-year level dataset, lenders that lobby on specific issues comprise
                                                   17




around 11 percent of the observations. Lobbying was performed by the lender itself in 25

percent of these observations and by the parent financial institution, affiliated firms, and

subsidiaries in 65, 23, and 5 percent respectively. This suggests that it was mainly the parent

firms, which are likely to be large, national financial institutions or holding groups, that lobbied

on specific issues relevant for their subsidiaries. In terms of magnitudes, the matched lenders

spent in total roughly half a billion dollars for lobbying on specific issues during 1999-2006.

Lobbying expenditures by lenders’ associations during the same period remained comparatively

small (8 percent of total spent).



As shown in Figure 3, lobbying lenders (i) tend to be larger either by assets or market share, (ii)

less likely to be HUD-regulated, (iii) more likely to be subprime, and (iv) cater to richer

borrowers. In terms of measures of lending, they had (i) slightly higher LIRs, (ii) lower

tendency to securitize, and (iii) faster growing loan portfolios. In addition, lobbying lenders

were significantly more likely to be bailed out.15 In the following section, we examine these

relationships rigorously. Summary statistics on the variables used in the empirical analysis are

shown in Table 2.




15
  Sixteen of the twenty lenders that spent the most on lobbying between 2000 and 2006 received funds provided by
the government under the TARP. In total, lenders that lobbied on specific issues received almost 60 percent of the
funds allocated.
                                                       18




                                          V. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS


This section presents the empirical specifications and regression results, based on the

mechanisms discussed in Section III. First, we analyze the relationship between lobbying and

the ex-ante characteristics of loans originated (the loan-to-income ratio; the proportion of loans

sold; the growth rate of loans originated). Second, we explore the relationship between lobbying

and ex-post outcomes (delinquency rates; stock returns during the crisis; likelihood of being

bailed-out).



                              A. Empirical Analysis of Loan-to-Income Ratio


We estimate the following panel equation:



                                yimt      li    Z imt  vm   t  vm *  t   imt                          (1)



where y imt is a measure of loan characteristics for lender i , in MSA m during year t . li is a

dummy for lenders that lobby the federal government on specific issues.16 Zimt denotes a set of

control variables at the lender-MSA level. vm and  t denote a set of MSA and year fixed effects

respectively. vm *  t captures the effect of all MSA-time varying factors on loan characteristics,



16
     Recall from Section IV that lobbying activities are reported at the lender level and do not vary across MSAs.
                                                     19




which are constant across lenders. MSA fixed effects control for any time-invariant MSA level

omitted variable, which could be correlated with lobbying and also affect loan characteristics. In

addition, the interaction between MSA and year effects, allows us to capture any time-varying

MSA characteristics. Time effects control for global shocks affecting all lenders and areas

equally. The parameter of interest is  , which captures average differences in mortgage loan

characteristics between lenders that lobby and lenders that do not lobby.17



Our main variable capturing ex-ante characteristics is the loan-to-income ratio (LIR) averaged at

the lender-MSA level. This measure is a simplified version of a commonly used indicator, debt-

to-income ratio, to determine whether a borrower can afford a mortgage loan. Lenders usually

require that mortgage payments cannot exceed a certain proportion of the applicant’s income.18

As the maximum proportion allowed increases, the burden of servicing the loan becomes harder

and the default probability potentially increases. We compute the LIR as a proxy for such limits

required by the lender and interpret increases in this ratio that are not explained by lender,

location characteristics or by time fixed effects as a loosening in lending standards.




17
  Free-riding problems may bias the estimated coefficient if lenders also benefit from lobbying activities of others.
However, the bias will be small if the externality is common to all other lenders, as the average effect of the
externality will be absorbed by year fixed effects (or by MSA-year fixed effects if the externality to other lenders
depends on the MSAs in which a lender is active).
18
     See, for instance, Sirota (2003).
                                              20




Table 3 presents the regression results of the LIR of originated loans on a dummy variable for

lenders lobbying on specific issues. The coefficient on this dummy variable is positive and

statistically significant at the 1 percent level in all the specifications, establishing that mortgage

loans originated by lenders lobbying on specific issues have higher LIR on average. This finding

remains unaffected when controlling for observable MSA and lender-MSA characteristics

(Column (2)). Lender-MSA level control variables ensure that the estimated coefficient on the

dummy for lobbying lenders does not reflect characteristics such as the size of the lender

(proxied by log of assets), the market power of the lender in a particular MSA (proxied by its

market share), or other factors proxying for observable and unobservable characteristics of a

lender’s pool of applicants such as (i) whether the lender focuses on community development

mortgages or has a brokerage-type business model (proxied by a dummy for HUD-regulated

lenders), (ii) whether the lender specializes in subprime lending, and (iii) the average income of

applicants of loans originated by the lender in a particular MSA. Moreover, the size of the

coefficient increases as control variables are added to the regression suggesting that omitted

variables at the MSA level and at the lender-MSA level may have resulted in attenuation bias.



Adding MSA, year, and MSA-year fixed effects does not affect the magnitude or the significance

of the estimated coefficients (Columns (4) and (5)). This set of fixed effects confirm that our

results do not reflect unobserved, either time-invariant or time-varying MSA characteristics, or

time effects common to all MSAs. Importantly, MSA-year interactions in column (5) guarantee

that the estimated effect is not biased due to, for example, the average quality of the borrower
                                             21




pool at the MSA level. If the relationship between lobbying and loan characteristics reflected

mainly a specialization of lenders, we should expect the estimated coefficient to become smaller

and insignificant when we include controls for lender characteristics such as whether she is

regulated by the HUD or is classified as a subprime lender by the HUD. We find, on the

contrary, that the estimated coefficient becomes larger. This evidence casts some doubt that

lender specialization could be the explanation for the difference in loan characteristics between

lobbying lenders and other lenders.


The magnitude of the difference in LIR between lobbying lenders and other lenders is not trivial.

The estimated coefficient of 0.15 in Column (5) implies that the average LIR of mortgages

originated is about 0.15 points higher for lobbying lenders than for other lenders. This is about 8

percent of the average LIR of 1.97 in the complete sample.


The estimated relationship between LIR and the lobbying decision may reflect a general

propensity to lobby, e.g., in order to gain access to policymakers to get private benefits, rather

than a desire to influence specific rules. Then, we would expect to obtain a similar result for

lenders that lobby on financial sector issues that are unrelated to mortgage markets. To carry out

this falsification exercise, we create a dummy variable for lenders lobbying on issues that are not

related to mortgage lending and securitization, e.g., consumer credit and security of personal

information, financial services other than mortgage lending, anti-money laundering (henceforth,

the “other issues”). We repeat our preferred specification presented in Column (5), Table 3 by

adding the new dummy. Column (6) displays the results. We find that the dummy for lobbying
                                                     22




on specific issues has a positive and significant coefficient while the dummy for lobbying on

other issues has a negative and significant sign. This suggests that the desire to influence

specific rules was one of the drivers of lobbying efforts.



Second, we estimate the following panel equation:

             yimt      (ln LOBAM )it 1  si  vm   t  vm *  t    Zimt   imt       (2)



where outcome variables are the same as in Equation (1), (ln LOBAM ) it 1 is the logarithm of the

amount of lobbying expenditures by lender i during year t  1.19 si denotes a set of lender fixed

effects which capture the effect of all lender-specific time-invariant factors on loan

characteristics. Note that lender fixed effects account for any unobserved lender-specific omitted

variable that does not vary over time. The preferred specification includes lender, MSA, year

effects and MSA-year interactions; lobbying expenses only change at the lender-year level, so

we cannot include lender-year interactions. The advantage of using the level of lobbying

expenditures is that the time variation in lobbying amounts allows us to introduce lender fixed

effects, and therefore to identify the coefficient of interest on the within dimension, in contrast to

Equation (1) where the coefficient of the lobbying dummy reflects systematic differences

between firms.



19
     LOBAM is assumed to be equal to $1 when a lender does not lobby.
                                                       23




Table 4 reports regressions of LIR on lobbying expenditures. The coefficient on the lobbying

amount is positive and significant at a 1 percent level for various sets of fixed effects and control

variables. In specifications including lender fixed effects (Columns (3) to (5)), the coefficient of

interest therefore reflects a correlation over time between the LIR and the lobbying amounts for

lobbying lenders only. Hence, any time-invariant lender-specific factors - such as a superior

screening technology - affecting both the decision to lobby and lending standards are absorbed

by the lender fixed effects. Another concern is that there may be shocks common to all lenders,

which we address by introducing time dummies. Columns (2) to (5) show that the coefficient

remains significant. Furthermore, Columns (4) and (5) include MSA-year interactions

controlling for time-varying local conditions faced by lenders.20 21 The range of estimated

coefficient suggests that a one standard deviation rise in lobbying expenditures is associated with




20
  We conduct further robustness tests for: (i) clustering at MSA level, (ii) exclusion of outliers, (iii) alternative split
of total expenditures into specific and non-specific issues based on share of reports, (iv) alternative measure of
lobbying expenditures, scaled by the importance of the regulations for which the firm lobbies, giving more weight to
lobbying for bills that appear more often in the lobbying reports, (v) using lobbying expenditures scaled by assets,
and (vi) taking into account lobbying expenditures by bankers’ associations. The main result that more lobbying is
associated with higher LIR remains unaltered (see Table A4 in the Appendix).
21
  Another potential concern could be that there are lender-specific time trends that drive the propensity of a lender
to take risk as well as to lobby. To address this concern, we augment Equation (2) with s i * t and the coefficient on
lobbying remains positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
                                                      24




a 0.02-0.11 points rise in LIR. This constitutes 1-5 percent of the average LIR of 1.97 in the

complete sample.22



                    B. Difference-in-Difference Estimations using State-Level Laws


We make use of difference-in-difference estimations exploiting across-state variation in lending

laws to uncover whether the existence of anti-predatory lending laws at the state level have

differential effects on the mortgage lending behavior of lenders that lobby relative to those that

do not lobby.23, 24 The hypothesis is that lobbying lenders were originating riskier loans than

other lenders in the absence of anti-predatory lending laws. Therefore, when a law comes into

effect at the state level they tighten their loan terms more than other lenders to meet the

minimum legal requirements. In one sense, this is a mirror image of the relationship between

lobbying and lending we explored in the earlier subsections: when tighter federal regulations fail

to pass or lax federal regulation comes to effect, lobbying lenders increase LIR more; here, when

tighter state regulation comes into effect, we expect lobbying lenders to decrease LIR more.




22
                             LOBAM , the outcome variable changes by
     For a 10 percent increase in
dyimt      * d ln LOBAM imt 1   * ln(LOBAM imt 1 / LOBAM imt 2 )   * 0.1 .
23
  Keys et al. (2009) use a similar identification strategy based on state lending laws in their analysis of
securitization and monitoring incentives.
24
  A potential concern is that state lending legislation efforts may be affected by the financial industry’s overall
lobbying activities, however, lobbying at the federal level is less likely to influence any individual state’s decision to
pass a law. Moreover, what we are interested in is the differential response of lobbying versus non-lobbying lenders
to the regulatory changes once a law comes into effect rather than the causal effect of the law.
                                                   25




We estimate the following difference-in-difference panel equation:



       yimt     . APLst    (ln LOBAM )it 1    (ln LOBAM )it 1  APLst    X mt    Z imt
                                                                                                           (3)
       si  vm   t   imt



APLst is a dummy equal to 1 if there exists an anti-predatory lending law in state s , where MSA

m is located, at time t .25 X mt denotes a set of MSA-year varying controls.

As shown in Table 5, the coefficient on the interaction term between the dummy for an anti-

predatory lending law and lobbying intensity is negative and significant at the 1 percent level in

Columns (2)-(4). This result is consistent with the hypothesis that lobbying lenders, at the

margin, raise their lending standards more than other lenders when anti-predatory lending laws

are in place. This implies that these laws happened to be more binding for lobbying lenders and

that, before the law came into place, lobbying lenders were more likely to have engaged in risky

lending practices.



The result is robust to including lender, MSA and year fixed effects, and when we control for

MSA-time, lender-time or lender-MSA-time level observable characteristics. In addition, the

overall effect of an anti-predatory lending law being in place, evaluated at the average lobbying



25
  In some cases, a single MSA contains areas in several states. Then we assume that the MSA has a law in place if
any one of the states does.
                                            26




expenditures in the sample, is     (ln LOBAM )  0 . This suggests that LIR is lower in MSAs

that belong to states with anti-predatory lending laws in place.



        C. Evidence on Lobbying and Securitization and Mortgage Credit Growth


In addition to LIR, we use as two other dependent variables that provide additional information

on lending practices: (i) the proportion of mortgages securitized and (ii) the annual growth rate in

the amount of loans originated. Recourse to securitization has been shown to weaken monitoring

incentives; hence, a higher proportion of securitized loans can be associated with lower credit

standards (see Keys et al, 2009, for evidence that securitization leads to less monitoring and

worse loan performance). Next, fast expansion of credit could be associated with lower lending

standards for several reasons. First, if there are constraints on training and employing loan

officers, increased number of applications will lead to less time and expertise allocated to each

application to assess their quality (see Berger and Udell, 2004). Second, in a booming economy,

increasing collateral values will increase creditworthiness of intrinsically bad borrowers and,

when collateral values drop during the bust, these borrowers are more likely to default (see

Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997). Third, competitive pressures might force lenders to loosen lending

standards and extend loans to marginal borrowers in order to preserve their market shares.



Table 6 (Columns (1) and (2)) shows that the proportion of mortgage loans securitized is

positively correlated with lobbying expenditures within lenders. Hence, securitization increased
                                               27




faster over time for lobbying lenders than for other lenders. The result is robust to the inclusion

of lender, MSA and year fixed effects and MSA-year interactions. Moreover, Columns (3) and

(4) show that lobbying is also positively correlated with the growth of mortgage lending. This

result is significant at the 1 percent level, suggesting that lobbying lenders, through faster

expansion of their mortgage loan portfolios, tend to lend more aggressively. In terms of

magnitudes, a one standard deviation increase in lobbying expenditures is associated with an 11

percent increase in the proportion of loans securitized and a 3 percentage point rise in credit

growth.



            D. Mortgage Lending by Lobbying Lenders and Delinquency Rates


We relate delinquency rates in 2008 in a given area (recall from Section IV that our data on

delinquency rates are at the MSA level) to the growth of lobbying lenders’ market share during

2000-06. Our explanatory variable measures the expansion of mortgage loans by lobbying

lenders relative to the expansion of such loans by all lenders during the period of interest.

Specifically, we estimate the following cross-sectional empirical model:



                        drm , 2008      gmsh m    X m    Z m   m                     (4)




where drm , 2008 is the MSA level delinquency rate as of 2008, gmsh m is the average annual

growth rate of the total market share of lobbying lenders in the MSA over 2000-06, X m is a set
                                            28




of MSA characteristics and Z m is a set of mortgage loan characteristics and lender characteristics

averaged at the MSA level. The coefficient of interest  captures the partial correlation between

delinquency rates and the growth rate of mortgage lending by lobbying lenders relative to non-

lobbying competitors.



Regression results reported in Table 7 show that delinquency rates in 2008 were significantly

higher in MSAs in which mortgage lending by lobbying lenders has expanded relatively faster

than mortgage lending by other lenders. This result is robust to the inclusion of various MSA-

level characteristics, including characteristics of the mortgage market such as the share of

subprime loans and the number of lenders (Column (1)). These control variables ensure that the

correlation does not reflect the fact that lobbying lenders may have expanded faster in areas that

ex post suffered more from the decline in house prices, or that had a higher proportion of risky

borrowers, or that were affected more by the economic downturn. The exclusion of states in

which the housing boom-bust cycle was more severe (Arizona, California, Florida, and Nevada)

ensures that mortgage market outcomes of these four states are not driving the results (Column

(2)). The estimated effect is economically significant: a one standard deviation increase in the

relative growth of mortgage loans of lobbying lenders is associated with almost a 1.5 percentage

point increase in the delinquency rate.



We perform two tests to address concerns that, even if we included many control variables,

omitted factors could still be driving the correlation between delinquency rates and the expansion
                                             29




of lobbying lenders. First, as in the analysis of loan characteristics at origination, we make use

of a falsification test to show that the expansion of mortgage lending by lobbying firms does not

merely reflect lender characteristics that may be correlated with a general propensity to lobby.

Indeed, we find no statistically significant relationship between delinquency rates and the

relative expansion of mortgage lending by lenders that lobbied on other issues (Column (3),

Table 7).



Second, we develop an instrumental variable strategy. As a first instrument, we consider the

combined 1998 market share in the MSA of lenders who lobbied on specific issues, in which

each lender’s initial market share is weighted by the distance between each lender’s headquarters

and Washington, D.C. This instrument is valid if (i) the initial presence of a lender in a MSA is

predetermined and is not correlated with lending conditions that prevailed in this MSA in the

following years; (ii) the distance between a lender’s headquarters and Washington, D.C. – a

proxy for certain costs of lobbying – is uncorrelated with lending conditions in any specific

MSA. The correlation between this instrument and the endogenous variable is negative (first

stage results are available upon request), potentially because a smaller initial market share

coupled with low cost of lobbying results in faster subsequent growth of lobbying lenders in that

area. We consider a second instrument defined in a similar way (initial market share weighted

by the distance variable), but using instead the initial market share of lenders lobbying on other

issues. The sign of the correlation between this instrument and the endogenous variable is

positive possibly because, in MSAs in which these other lenders have a larger initial presence,
                                                     30




lenders lobbying on specific issues may intensify their lobbying and lending activities and gain

market share even more when these other lenders have a higher cost of lobbying and a high

initial market share.



Regression results confirm the conclusions of our OLS estimations (Column (4), Table 7). When

instrumenting the variable of interest, the coefficient increases significantly, suggesting that there

might be an attenuation bias in the OLS estimates. Moreover, the Hansen J test does not reject

the validity of the instruments. Furthermore, to allay concerns of weak instrument bias, we also

make use of the LIML estimator known to be more robust to weak instrument bias and confirm

the 2SLS results (Column (5), Table 7). All in all, the evidence is suggestive of a causal

relationship between the expansion of mortgage lending by lobbying institutions and subsequent

delinquency rates.

                                E. Stock Price Returns during the Crisis


Following the methodology developed in recent studies assessing the value of political

connections (Fisman, 2001; Faccio, 2005; and Fisman et al., 2006), we perform an event study

around the major events of the financial crisis and ask whether lenders that lobbied on specific

issues experienced abnormal stock market returns during the month the event took place.26 We

consider the following empirical specification:


26
  There exists a key difference with the approach of these papers that quantify the value of political connections.
They conduct the event study around periods of news under the assumption that these news a priori specifically
affect politically connected firms only, while other firms should not be directly impacted, and confirm the initial
                                                                                                        (continued)
                                                        31




                                          Rie      li    X i   i                                        (5)



where Rie is the ex-dividend monthly return on firm i ’s stock over the event period e , li is a

dummy for financial institutions that lobby on specific issues during 1999-2006, X i is a set of

control variables, and  i is a residual.27 We use the market- and risk-adjusted return defined as

the stock return adjusted for the predicted return based on the CAPM.28 If lobbying was

systematically related to risk-taking and the quality of loans made, then we would expect

lobbying lenders to have lower abnormal returns during negative events and higher abnormal

returns during positive events.



We consider three major events of the crisis, namely, the collapse of two key investment banks

(negative events) and the government’s ultimate response to the turmoil in the financial system

(a positive event). The event dates are: (i) March 11-16, 2008 (JP Morgan acquired Bear Stearns

after Fed provides $30 billion in non-recourse funding; Fed expanded liquidity provision), (ii)

hypothesis. In our case, however, all firms are a priori potentially affected by the market news, but we show that
the effect of news on market value varies systematically across financial intermediaries according to lobbying
behavior in a direction that is consistent with our hypothesis.
27
     Monthly stock returns are computed from the end of the previous month to the end of the month considered.

28
                                                    Abnormal _ returnie  Rie  K it where
     The market- and risk-adjusted return is defined as:
K it  ai  bi  Rmt where ai and bi are firm-specific coefficients estimated over 2007-08, and Rmt is the market
return (proxied by the return on the stock market index of banks in the S&P500). The results presented in this
section are robust if we consider (i) simple stock return or (ii) the mean-adjusted return, defined as the stock return
of firm i adjusted for its mean over 2007-08.
                                               32




September 15-16, 2008 (Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy while AIG was bailed out), and

(iii) October, 14, 2008, when the bailout program was announced.



Regression results are reported in Table 8. Our analysis indicates that lenders that lobbied on

specific issues experienced negative abnormal returns during the collapse of key financial

institutions suggesting that these lenders were significantly more exposed, directly or indirectly,

to bad mortgage loans. Finally, lobbying lenders experienced positive abnormal returns during

the announcement of the TARP potentially implying that the market anticipated lobbying lenders

to be more connected to the policymakers and have higher chances of benefiting from the bail

out. Note that the estimated coefficient on the lobbying dummy does not merely reflect the

effect of a specialization of the lender considered (as proxied by the subprime dummy or by total

mortgage loans originated in proportion to total assets). We also control for the size and

exposure to mortgages of the lender as a proxy for size, but find no significant effect on

abnormal stock returns.



The coefficient of interest is statistically significant at conventional levels for all three events.

Moreover, the estimated effects are very large. Lobbying financial institutions lost on average

21 percent during the 2008 events. The differential loss of value is even more impressive during

the Lehman failure: a 37 percent additional loss of value when returns are adjusted for the market

correlation. The results suggest that these financial institutions were significantly more exposed
                                                33




to bad mortgage loans than other financial institutions. However, these institutions gained 27

percent when TARP was announced.



                                      F. Lobbying and Bailout


In this section, we examine whether the likelihood of getting bailed out in 2008 is correlated with

lobbying in 2000-06. We estimate the following regression specification:


               Bailout i , 2008    LOBBYi , 200006    X i   i             (6)


where Bailouti , 2008 is a dummy that is 1 if the lender got funds under TARP or the amount of

TARP funds received by lender (in logs). LOBBYi , 200006 is either a dummy equal to 1 if the

lender lobbied on specific issues in any year between 2000-06 or the sum of lobbying

expenditures during 2000-06. The specification controls for a number of lender level

characteristics which include proxies for their size, proxies for specialization (whether they are

regulated by HUD, or whether they are classified as subprime lenders by HUD), the average

income level of the borrowers and importantly the average LIR of the loans they originated over

1999-2006 as an additional control for the riskiness of their mortgage loan portfolio over this

period.



The regression results are shown in Table 9. We find that lenders who lobbied were more likely

to be bailed out (Columns (1) and (2)) and received larger amounts of TARP funds (Columns (3)
                                                    34




and (4)). Lastly, lenders that spent more on lobbying activities received a bigger piece of the

cake (Columns (5) and (6)). In terms of magnitude, lobbying lenders are 7 percent more likely to

be bailed out (for comparison, less than 1 percent of the lenders in the dataset were bailed out),

yet a one standard deviation increase in lobbying expenditures is associated with a relatively

small 0.4 percent increase in the TARP funds received. Another interesting finding is that larger

lenders were more likely to be bailed out as suggested by the positive and statistically significant

coefficient on the two proxies for size – assets and market share. This is in line with the too-big-

to-fail argument.29



                                          G. Discussion of Results


To summarize, lobbying was associated ex ante with more risk-taking at mortgage origination as

measured by higher LIR, higher securitization rates, and faster mortgage credit expansion. Ex

post, delinquency rates were higher in areas in which lobbying lenders expanded their mortgage

lending more aggressively. Moreover, lobbying lenders had negative abnormal stock returns

during the Bear Stearns rescue and the collapse of Lehman Brothers, but positive abnormal stock

returns around the date the bailout package was announced. Finally, lobbying lenders were more

likely to be bailed-out than other lenders.




29
  The results shown in Table 9 are estimated by OLS; they are also robust to using probit. These results should be
interpreted with caution as unobserved lender-level characteristics could be driving our results.
                                             35




While these results should not be interpreted as establishing a causal link between lobbying and

mortgage lending, taken together, they are consistent with the stories outlined in Section III.

Certain lenders were more likely to benefit from lax regulation. These lenders lobbied more

aggressively; the ensuing lax regulatory environment let them take more risks and exposed them

to worse outcomes during the crisis. In addition, the evidence is consistent with the market

anticipating that lobbying lenders would be more likely to benefit from the bailout and they

indeed did.



There may be several characteristics that determine whether lenders are more likely to benefit

from lax regulation. First, these lenders may be specialized, e.g., in catering to borrowers with

lower income levels or in areas with higher average property prices. They may lobby to signal

their information on special lending opportunities, thereby preventing tighter regulation that

would otherwise limit growth in their particular segments. In the empirical analysis, we include

explicit controls, e.g., whether the lender is subprime or is regulated by HUD, size of the lender

(which may be another proxy for specialization if specialized lenders are smaller), and the

average income level of borrowers, to capture certain kinds of specialization effects. The

coefficient on lobbying variable remains significant, so the results are not much likely to be

driven by lenders specialized along these dimensions (although they may still be driven by

specialization along other dimensions).
                                                   36




Second, certain lenders may be overoptimistic and may have underestimated the likelihood of an

adverse event affecting the mortgage market more than other financial intermediaries did.30

Owing to a genuine and systematic underestimation of default probabilities, overoptimistic

lenders might have lobbied to inform the policymaker of the “true” state of the world and prevent

a tightening of lending laws. Then, they may have taken more risks ex ante and had higher

exposures to bad loans ex post. Interestingly, we find that the difference in LIR of originated

loans between lobbying lenders and other lenders was even larger during 2005-07, implying that

lobbying lenders relaxed their lending standards more during this period (see Column (7) of

Table A4 in the Appendix). It is not clear why lobbying lenders would have become even more

overoptimistic during the years when signs of stress in the housing market were becoming

visible. Moreover, one would expect that if lobbying lenders were genuinely expecting better

prospects for mortgage loans, they would have securitized at a slower pace in order to keep these

loans in their balance sheets rather than shift risks, contrary to what we find in the data.



Third, certain lenders may have a greater desire or ability to exploit high short-term gains

associated with riskier lending strategies. These lenders lobby to prevent a tightening of lending

laws that may reduce the benefits associated with short-termist strategies emphasizing short-term




30
  For example, rating agencies and sponsors severely underestimated the probability of default and loss given
default when assigning ratings to mortgage-backed securities (Calomiris, 2008).
                                                    37




gains over long-term profit maximization. Short-termism can lead to moral hazard and result in

more risk-taking ex ante and worse performance ex post.31


A more cynical alternative story could be that certain lenders lobby the policymaker to increase

their chances of preferential treatment, e.g., a lower probability of scrutiny by bank supervisors

or a higher probability of being bailed out in the event of a financial crisis. This in turn could

lead to moral hazard and induce lenders to originate loans that would appear riskier ex ante.32

Assuming all else equal, these loans would have a higher probability of default ex post. On the

one hand, lobbying on any issue should establish connectedness, increase chances of getting

preferential treatment and enhance incentives to take more risk. However, as discussed above

(Table 3), lobbying on other issues was not significantly associated with risk-taking, which

weakens the case for such motives for lobbying. On the other hand, there is evidence that large

lenders were the ones lobbying more aggressively and ultimately getting bailed out with a higher

probability. These suggest that lobbying might have been driven in part by too-big-to-fail

concerns and, in turn, by expectations of preferential treatment.




31
   Short-termism in executive compensation is explored theoretically by, among others, Bolton, Scheinkman and
Xiong (2006), while empirical evidence on whether distorted incentives contribute to excessive risk-taking is mixed
(Agarwal and Wang, 2009; Cheng, Hong, and Scheinkman, 2010; Fahlenbrach and Stulz, 2009). In policy circles,
flaws in compensation contracts have become a key issue since the crisis (see, for instance, a speech by the Fed
Chairman Bernanke at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20091023a.htm ).
32
  See Tressel and Verdier (2009) for a model of regulatory forbearance of banks emphasizing this moral hazard
channel.
                                             38




It is empirically extremely difficult to pin down the most likely motivation for the financial

industry’s lobbying during our sample period. Ultimately, we do not know the exact activities

on which lobbying expenditures are spent. If lobbying lenders are specialized or overoptimistic,

their motive for lobbying appears to be consistent with information-based theories, which assert

that lobbying firms have better information than the policymakers and partly reveal their

information by endogenously choosing their lobbying effort (Potters and van Winden, 1992;

Lohmann, 1995; Grossman and Helpman, 2001). If lobbying lenders are short-termist or lobby

to increase the chances of preferential treatment, their motive for lobbying seems to fit better

with theories of rent seeking, where lobbying firms compete for influence over a policy by

strategically choosing their contribution to politicians (Bernheim and Whinston, 1986; Grossman

and Helpman, 1994).



While we cannot firmly tell apart alternative theories of information dissemination and rent

seeking, we can try to distinguish the channels through which lobbying was associated with

lending: relaxation of rules or earning preferential treatment. Specifically, lenders differ in their

capacity or willingness to take risks: some lenders are the risky type and are more likely to

benefit from (i) relaxation of lending rules, and (ii) discretion of regulators favoring them over

others, e.g., less supervision or perceived insurance against adverse outcomes. These risky

lenders lobby more and they take more risk (i) if lobbying efforts are successful and the lending

rules remain/become lax, and (ii) if they are under less scrutiny or have insurance.
                                             39




To what extent ex-ante risk-taking by lobbying lenders is explained by changes in regulations,

that benefits many lenders (free riding), or by anticipation/realization of firm-specific favors?

We do a simple test which can help us quantify the relative magnitudes of these two channels.

First, taking LIR in 1999 (after purging the MSA effects) as an indicator of initial risk bearing,

we label the lenders in the top quartile as the risky type. Let ∆          be the difference in the

LIR during 2000-07 (after purging the MSA and year effects) of the risky type between the

lobbying and non-lobbying lenders. Since the lenders we are comparing are the same type and,

hence, benefit the same way from the same rules, we do not expect to observe any difference in

risk-taking due to the effect of lobbying on lending rules. Therefore, any difference can be

attributed to expectation/realization of firm-specific benefits associated with lobbying.

Similarly, let ∆                 be the difference in the LIR during 2000-07 (after purging the

MSA and year effects) of non-lobbying lenders between the risky and less-risky types. With

relaxation of rules, non-lobbying risky lenders free-ride and increase their LIR while the less-

risky types do not have the capacity to take as much risk. So, any difference can be attributed to

free-riding.
                                              40




In the end, we compare ∆            and ∆           to evaluate the relative magnitudes of the two

channels. We find that both differences are positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent

level. Moreover, they are roughly the same magnitude with ∆               = 0.14 and ∆           =

0.16 (7 and 8 percent of the sample average LIR, respectively). Consequently, the association

we establish between lobbying and lending in our sample period appears to be driven equally by

both channels: changes in rules and preferential treatment.



                                        VI. CONCLUSION


This paper studies the relationship between lobbying by financial institutions and mortgage

lending during 2000-07. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study documenting how

lobbying may have contributed to the accumulation of risks leading the way to the current

financial crisis. We carefully construct a database at the lender level combining information on

loan characteristics and lobbying expenditures on laws and regulations related to mortgage

lending and securitization. We show that lenders that lobby more intensively on these specific

issues engaged in riskier lending practices ex ante, suffered from worse outcomes ex post, and

benefited more from the bailout program.



While pinning down precisely the motivation for lobbying is difficult, our analysis suggests that

the political influence of the financial industry contributed to the financial crisis by allowing risk

accumulation. Therefore, it provides some support to the view that the prevention of future
                                            41




crises might require a closer monitoring of lobbying activities by the financial industry and

weakening of their political influence. However, the precise policy response would depend on

the true motivation for lobbying. Specialized rent-seeking for preferential treatment such as

bailouts would require curtailing lobbying as a socially non-optimal outcome. Distorted

incentives due to short-termism linking risky lending and lobbying would require public

intervention in the design of executive compensation. If, however, lenders lobbied mainly to

inform the policymaker and promote innovation, lobbying would remain a socially beneficial

channel to facilitate informed decision making.
                                           42




                                          References


Acemoglu, D., 2009, “The Crisis of 2008: Structural Lessons for and from Economics”,
     mimeo, MIT.

Agarwal, S. and F. H. Wang, 2009,” Perverse Incentives at the Banks? - Evidence from a Natural
      Experiment”, mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Berger, A. and G. Udell, 2004, “The Institutional Memory Hypothesis and the Procyclicality of
       Bank Lending Behavior,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 458–95.

Bernheim, B. D. and M. D. Whinston, 1986, “Menu Auctions, Resource Allocation, and
      Economic Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(1), 1-31.

Bertrand, M., F. Kramarz, A. Schoar, and D. Thesmar, 2004, “Politically Connected CEOs and
       Corporate Outcomes: Evidence from France,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

Bolton, P., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong, 2006, “Executive Compensation and Short-termist
       Behaviour in Speculative Markets”, Review of Economic Studies 73, 577–610.

Bostic R., K. Engel, P. McCoy, A. Pennington-Cross, and S. Wachter, 2008, “State and Local
       Anti-predatory Lending Laws: The Effect of Legal Enforcement Mechanisms”, Journal
       of Economics and Business 60, 47–66.

Calomiris, C., 2009, “The Subprime Turmoil: What’s Old, What’s New, and What’s Next”,
      Journal of Structured Finance 15 (1), 6-52.

Cheng, I.-H., H. Hong, and J. Scheinkman, 2010, “Yesterday’s Heroes: Compensation and
       Creative Risk-Taking”, NBER WP No. 16176.

Claessens, S., E. Feijen, and L. Laeven, 2008, “Political Connections and Preferential Access to
       Finance: The Role of Campaign Contributions”, Journal of Financial Economics 88 (3),
       554-80.

Dell’Ariccia, G. and R. Marquez, 2006, “Lending Booms and Lending Standards”, Journal of
       Finance 61 (5), 2511 – 46.

Dell’Ariccia, G., D. Igan, and L. Laeven, 2008, “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence
       from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, CEPR Discussion Papers No. 6683.
                                          43




Diamond, D.W. and R. Rajan, 2009, “The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and
      Remedies”, NBER Working Paper No. 14739.

Facchini, G., A. M. Mayda, and P. Mishra, 2008, “Do Interest Groups Affect Immigration
       Policy?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6898, IMF WP No 08/244.

Faccio, M., 2006, “Politically Connected Firms”, American Economic Review 96 (1), 369-86.

Faccio, M. and D. C. Parsley, 2007, “Sudden Deaths: Taking Stock of Geographic Ties”,
ECGI - Finance Working Paper No. 113/2006.

Fahlenbrach, R. and R. M. Stulz, 2009, “ Bank CEO Incentives and the Credit Crisis”, NBER
       Working Paper 15212.

Fisman, R., 2001, “Estimating the Value of Political Connections”, American Economic Review
      91, 1095-102.

Fisman, D., R. Fisman, J. Galef, and R. Khurana, 2006, “The Cheney Effect: Valuing
      Political Connections in America”, mimeo, Columbia University.

Gerardi, K., A. Lehnert, S. M. Sherland, and P. S. Willen, 2009, “Making Sense of the
       Subprime Crisis”, Public Policy Discussion Paper 09-1, Federal Reserve Bank of
       Boston.

Goldberg, P. K. and G. Maggi, 1999, “Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation”,
      American Economic Review 89 (5), 1135-55.

Gorton, G., 2008a, “The Panic of 2007,” Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference,
       “Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,” Federal Reserve Bank of
       Kansas City.

Gorton, G., 2008b, “The Subprime Panic”, NBER Working Paper 14398.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman, 1994, “Protection for Sale”, American Economic Review 84,
      833-50.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman. 2001. Special Interest Politics. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Harstad, B. and J. Svensson, 2008, “From Corruption to Lobbying and Economic Growth”,
       mimeo, Kellogg School of Management.
                                          44




Johnson, S., 2009, “The Quiet Coup,” The Atlantic, May; available at
      http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/200905/imf-advice.

Johnson, S. and T. Mitton, 2003, “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from Malaysia,”
      Journal of Financial Economics 67, 351-382.

Khwaja, A. and A. Mian, 2005, “Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent Provision
      in an Emerging Financial Market”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4).

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 211–48.

Kroszner, R. and P. Strahan, 1999, “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the
      Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4),
      1437-67.

Kroszner, R. and T. Stratmann, 1998, “Interest-Group Competition of Congress: Theory and
      Evidence from Financial Services’ Political Action Committees”, American Economic
      Review 88 (5), 1163-87.

Ludema, R., A. M. Mayda, and P. Mishra, 2010, “Protection for Free: An Analysis of U.S. Tariff
     Exemptions”, CEPR DP No. 7951, IMF Working Paper No. 10/211.

Mayer, C., K. Pence, and S. M. Sherlund, 2009, “The Rise in Mortgage Default”, Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 27-50.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi, 2009, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from
       the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi, 2010a, “The Political Economy of the U.S. Mortgage Default
       Crisis,” American Economic Review, December, 100(5): pp. 1967-98.

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, 2010b, “The Political Economy of the Subprime
       Mortgage Credit Expansion”, NBER Working Paper No. 16107.


Potters, J. and F. Van Winden, 1992, “Lobbying and Asymmetric Information,” Public Choice
        74, 269-92.

Stigler, G., 1971, “The Theory of Economic Regulation”, Bell Journal of Economics and
        Management Science, II, 3-21.
                                           45




Sirota, D., 2003, Essentials of Real Estate Finance, Dearborn Financial Publishing, Chicago.

Tressel, T. and T. Verdier, 2008, “Financial Globalization and the Governance of Financial
       Intermediaries”, forthcoming, Journal of the European Economic Association.
                                                               46




                               Figure 1. Evolution of lobbying lntensity (expenditures per firm) over
                                                                time
                         135


                         130


                         125


                         120
Index number: 1999=100




                         115


                         110


                         105


                         100                                  Finance, Insurance and Real Estate Industry


                                                              Average lobbying intensity
                         95


                         90
                                 1999     2000     2001     2002          2003             2004         2005   2006
                                                   47




                     Figure 2. Lending Standards and Securitization
 0.8                                                                                           2.5

              Loan-to-income ratio
                  (RHS axis)
0.75
                                                                                               2



 0.7
                                                         Percent of Loans Sold
                                                              (LHS axis)                       1.5


0.65


                                                                                               1

 0.6



                                                                                               0.5
0.55




 0.5                                                                                           0
       2000          2001            2002   2003        2004        2005         2006   2007
                                                             48




                      Figure 3. Difference between lobbying and non-lobbying lenders
180
                                                                                  Lenders that lobby on specific issues 1999-2006
                                                                                  (index=100)
160
                                                                                  Lenders that do not lobby on specific issues

140


120


100


80


60


40


20


  0
      Assets (in logs) Market share   Regulator is   Lender is      Average Loan-to-income Proportion of Growth in loans         Bailout
                        of lender        HUD         subprime    income of app   ratio       loans sold   (in percent)
                                                                    (in logs)
                                           49




 Table 1. Targeted Political Activity Campaign Contributions and Lobbying Expenditures
                                     (millions of dollars)

Election cycle                                      1999-2000   2001-02   2003-04   2005-06
Contributions from PACs                                  326       348       461       509
Overall lobbying expenditure                            2,972     3,348     4,081     4,747
   Of which expenditure by finance, insurance,
   and real estate industry (FIRE)                        437       478       645       720
   Share of FIRE in overall lobbying (in percent)        14.7      14.3      15.8      15.2
Total targeted political activity                       3,298     3,696     4,542     5,256

Source: Center for Responsive Politics.
                                                     50




                                           Table 2. Summary Statistics
                                                       Observations      Mean    Median Std. Deviation

Lender-level variables
Lenders that lobby on specific issues
Loan-to-income ratio                                         73,374       2.02     1.98          0.70
Proportion of loans sold                                     73,374       0.63     0.80          0.38
Growth in amount of loans originated (in percent)            56,504       3.80     0.12        143.63
Market share of lender                                       73,374       0.01     0.00          0.03
Average income of loan applicants (in logs)                  73,374       7.65     7.49          2.38
Assets (in logs)                                             73,374      14.65    16.76          4.31
Dummy=1 if regulator is HUD                                  73,374       0.37     0.00          0.48
Dummy=1 if lender is subprime                                73,374       0.30     0.00          0.46
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs)           73,374       6.68     9.96          5.37
Lenders that do not lobby on specific issues
Loan-to-income ratio                                        575,564       2.00     1.93          0.95
Proportion of loans sold                                    575,564       0.71     1.00          0.41
Growth in amount of loans originated (in percent)           371,875       1.75     0.07         38.13
Market share of lender                                      575,564       0.00     0.00          0.01
Average income of loan applicants (in logs)                 575,564       6.47     6.18          2.01
Assets (in logs)                                            575,564      11.89    10.34          3.31
Dummy=1 if regulator is HUD                                 575,564       0.59     1.00          0.49
Dummy=1 if lender is subprime                               575,564       0.21     0.00          0.41

MSA-level variables
Average income (in '000)                                    648,938      31.72    30.61          7.29
GDP growth                                                  648,938       0.05     0.05          0.03
Self-employment rate                                        584,237       0.04     0.04          0.03
Unemployment rate                                           648,084       0.05     0.05          0.02
Population (in logs)                                        648,938      13.30    13.00          1.39
House price appreciation                                    646,366       0.07     0.05          0.07
Number of competing lenders (in logs)                       648,938       5.49     5.48          0.47
Number of loan applications (in logs)                       648,938       9.91     9.78          1.30
Delinquency rate in 2008                                    648,938       0.17     0.16          0.05
Share of subprime loans in total loans                      648,938       0.10     0.09          0.04
Share of hispanics in population                            512,547       0.21     0.12          0.26
Share of college graduates in population                    512,547       0.23     0.22          0.07
                                                                        51




                                            Table 3. Lobbying and Loan-to-Income Ratio
                                 Dependent variable: Loan-to-income ratio at (lender, MSA, year) level

                                                              (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
Dummy=1 if lender lobbies on specific issues              0.016***      0.144***       0.075***      0.138***      0.145***      0.142***
                                                           [0.005]       [0.004]        [0.004]       [0.004]       [0.004]       [0.004]
Dummy=1 if lender lobbies only on other issues                                                                                   -0.017***
                                                                                                                                   [0.005]
Number of observations                                     648,938       581,105       648,938        581,105       648,938       648,938
R-squared                                                   0.00          0.10          0.14           0.16           0.18          0.18
MSA fixed effects                                             No             No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Year fixed effects                                            No             No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
MSA*year fixed effects                                        No             No           No            No            Yes           Yes
Additional controls                                           No             Yes          No            Yes           Yes           Yes
The regressions are run on the lender-MSA-year panel from 1999-2007. The dummy for lobbying on specific issues is equal to 1 if the
lender lobbies for those issues in any year during 1999-2006. Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and regulations related
to mortgage lending and securitization. Columns (2) and (4) include MSA-year-level controls for average income, GDP growth rate, self-
employment rate, unemployment rate, population, house price appreciation, number of competing lenders, and number of loan applications
as well as lender-year-level controls for assets and dummies for HUD regulation and subprime, and MSA-lender-year-level controls for
market share of lender and average income of loan applicants (calculated for each lender separately in each MSA using the loan
applications and originations by the lender in a particular MSA in a given year). Columns (5) and (6) include only the MSA-lender-year-
level and lender-year-level controls. Standard errors denoted in parentheses are clustered at the lender-MSA level. ***, ** and * represent
statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
                                              52



                                   Table 4. Lobbying Expenditures and Loan-to-Income Ratio
                                 Dependent variable: Loan-to-income ratio at (lender, MSA, year) level

                                                                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), lagged            0.007***      0.009***      0.003***      0.003***      0.002***
                                                                       [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.001]       [0.001]       [0.001]
Assets (in logs)                                                                                                              0.006***
                                                                                                                               [0.000]
Market share of lender                                                                                                        3.017***
                                                                                                                               [0.090]
Average income of loan applicants (in logs)                                                                                  -0.031***
                                                                                                                              [0.001]
Number of observations                                                 406,035       406,035       406,035       406,035       406,035
R-squared                                                               0.00          0.17          0.10          0.12           0.12
MSA fixed effects                                                         No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Year fixed effects                                                        No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Lender fixed effects                                                      No           No            Yes           Yes           Yes
MSA*year fixed effects                                                    No           No            No            Yes           Yes
The regressions are run on the lender-MSA-year panel from 2000-07. Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and
regulations related to mortgage lending and securitization. Assets vary at the lender-year level only. Market share of lender and average
income of loan applicants are calculated for each lender separately in each MSA using the loan applications and originations by the
lender in a particular MSA in a given year. Standard errors denoted in parentheses are clustered at the lender-MSA level. ***, ** and
* represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
                                           53



                             Table 5. Lobbying and Loan-to-Income Ratio: Difference-in-Difference
                                 Dependent variable: Loan-to-income ratio at (lender, MSA, year) level

                                                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
Dummy=1 if anti-predatory lending law in (MSA, year)                                 0.166***      0.015***        0.006         0.006
                                                                                      [0.004]       [0.005]       [0.005]       [0.005]
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), lagged                           0.007***      0.009***      0.008***      0.007***
                                                                                      [0.001]       [0.001]       [0.001]       [0.001]
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), lagged*Lending law                -0.001       -0.007***     -0.006***     -0.005***
                                                                                      [0.001]        [0.002]       [0.002]       [0.001]
Number of observations                                                                406,035       406,035       355,656       355,656
R-squared                                                                               0.01          0.10          0.10          0.10

Lender fixed effects                                                                    No            No            Yes           Yes
MSA fixed effects                                                                       No            Yes           Yes           Yes
Year fixed effects                                                                      No            Yes           Yes           Yes
Additional controls                                                                     No            No            Yes           Yes
The regressions are run on the lender-MSA-year panel from 2000-07. Information on the enactment of state-level anti-predatory lending
laws is from Bostic et al (2008). Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and regulations related to mortgage lending and
securitization. Columns (3) includes MSA-year-level controls for average income, GDP growth rate, self-employment rate, unemployment
rate, population, house price appreciation, number of competing lenders, and number of loan applications. Column (4), in addition to these
MSA-year-level controls, includes lender-year-level controls for assets and MSA-lender-year-level controls for market share of lender and
average income of loan applicants (calculated for each lender separately in each MSA using the loan applications and originations by the
lender in a particular MSA in a given year). Standard errors denoted in parentheses are clustered at the lender-MSA level. ***, ** and *
represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
                                        54



                      Table 6. Lobbying Expenditures, Proportion of Loans Sold, and Credit Growth
                                Dependent variable: Alternative measures for loan-to-income ratio

Dependent variable at (lender, MSA, year) level →                       Proportion of loans sold               Credit growth
                                                                           (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), lagged              0.007***       0.007***           0.318**        0.321***
                                                                         [0.000]        [0.000]           [0.130]         [0.118]
Assets (in logs)                                                                       -0.000**                          -0.113**
                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.047]
Market share of lender                                                                 0.216***                         -27.736**
                                                                                        [0.026]                          [12.114]
Average income of loan applicants (in logs)                                            0.002***                          0.740***
                                                                                        [0.000]                           [0.079]
Number of observations                                                  406,035         406,035           406,996         385,701
R-squared                                                                 0.01            0.01              0.00            0.00
MSA fixed effects                                                          Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes
Year fixed effects                                                         Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes
Lender fixed effects                                                       Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes
MSA*year fixed effects                                                     Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes
The regressions are run on the lender-MSA-year panel from 2000-07. Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and
regulations related to mortgage lending and securitization. Assets vary at the lender-year level. Market share of lender and average
income of loan applicants are calculated for each lender separately in each MSA using the loan applications and originations by the
lender in a particular MSA in a given year. Standard errors denoted in parentheses are clustered at the lender-MSA level. ***, **
and * represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
                                            55



                                   Table 7. Lending by Lobbying Lenders and Delinquency Rates
                                        Dependent variable: Delinquency rate in 2008 at MSA level

                                                                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                                                       excl. CA,
                                                                                       FL, NV &
                                                                                          AZ                       IV: 2SLS      IV: LIML
Growth in market share of lenders lobbying on specific issues            0.718***      0.662***      0.734***       2.052**       2.064**
(average 2000-06)                                                         [0.152]       [0.147]       [0.158]       [0.816]       [0.825]
Growth in market share of lenders lobbying on other issues                                             -0.022
(average 2000-06)                                                                                      [0.059]
F-test of excluded instruments                                                                                        9.63          9.63
Observations                                                                305           253           305           305           305
R-squared                                                                   0.53          0.61          0.53          0.34          0.33
Hansen's J stat (p value)                                                                                            0.744         0.745
The regressions are run on the MSA cross-section. Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and regulations related to mortgage
lending and securitization. All regressions include controls for average income, GDP growth rate, self-employment rate, unemployment rate,
population, number of competing lenders, number of loan applications, share of subprime loans, share of hispanics, and share of college
graduates are averages over 2000-06 for each MSA. House price appreciation is the cumulative change in house prices from 2000 to 2006.
In columns (4) and (5), growth in market share of lenders lobbying on specific issues is instrumented by the initial market share of lenders
lobbying on specific issues weighted by the distance of headquarters to DC (in logs) and the initial market share of lenders lobbying on
unrelated issues weighted by the distance of headquarters to DC (in logs). ***, ** and * represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10
percent, respectively. Robust standard errors are in brackets.
                                                         56




                                Table 8. Lobbying and Abnormal Stock Returns
                        Dependent variable: Market- and risk-adjusted return at lender level

                                                                      (1)                 (2)                (3)
                                                                 Bear Stearns
                                                                 and Lehman                         Bailout
Market Event                                                       failures       Lehman failure announcement

Dummy=1 if lender lobbies on specific issues                       -0.207**           -0.365**           0.301***
                                                                    [0.090]            [0.175]            [0.106]
Dummy=1 if regulator is HUD                                         -0.044             -0.091              -0.18
                                                                    [0.106]            [0.204]            [0.143]
Dummy=1 if lender is subprime                                      0.210**             0.373**            -0.105
                                                                   [0.096]             [0.185]            [0.122]
Assets (in logs)                                                    -0.017             -0.033              0.018
                                                                    [0.014]            [0.026]            [0.018]
Mortgage loans originated / assets                                  0.0000             -0.0001           -0.0003**
                                                                    [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]
Number of observations                                                 92                 45                 45
R-squared                                                             0.14               0.22               0.37
Market- and risk-adjusted return is the stock price return over the month of the event, adjusted for the predicted
return based on a CAPM where the market portfolio is proxied by the stock price index of financial institutions in the
S&P500. Market events around which market- and risk-adjusted returns are analyzed are (1) March 11-16, 2008: JP
Morgan acquired Bear Stearns after Fed provided $30 billion in non-recourse funding), (2) September 15-16, 2008:
Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy and the authorities stepped in to rescue AIG), and (3) October 14, 2008:
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) making $700 billion available for asset purchases was announced. The
dummy for lobbying on specific issues is equal to 1 if the lender lobbies for those issues in any year during 1999-2006.
Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and regulations related to mortgage lending and securitization.
The HUD and subprime dummies are equal to one if the lender was HUD regulated or subprime respectively in any
year during 1999-2007. Assets and mortgage loans to assets are for the year 2006. Event fixed effects are included
in column (1). ***, ** and * represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively. Robust standard
errors are in brackets.
                                                                                        Table 9. Lobbying and Bailout
                                                                        Dependent variable: Bailout probability / amount at lender level

Dependent variable at (lender) level →                                             Dummy=1 if the lender got funds under TARP                            TARP funds received by lender (in logs)
                                                                                              (1)                      (2)                       (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
Dummy=1 if lender lobbies on specific issues                                              0.073***                  0.069***                 1.683***          1.582***
                                                                                           [0.018]                   [0.018]                  [0.404]           [0.405]
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), total over 2000-06                                                                                                            0.035***           0.032***
                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.010]            [0.011]
Assets (in logs)                                                                                                    0.001***                                   0.033***                              0.031***
                                                                                                                     [0.000]                                    [0.007]                               [0.007]
Dummy=1 if regulator is HUD                                                                                         0.003**                                     0.062**                                0.054*
                                                                                                                    [0.001]                                     [0.030]                                [0.029]
Dummy=1 if lender is subprime                                                                                        -0.003                                     -0.083                                 -0.067
                                                                                                                     [0.004]                                    [0.084]                                [0.074]
Market share of lender                                                                                               0.079*                                     1.695*                                 1.720*
                                                                                                                     [0.042]                                    [0.925]                                [0.920]
Average income of loan applicants (in logs)                                                                           0.000                                      0.007                                  0.013
                                                                                                                     [0.000]                                    [0.010]                                [0.010]
Loan-to-income ratio (averaged over 1999-2006)                                                                        0.001                                      0.022                                  0.028
                                                                                                                     [0.001]                                    [0.025]                                [0.025]
Observations                                                                                13,315                   13,172                   13,315            13,172             14,041              13,883
R-squared                                                                                    0.03                     0.03                     0.03              0.03               0.02                0.02
The regressions are run on the lender cross-section. The dummy for lobbying on specific issues is equal to 1 if the lender lobbies for those issues in any year during 1999-2006. Lobbying on specific issues
refers to lobbying on bills and regulations related to mortgage lending and securitization. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is 1 if the lender or any of its affiliates were granted funds under the
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and 0 otherwise. In columns (3) to (6), the dependent variable is the amount, in logs, of funds received by the lender under TARP. Large lenders are defined by the
top quartile of lobbying lenders (in terms of assets). Columns (2), (4), and (6) include lender-level controls for assets and dummies for HUD regulation and subprime and market share of lender and average
income of loan applicants (calculated for each lender separately in each MSA using the loan applications and originations by the lender in a particular MSA and then averaged across MSAs and years).
Loan-to-income ratio, averaged for each lender across MSAs and over the years from 1999 to 2006, is also introduced as a right-hand-side variable to control for the riskiness of the mortgage loan portfolio
over this period. Robust standard errors are in brackets. ***, ** and * represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
Appendix not for Publication

Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)

Enacted by Congress in 1975, the original purpose of the Act was two-fold: enhance
enforcement of anti-discriminatory lending laws and disseminate information to guide
investments in housing. The Act requires financial institutions to disclose information to
their regulatory agency about every loan application received. Whether an institution is
covered depends on its size, the extent of its activity in a metropolitan statistical area (MSA),
and the weight of residential mortgage lending in its portfolio. Any depository institution
with a home office or branch in an MSA must report HMDA data if it has made a home
purchase loan on a one-to-four unit dwelling or has refinanced a home purchase loan and if it
has assets above an annually adjusted threshold. Any non-depository institution with at least
ten percent of its loan portfolio composed of home purchase loans must also report HMDA
data if it has assets exceeding $10 million. Under these criteria, small lenders and lenders
with offices only in non-metropolitan areas are exempt from HMDA data reporting
requirements. Therefore, information for rural areas tends to be incomplete. Yet, U.S.
Census figures show that about 83 percent of the population lived in metropolitan areas over
our sample period, and hence, the bulk of residential mortgage lending activity is likely to be
reported under the HMDA. Information covers individual characteristics (race, ethnicity,
income, geographic location of the property, etc.), loan information (amount requested,
response, reasons for denial, etc.) and institution information (regulatory authority,
geographic location, and assets). The data can be ordered on CD-ROM’s from the Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), and starting in 2006 they can also be
downloaded from their website. The data cover about 250 million loan applications between
1996 and 2007.

In order to make sure that the data are clear of outliers and erroneous values, we follow these
procedures:

    • Loan amount and applicant income are rounded to a lower limit, hence all
          observations below $1000 and $10000, respectively, are eliminated.

    • Definitions of applicant race, loan purpose and purchaser type have changed between
          2003 and 2004. For applicant race, an applicant ethnicity variable has been
          added and the race code for Hispanic has been eliminated. Other codes have
          been rearranged. In our dataset, these variables are transformed into harmonized
          dummies for selected ethnicities. Loan purpose category “multifamily” has been
          moved to a new specific variable called property type in 2004. In order to
          harmonize the pre-2003 and post-2003 data, all multifamily-related records are
          eliminated. Purchaser type has gone under a minor recoding to make room for
          “securitization”, i.e. the packaging and sale of loans on the open market, as
          opposed to the sale of the whole loan to a private institution or government-
          sponsored enterprise. As we do not distinguish between loan sales and
          securitized loans, no adjustments are made for this change.
     • We eliminate all application records that did not end in one of the three following
           actions: loan originated, application approved but not accepted, application
           denied. Other actions mostly represent dubious statuses (e.g. application
           withdrawn by applicant) or purchased loans; these have also been excluded
           because it is not clear whether they are reported twice, once by the originating
           institution and again by the purchasing institution.

Although HMDA is a relatively homogeneous dataset considering its size, there are some
inconsistencies that need to be dealt with. First, HMDA disclosure requirements change,
although minimally, from one year to the next to reflect changes in metropolitan area
definitions and keep minimum institution size in line with inflation. While there is little that
can be done to take account of the fact that the set of institutions qualifying under the
applicable rules on the size restriction change, we eliminate the observations that cannot be
associated with a metropolitan area, which typically turn out to be loans made in rural areas
by institutions whose primary business is in metropolitan areas and are therefore required to
report or loans that were made in an area that happened to be reclassified as rural. Second,
2004 was marked by a major overhaul of the HMDA regulations. New variables were added,
including the interest rate when it is set above a certain threshold: the number of variables
expanded from 30 to 45. Moreover, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) increased
the number of official Metropolitan areas (MAs) from about 320 to about 390. The
boundaries of the MAs themselves were sometimes enlarged, increasing the number of
lenders required to report. Trends apparent from a comparison of aggregate figures from
2003 and 2004, therefore, should be taken with a grain of salt. For example, loan market
growth rates are likely to be inflated because in the existing MAs more institutions were
required to disclose; at the same time, in a specific MA figures could be understated because
part of the counties that used to form it have been incorporated into a new MA. In such
cases, 2004 aggregate figures have been interpolated using 2003 and 2005 figures. Third,
some Loan Application Records (LARs) were found to be wrong or inconsistent by
numerous data validity checks operated by the FFIEC. Such records, after being altered
automatically, have been marked as “edited” using a flag. Around 6 percent of all records
are marked as edited. Edits are distributed in a homogeneous fashion across time and across
space. In any event, those records have been eliminated from our database. 1

To concentrate on a relatively homogeneous set of loans, we drop loans for multi-family
purpose from the sample, as this is a distinct market from the overall mortgage market for
single family homes. We also drop federally insured loans as their risk profile is likely to
differ from that of other loans.

HMDA data does not include a field that identifies whether an individual loan application is
a subprime loan application. In order to distinguish between the subprime and prime loans,
we use the subprime lenders list as compiled by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban

1
 An exception is Arizona in 2003. For most Arizona MAs in 2003 nearly all records are reported as edited.
While the reasons of this remain unknown, such records have been eliminated, and 2003-04 credit growth rates
have been interpolated using data from the adjacent years.
Development (HUD) each year. HUD has annually identified a list of lenders who specialize
in either subprime or manufactured home lending since 1993. HUD uses a number of
HMDA indicators, such as origination rates, share of refinance loans, and proportion of loans
sold to government-sponsored housing enterprises, to identify potential subprime lenders.
Since 2004, lenders are required to identify loans for manufactured housing and loans in
which the annual percentage rate (APR) on the loan exceeds the rate on the Treasury security
of comparable maturity by at least three (five, for second-lien loans) percentage points and
report this information under HMDA. The rate spread can be used as an alternative indicator
(to the HUD list) to classify subprime loans. For the years with available data, the ranking of
subprime lenders using the rate spread variable alone coincides closely with the ranking in
the HUD list (the correlation is around 0.8).

Data at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) Level

Despite its broad coverage on borrower, property, and loan characteristics, several important
variables that might have an impact on lending decisions are left out in HMDA. The lack of
knowledge on the applicant’s credit score and age, interest rate and maturity of the loan, and
property price are just examples of missing fundamental information on which the lender
might base the decision. Some of this essential information might be partially recovered
through use of economic and social indicators available for the geographical area. For that
purpose, we gather data from the following sources.

    • Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA): Annual data on personal income, labor and
          capital remuneration, proprietors’ employment, and population.

    • Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS): Data on unemployment and prices

    • U.S. Census Bureau: Data on population

    • Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO): Housing price index (HPI)

    • LoanPerformance: Mortgage delinquencies (percent of subprime loans that are 60 or
          more days delayed in payment) from LoanPerformance at four different points in
          time (February 2005, 2006 and 2007 and November 2007).

Adjustment for Change in Metropolitan Area Definitions

The definitions of MAs change over time, both because of change in administrative standards
and, more often, because of the dynamic nature of cities. OMB operated a major change in
the definitions in 2003, and HMDA incorporated this change into its requirements in 2004.
Hence, it is necessary to adjust the aggregation of data to reflect these changes in definitions
to make sure that data are consistent pre- and post-2004. Further harmonization of
metropolitan area definitions is necessary as some sources use different codes.

The new codes identify physical MAs as Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs). A CBSA
can span more than one state but always covers counties in their entirety without splitting
them. Large areas such as New York-Newark-Bridgeport (NY-NJ-CT-PA) are in turn
subdivided into Metropolitan Divisions (MDs) in order to maintain a more comparable area
size. MDs, too, are made up of whole counties. The only exception to this rule is the New
England City and Town Areas (NECTAs) used by BLS. Due to historical reasons, New
England city boundaries are administratively allowed to cut across counties. It is therefore
impossible to match NECTA borders to CBSA and MD codes; while there are CBSA codes
for Boston and other NECTAs, the Census Bureau warns that these codes represent statistical
artifacts that do not match exactly the actual borders. For this reason, unemployment and
inflation figures for NECTAs have been imputed without adjustment to the corresponding
CBSAs (hence, at the highest level of aggregation to minimize errors). LoanPerformance
data, excluding the November 2007 version, are expressed using the 1999 codes. At a first
approximation, in the 1999 codebook CBSAs were replaced by Consolidated Metropolitan
Statistical Areas (CMSAs) and MDs were replaced by Primary Metropolitan Statistical Areas
(PMSAs). In order to fit PMSA-based data to our dataset, the data were merged to single
counties according to their former PMSA; CBSA values were then calculated by averaging
the value taken by each of the counties constituting the CBSA. This way it was possible to
have a continuous and consistent series where one PMSA has been split into two CBSAs in
the new codes, or vice versa. However, some of the seventy new MAs of the 2003 definition
are new areas, that only recently reached the metropolitan area threshold, and therefore these
areas have been excluded.

HMDA data always report the county where the property is located, and therefore it was
possible to associate the 2003 definitions with pre-2004 data. We recreate two artificial,
coherent “CBSA” and “MD” variables for the individual data in all seven years. Of course,
the pre-2004 coverage of MAs created in 2004 is not complete, as local institutions were
deemed to be rural and therefore not required to file under HMDA. On the other hand, a
large part of lending in non-metropolitan cities is still carried out by lenders that are required
to file so we include these observations.

Lobbying Expenditures

In addition to campaign contributions to officials and candidates for election purposes,
companies, labor unions, and other organizations spend billions of dollars each year to lobby
incumbent members of Congress and of federal agencies. Some special interests hire
lobbying firms; others have lobbyists working in-house. We compile the dataset on lobbying
expenditures using two sources: (i) the website of the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP)
(www.crp.org) and (ii) website of the Senate’s Office of Public Records (SOPR) --
http://www.senate.gov/legislative/Public_Disclosure/LDA_reports.htm. The data are based
on the semi-annual lobbying disclosure reports filed with the SOPR and posted to their
website. We focus on the reports covering lobbying activity that took place from 1999
through 2006.

The website of the CRP provides information on the lobbying expenditures as well as the
general issues with which lobbying is associated. The information however, is not user-
friendly (e.g. one has to click on each firm name to get the details), and often has to be cross-
checked with individual lobbying reports which are publicly available in pdf format on the
website of the SOPR. Moreover, the CRP does not provide information on the specific
issues (or particular regulations) with which the lobbying is associated. We extract the entire
lobbying database from the CRP website (comprising about 16,000 unique firms over 1999-
2006, with a maximum of around 9,000 firms in any one year) and use it for the matching
process with HMDA database. For the matched firms (around 250), we go over the
individual pdf reports to extract detailed information including specific issues.

The Lobbying Disclosure Act (LDA) of 1995 requires lobbying firms and organizations to
register and file reports of their lobbying activities with the Secretary of the Senate and the
Clerk of the House of Representatives. In general, it requires registration by any individual
lobbyist (or the individual's employer if it employs one or more lobbyists) within 45 days
after the individual first makes, or is employed or retained to make, a lobbying contact with
either the President, the Vice President, a Member of Congress, or any other specified
Federal officer or employee, including certain high-ranking members of the uniformed
services.

A registrant must file a report for the semiannual period when registration initially occurred
and for each semiannual period thereafter, including the period during which registration
terminates. Lobbying firms, i.e., entities with one or more lobbyists, including self-employed
individuals who act as lobbyists for outside clients, are required to file a separate report for
each client covered by a registration. Organizations employing in-house lobbyists file a
single report for each semiannual period. The semiannual report is required to be filed no
later than 45 days after the end of a semiannual period beginning on the first day of January
and the first day of July of every year in which a registrant is registered. LDA requires the
Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives to make all
registrations and reports available to the public as soon as practicable after they are received.

Under Section 3(10) of the LDA, an individual is defined as a “lobbyist” with respect to a
particular client if he or she makes more than one lobbying contact (i.e. more than one
communication to a covered official) and his or her “lobbying activities” constitute at least
20 percent of the individual's time in services for that client over any six-month period.
“Lobbying activity” is defined in Section 3(7) of the LDA as “lobbying contacts or efforts in
support of such contacts, including background work that is intended, at the time it was
performed, for use in contacts, and coordination with the lobbying activities of others”.

Lobbying firms are required to provide a good-faith estimate rounded to the nearest $20,000
of all lobbying-related income in each six-month period. Likewise, organizations that hire
lobbyists must provide a good-faith estimate rounded to the nearest $20,000 of all lobbying-
related expenditures in a six-month period. An organization or a lobbying firm that spends
less than $10,000 in any six-month period does not have to state its expenditures. In those
cases, CRP treats the figure as zero.

Annual lobbying expenditures and incomes (of lobbying firms) are calculated by adding mid-
year totals and year-end totals. Whenever a lobbying report is amended, income/expense
figures from the amendment are generally used instead of those from the original filing.
Often, however, CRP staff determines that the income/expenditures on the amendment or
termination report are inaccurate. In those instances, figures from the original filing are used.
Occasionally, income that an outside lobbying firm reports receiving from a client is greater
than the client's reported lobbying expenditures. Many such discrepancies can be explained
due to filer error. In cases not already resolved in previous reports and where the
discrepancy exceeds the $20,000 that can be attributed to rounding, the client's expenditures
rather than the lobbying firm's reported income are used. The only exception is when a client
reports no lobbying expenditures, while the outside lobbying firm lists an actual payment. In
such cases, the figure reported by the lobbying firm is used.

In cases where the data appears to contain errors, official Senate records are consulted and,
when necessary, the CRP contacts SOPR or the lobbying organizations for clarification. The
CRP standardizes variations in names of individuals and organizations to clearly identify
them and more accurately represent their total lobbying expenditures.

In cases where both a parent and its subsidiary organizations lobby or hire lobbyists, the CRP
attributes lobbying spending to the parent organization. Therefore, the lobbying totals
reported by the CRP for a parent organization may not reflect its original filing with the
Senate, but rather the combined expenditures of all related entities.

However, to calculate lobbying expenditures by sector and industry, each subsidiary is
counted within its own sector and industry, not those of its parent. The CRP makes this
distinction when it has the information necessary to distinguish some or all of the subsidiary's
lobbying expenditures from either the subsidiary's own filing or from the receipts reported by
outside lobbying firms. For example, tobacco giant Altria Group owns Kraft Foods.
Although Altria Group's original filing includes lobbying for Kraft in its expenditures, in the
dataset the CRP isolates Kraft's payments to outside lobbyists and includes them in ‘Food
Processing and Sales’.

When companies merge within any two-year election cycle, their lobbying expenditures are
combined and attributed to the new entity. This is done in order to correlate lobbying data to
campaign contribution data for each particular organization and industry.

In addition to firms’ own lobbying expenditures, we also include lobbying expenditures by
finance, insurance, real estate trade associations; that is, we are interested in associations
such as the Electronic Check Clearing House Organization (ECCHO) or the Financial
Services Roundtable. To split the total association expenditures among the various
association members, we first obtain membership information from approximately 150
association websites. For example, according to the ECCHO website, there are more than
2200 members including Bank of America, Citibank, and SunTrust. Next, a share of the
associations’ lobbying expenditures is assigned to each member firm. This share is
calculated as the member firm’s own lobbying expenditures divided by the sum of all
association members’ lobbying expenditures. Then, for each firm and each year, the firm’s
share is multiplied by the association’s total lobbying expenditures so that the association
lobbying expenditures are distributed across all of the member firms.

Interestingly, the LDA also requires the organization to state the issues on which the
registrant engaged in lobbying during the reporting period. Table A1 shows 76 issues, of
which at least one has to be entered by the registrant/filer. The filer can list more than one
issue. In that case, she has to use a separate page of the form for each code selected.

For each general issue, the filer is also required to list the specific issues which were lobbied
for during the semi-annual period. For example, specific bills before Congress or specific
executive branch actions are required to be listed in the form.

Table A2 shows a sample form filed by Bear Stearns for lobbying activity between July 1 –
December 31, 2007; Table A3 shows a sample form filed by Bank of America for lobbying
activity between July 1 – December 31, 2006. Only three selected pages of each form are
shown. Page 1 of the form shows the name and details of each company, the time period
covered by the report and the expenses incurred by each company relating to lobbying
activity during this period (for Bear Stearns, expenses were $500,000, and for Bank of
America, $1,020,000). The lobbying expenditure is listed only once on the first page of the
form and the amount is not split among the issues. The other two pages of the forms show
general issues for which the companies engaged in lobbying activity (Bear Stearns: Banking
and Bankruptcy; Bank of America: Banking and Housing).

Specific House and Senate Bills of Interest

We focus on five general lobbying issues: Accounting, Banking, Bankruptcy, Housing, and
Financial Institutions. Moreover, certain House and Senate bills are of particular interest
since they promote either tight or lax restrictions in these five general areas of interest.

Bills that introduce tight restrictions for lenders focus primarily on predatory lending
practices 2 and high-cost mortgages 3. For example, many bills contain restrictions/limits on
annual percentage rates for mortgages, negative amortization, pre-payment penalties, balloon
payments, late fees, and/or the financing of mortgage points and fees. Expanded consumer
disclosure requirements regarding high-cost mortgages (such as including the total cost of

2
 While there is no single legal definition of predatory lending practices, the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development offers the following examples as predatory lending practices by creditors: 1) charging
unnecessary fees; 2) lending more money than a borrower could repay; 3) encouraging borrowers to lie on
credit applications; 4) changing the terms of the loan at closing; 5) signing blank loan paperwork; and 6)
charging higher fees based on a consumer’s race and not on a consumer’s credit history. (Please see
http://www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/buying/loanfraud.cfm for more information.) For additional information,
please see the National Conference on State Legislatures’ website
(http://www.ncsl.org/programs/banking/predlend_intro.htm) for an overview of the predatory lending practices
outlawed by each state legislature.
3
 High-cost mortgages are often defined as mortgages that have annual percentage rates (APRs) that exceed the
APR on Treasury securities by a certain number of percentage points. For example, the Predatory Lending
Consumer Protection Act of 2002 (S. 2438) amended the Home Ownership Equity Protection Act to define high
cost first mortgages as either 1) mortgages with APRs that are six percentage points above the Treasury security
APR or 2) mortgages where the total cost of points and fees is greater than five percent of the total loan amount
or $1000.
lender fees on loan settlement paperwork or disclosing to consumers that they are borrowing
at a higher interest rate) are introduced in some of the bills.

Many of the bills prohibit high-cost mortgage lenders from engaging in other unfair or
deceptive practices. Creditors are to evaluate each consumer’s ability to repay a loan before
making the loan, and one bill stipulates that mortgage debt is not to exceed 50 percent of an
individual’s income, and income is to be verified. Creditors are not to encourage consumers
to default on loans; moreover, mortgage lenders and other creditors must report their
consumers’ payment histories to credit reporting agencies. High-cost mortgage lenders may
not accelerate a consumer’s debt if the consumer is making payments on time. In addition,
individuals who provide mortgage lending or brokerage services must be adequately trained
in high-cost lending. Civil penalties for engaging in predatory lending practices are
increased.

Some of the bills that firms and/or associations lobby for are closely related as it is common
for various versions of the same bill to come in front of the House/Senate in the legislative
process. To exploit any information that might be contained in the number of times a specific
issue is discussed, we identify groups of bills that have the same name (or very similar
names) and/or contain essentially the same language. For example, we consider the
following bills to be a group: S. 2415: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act of 2000;
H.R. 4250: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act of 2000; S. 2438: Predatory Lending
Consumer Protection Act of 2002; H.R. 1051: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act
of 2001. Once the related bills are grouped, we count the total number of times an individual
bill or at least one of the bills in a group was listed as a specific issue of interest by either
firms or associations. Based on these counts, we rank the “popularity” of the bills and groups
of bills. The first 19 spots in the ranking are groups of bills, while S. 900 (the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act) is the most common individual bill for which firms and/or associations
lobby. We have one ranking for all of the bills and groups of bills; the other ranking is only
for the top 100 most common bills or groups of bills. We use these counts and rankings as
weights to split the total lobbying expenditure. Essentially, the firms’ lobbying expenditure
is multiplied by the count and the two rank variables to produce three scaled lobbying
expenditure variables.

The following bulleted list offers greater detail on each of the specific bills that promote
tighter restrictions in Accounting, Banking, Bankruptcy, Finance, and Housing:

   •   H.R. 1051: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act of 2001
          o Introduced March 15, 2001; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
              into law
          o H.R. 1051 amends the Truth in Lending Act regarding allowable annual
              percentage rates, total points and fees, pre-payment penalties, and balloon
              payments for high cost mortgages. The bill also requires additional
              disclosures to consumers and restricts high-cost mortgage creditors in
              financing mortgage points and fees and from accelerating a consumer’s debt
              or from encouraging consumer default. Consumers must fulfill a credit
              counseling requirement.
•   H.R. 1163: Predatory Mortgage Lending Practices Reduction Act
       o Introduced April 8, 2003; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o H.R. 1163 requires that any individual who provides mortgage lending or
           brokerage services be adequately trained in subprime lending. The bill also
           includes subprime lender requirements and prohibitions and penalties for
           unfair and deceptive practices. Furthermore, H.R. 1163 extends grants to
           community organizations offering education on subprime or illegal lending
           practices.

•   H.R. 1182: Prohibit Predatory Lending Act 2005
       o Introduced March 9, 2005; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o H.R. 1182 defines high-cost mortgages as 1) any primary mortgage with an
           interest rate eight percentage points above the yield on Treasury securities or
           2) any secondary mortgage with an interest rate ten percentage points above
           the yield on Treasury securities. The bill addresses the calculation of points
           and pre-payment penalties; furthermore, it contains restrictions on balloon
           payments and late fees and prohibits debt acceleration. Additionally, H.R.
           1182 prevents lenders from extending to credit to individuals who do not have
           the ability to repay the debt. For example, mortgage debt is not to exceed 50
           percent of an individual’s income, and income is to be verified by pay stubs,
           tax returns, etc.

•   H.R. 1295: Responsible Lending Act
       o Introduced March 15, 2005; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
          into law
       o H.R. 1295 defines “higher-cost mortgage” and includes requirements for
          mortgage product evaluation software and appraisals for properties secured by
          higher-cost mortgages. In addition, mortgage pamphlets distributed to
          consumers are to be updated and simplified and explain topics such as balloon
          payments, escrow accounts, and consumer responsibilities; furthermore,
          information should be provided in multiple languages and formats to reach
           vulnerable populations.

•   H.R. 1865: Prevention of Predatory Lending Through Education Act
       o Introduced April 29, 2003; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o Under H.R. 1865, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development is to
           award grants to state and local governments and non-profit organizations so
           that they may counsel and educate consumers on predatory lending practices.

•   H.R. 3607: Protecting Our Communities From Predatory Lending Practices Act
       o Introduced December 20, 2001; Never passed by House or Senate; Never
          signed into law
       o H.R. 3607 prohibits unfair or deceptive practices and statements regarding
         consumer credit transactions, applications, etc. In addition, the bill includes
         provisions that prohibit certain practices involving a consumer’s dwelling;
         that is, practices such as flipping consumer loans, financing credit insurance,
         charging fees for services not provided, and others are prohibited.

•   H.R. 3807: Predatory Mortgage Lending Practices Reduction Act
       o Introduced February 27, 2002; Never passed by House or Senate; Never
           signed into law
       o Please see H.R. 1163.

•   H.R. 3901: Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2000
       o Introduced March 9, 2000; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o H.R. 3901 adds the following disclosure requirement to the Home Mortgage
           Disclosure Act of 1975: “the annual percentage rate of mortgage loans and
           home improvement loans originated by the institution grouped according to
           census tract, income level, racial characteristics, and gender.” The bill
           restricts certain rates and fees and mandates that any borrower who would like
           to obtain a high-cost mortgage complete home ownership counseling. Pre-
           payment penalties, negative amortization, flipping home loans, extending
           credit without regard to ability to repay, encouraging default, payments to
           appraisers by creditors, and creditor-financing of credit insurance are
           disallowed.

•   H.R. 3915: Mortgage Reform and Anti-Predatory Lending Act of 2007
       o Introduced October 22, 2007; Passed by House November 15, 2007; Never
          passed by Senate; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 3915 introduces licensing and training requirements for individuals
          wishing to become loan originators. In addition, the bill stipulates that certain
          federal agencies are to regulate mortgage lenders so that they do not
          encourage borrowers from taking on loans that they do not have the ability to
          repay. Good faith estimates must include the total loan amount, the type and
          length of the loan, the annual percentage rate, the total estimated monthly
          payment, the percentage the monthly payment is of the borrower’s monthly
          income, and other disclosures.

•   H.R. 4213: Consumer Mortgage Protection Act of 2000
       o Introduced April 6, 2000; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o The Consumer Mortgage Protection Act of 2000 revises regulations on fees,
           points, closing costs, annual percentage rates, and pre-payment penalties.
           Creditors are not to encourage consumers to default on loans and must report
           quarterly to credit bureaus on the status of consumer loans.

•   H.R. 4250: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act of 2000
       o Introduced April 12, 2000; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
         into law
       o H.R. 4250 requires additional disclosures to consumers who are applying for
         high-cost mortgages to warn them regarding the higher interest rates and the
         risks associated with high-cost mortgages. Pre-payment penalties, balloon
         payments, and the financing of points and fees are restricted. Creditors must
         evaluate each consumer’s ability to repay the loan, and creditors must not
         encourage a consumer to default on the loan.

•   H.R. 4471: Fair and Responsible Lending Act
       o Introduced December 8, 2005; Never passed by House or Senate; Never
           signed into law
       o H.R. 4471 regulates fees, payments, and other costs associated with high-cost
           home loans. The bill requires that a consumer considering a high-cost
           mortgage attend credit counseling services. Computer software programs
           designed to help consumers choose among mortgage products must be
           certified by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.

•   H.R. 4818: Mortgage Loan Consumer Protection Act
       o Introduced May 22, 2002; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o H.R. 4818 requires disclosure of lenders’ fees on settlement paperwork and
           prohibits lenders from charging certain loan fees.

•   H.R 833: Responsible Lending Act
       o Introduced February 13, 2003; Never passed by House or Senate; Never
          signed into law
       o See also H.R. 1295. H.R. 833 defines high cost mortgages, points, and fees.
          The bill also creates the Consumer Mortgage Protection Board to offer grants
          to organizations providing homeownership/rental counseling. Mortgage
          broker guidelines and requirements are also included in the bill.

•   S. 2415: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act of 2000
        o Introduced April 12, 2000; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
        o S. 2415 amends the Truth in Lending Act regarding annual percentage rates,
           total points and fees, pre-payment penalties, and balloon payments for high
           cost mortgages. The bill also requires additional consumer disclosures and
           restricts high-cost mortgage creditors from financing mortgage points and fees
           and from accelerating a consumer’s debt or from encouraging consumer
           default. High-cost mortgage lenders must report their consumers’ payment
           histories to credit reporting agencies. Civil penalties and the statute of
           limitations are increased.

•   S. 2438: Predatory Lending Consumer Protection Act of 2002
       o Introduced May 1, 2002; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed into
         law
       o S. 2438 amends the Truth in Lending Act regarding high cost mortgages; as
         such, the bill requires additional disclosures to the consumer, prohibits balloon
         payments and prepayment penalties, and limits the points/fees a lender may
         charge for high cost mortgages. Creditors must report a consumer’s payment
         history/status to consumer reporting agencies.

•   H.R. 2201: Consumer Debt Prevention and Education Act of 2005
       o Introduced May 5, 2005; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 2201 excludes medically distressed individuals from means test
           requirements for Chapter 7 bankruptcy filings. The bill also requires any
           credit issuer mailing credit applications to consumers to include a brochure
           explaining how negative credit scores and being over the limit can affect a
           consumer credit status. The brochure must also include information on how
           long it will take to pay off a credit card balance if the consumer only makes
           minimum payments.

•   H.R. 3763: Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
       o Introduced February 14, 2002; Passed House April 24, 2002; Passed Senate
           July 15, 2002; Signed into law July 30, 2002
       o H.R. 3763 establishes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to
           oversee audit-related issues. The bill also addresses auditor independence and
           prevents any auditor from providing non-audit related services for the same
           company. Auditor rotation and reporting guidelines are included.
       o Under H.R. 3763, the principal executive and financial officers are to certify
           the financial reports and forgo certain bonuses and compensation if certain
           violations of securities laws occur. The chief executive officer must sign the
           corporation’s tax returns. Insider trading during certain blackout periods is
           disallowed. The bill also calls for increased financial disclosures and assigns
           corporate and criminal fraud liability and increases the penalties for white-
           collar crimes.

•   H.R. 4541: Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000
       o Introduced May 25, 2000; Passed House October 19, 2000; Never signed into
           law
       o Under H.R. 4541, the following types of contracts and transactions are
           excluded from the Commodity Exchange Act: 1) foreign currency; 2)
           government securities; 3) security warrants; 4) security rights; 5) resales of
           installment loan contracts; 6) repurchase transactions in an excluded
           commodity; 7) mortgages or mortgage purchase commitments; 8) electronic
           trading of excluded commodities; 9) qualifying hybrid instruments; and 10)
           swap transactions.
       o The bill revises registration requirements for security futures product
           exchanges and exempts certain floor brokers/traders from registration
           requirements. Rules and provisions for securities futures trading are included.
   •   S. 2697: Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000
           o Introduced June 8, 2000; Never signed into law
           o See H.R. 4541

A second group of bills loosens restrictions for lenders in the general issues of Accounting,
Banking, Bankruptcy, Finance, and Housing. For example, the bills related to housing use a
wide array of tools including lower down-payment requirements; state and local grant
funding to provide down-payment assistance for certain borrowers; hybrid adjustable rate
mortgage programs; revised mortgage insurance premiums and cancellation policies; and
financial assistance when purchasing homes in high-crime areas or low-income areas.
Another channel through which these housing bills incorporate lax housing regulations is
relaxing restrictions on Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans and oversight of the
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae), the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (Freddie Mac), and the Federal Home Loan Banks.

The following bulleted list offers greater detail on each of the Accounting, Banking,
Bankruptcy, Finance, and Housing bills that relax restrictions:

   •   H.R. 1276: American Dream Downpayment Act
          o Introduced March 13, 2003; Passed by House October 1, 2003; Never passed
              by Senate; Never signed into law
          o H.R. 1276 amends the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act
              and offers down-payment assistance to certain low-income individuals, first-
             time home buyers, uniformed employees, or teachers through the use of grants
             to state and local governments.

   •   H.R. 1461: Federal Housing Finance Reform Act of 2005
          o Introduced April 5, 2005; Passed by House October 26, 2005; Never passed
              by Senate; Never signed into law
          o The Federal Housing Finance Reform Act of 2005 creates the Federal
              Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) which would have oversight of Freddie
              Mac, Fannie Mae, and Federal Home Loan Banks. FHFA would become the
              single regulator for Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae; the Department of Housing
              and Urban Development would no longer have oversight. The bill requires
              Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to set aside funds directed at increasing
              homeownership among low-income individuals or in low-income areas.

   •   H.R. 1629: FHA Multifamily Housing Mortgage Loan Limit Adjustment Act of
       2001
          o Introduced April 26, 2001; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
              into law
          o H.R. 1629 would increase the mortgage loan limits for multifamily housing
              mortgage insurance.

   •   H.R. 176: FHA Single Family Loan Limit Adjustment Act of 2005
       o Introduced January 4, 2005; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
         into law
       o H.R. 176 increases the amount that can be insured under FHA mortgages in
         high-cost areas.

•   H.R. 1776: American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000
       o Introduced May 12, 1999; Passed by House April 6, 2000; Never passed by
          Senate; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 1776 makes grants available to states and local governments and requires
          any community development block grant applicant to make an honest effort to
          reduce barriers to homeownership. The bill extends loan terms for
          manufactured home lot purchases, lowers down-payment requirements for
          home purchases, and offers other forms of down-payment assistance for
          teachers and public safety officers. Hybrid adjustable rate mortgage programs
          and financial assistance when purchasing homes in high-crime areas are also
          included.

•   H.R. 2589: Mark-to-Market Extension Act of 2001
       o Introduced July 23, 2001; Passed by House September 24, 2001; Never passed
           by Senate; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 2589 revises Section 8 and other multifamily housing mortgage
           assistance programs. For example, vouchers, rent restructuring, “look-back”
           project eligibility, and housing insurance restructuring programs are included.
           The mark-to-market program is extended through 2006.

•   H.R. 3206: Home Ownership Expansion and Opportunities Act of 2001
       o Introduced November 1, 2001; Never passed by House or Senate; Never
           signed into law
       o H.R. 3206 permits the Government National Mortgage Association to
           guarantee securities through the use of certain conventional mortgages.

•   H.R. 3755: Zero Downpayment Act of 2004
       o Introduced February 3, 2004; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o H.R. 3755 would permit the Department of Housing and Urban Development
           to insure single family primary residences for first-time homebuyers who do
           not make a down-payment. Applicants must participate in mortgage
           counseling, and in certain circumstances, foreclosure prevention counseling.
           No more than ten percent of the mortgages held by the Federal Housing
           Administration may qualify for this program.

•   H.R. 4110: FHA Single Family Loan Limit Adjustment Act of 2004
       o Introduced April 1, 2004; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
       o Please see H.R. 176
•   H.R. 5121: Expanding American Ownership Act of 2006
       o Introduced April 6, 2006; Passed by House July 25, 2006; Never passed by
           Senate; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 5121 raises the maximum insurable amount of a home to be equal to the
           full median price of area homes. With regards to FHA mortgage loans, the
           bill extends the maximum length of the loan from 35 to 40 years and removes
          the requirement of a three percent down-payment. H.R. 5121 also revises the
          mortgage insurance premium structure.

•   H.R. 5503: FHA Multi Family Loan Limit Adjustment Act
       o Introduced May 25, 2006; Passed by House September 27, 2006; Never
           passed by Senate; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 5503 increases the FHA loan limits in high cost areas for the following
           types of housing: rental, cooperative, rehabilitation, neighborhood
           conservation, moderate income, displaced family, condominiums, and housing
           for the elderly.

•   H.R. 5640: American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity Act of 2000
       o Introduced December 5, 2000; Passed by House December 5, 2000; Passed by
           Senate December 7, 2000; Signed into law December 27, 2000
       o H.R. 5640 affords greater protection to consumers with regards to mortgage
           insurance cancellations and offers grants to provide downpayment assistance
           to Section 8 tenants. The bill addresses standards for manufactured homes and
           eliminates the National Manufactured Home Advisory Council. Programs and
           services related to rural housing and housing for the elderly or for disabled
           families are also included.

•   H.R. 811: American Dream Downpayment Act
       o Introduced April 8, 2003; Passed by Senate November 24, 2003; Passed by
           House December 8, 2003; Signed into law December 16, 2003
       o H.R. 811 amends the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act
           and offers down-payment assistance to low-income, first-time home buyers
           through the use of grants to state and local governments. The bill revises
           certain criteria for hybrid adjustable rate mortgages and increases the loan
           limits for FHA multifamily loans.

•   S. 1163: FHA Multifamily Housing Mortgage Loan Limit Adjustment Act of
    2001
        o Introduced July 11, 2001; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
        o S. 1163 increases mortgage loan limits for multifamily housing mortgage
           insurance.

•   S. 1620: Home Ownership Expansion Act of 2001
        o Introduced November 1, 2001; Never passed by House or Senate; Never
           signed into law
       o S. 1620 would permit the guaranteeing of conventional mortgage-backed
         securities.

•   S. 2169: PROMISE (Promoting Refinancing Opportunities for Mortgages
    Impacted by the Subprime Emergency) Act of 2007
        o Introduced October 16, 2007; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
        o S. 2169 gives the Director of the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
           Oversight of the Department of Housing and Urban Development authority to
           suspend, modify or lift the limitation on growth provision in the Fannie Mae
           Consent Decree and the voluntary temporary growth limitation in the Freddie
           Mac Letter. The Director also is authorized to increase the mortgage portfolio
           limitations of both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac by at least 10 percent. The
           bill then stipulates that 85 percent of this increase should be set aside for
           refinancing subprime mortgages that are at risk of foreclosure. The definition
           of subprime mortgages is at the discretion of the Director.

•   S. 3535: Expanding American Homeownership Act of 2006
        o Introduced June 19, 2006; Never passed by House or Senate; Never signed
           into law
        o See also H.R. 5121. S. 3535 introduces various changes to conforming loan
           limits, loan terms, cash investment requirements, mortgage insurance
           premiums, insurance for condominiums, and insurance for manufactured
           homes.

•   S. 256 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005
        o Introduced February 1, 2005; Passed Senate March 10, 2005; Passed House
           April 14, 2005; Signed into law April 20, 2005
        o S. 256 revises the conditions for filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy and includes
           language to discourage repeat filings and abuse of the bankruptcy system.
           The bill also outlines penalties for creditor abuse, incorporates means tests for
           bankruptcy filings, increases the length of time between Chapter 7 bankruptcy
           filings from six to eight years, and mandates credit counseling for debtors.

•   H.R.685: Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005
       o Introduced February 9, 2005; Never signed into law
       o See S. 256

•   H.R. 975: Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2003
       o Introduced February 27, 2003; Passed House March 19, 2003; Never signed
           into law
       o See S. 256

•   H.R.975: Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2003
       o Introduced February 27, 2003; Passed House March 26, 2003; Never signed
          into law
       o See S. 256

•   S. 1920: Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2004
        o Introduced November 21, 2003; Passed Senate November 25, 2003; Passed
           House January 28, 2004; Never signed into law
        o See S. 256

•   H.R. 1529: Involuntary Bankruptcy Improvement Act of 2003
       o Introduced April 1, 2003; Passed House June 10, 2003; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 1529 amends Federal bankruptcy law so that a court may dismiss false or
          fraudulent involuntary bankruptcy petitions. The court may also order that
          consumer reporting agencies remove information pertaining to the bankruptcy
          petition.

•   H.R. 1860: To Amend the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer
    Protection Act of 2005…
       o Introduced April 26, 2005; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 1860 amends the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer
           Protection Act of 2005 to prevent a court from using a means-test as a way to
           prevent or dismiss a Chapter 7 bankruptcy if the following apply: 1) debtor is
           currently on active duty and or has returned from active duty within the last
           180 days; 2) debtor is engaged in some form of homeland security activity
           (for at least 60 days) or has completed the activity within the last 180 days; 3)
           debtor was in Reserves and called to active duty after September 11, 2001.

•   H.R. 2060: To Amend the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer
    Protection Act of 2005…
       o Introduced May 3, 2005; Never signed into law
       o See H.R. 1860.

•   H.R. 665: Financial Services Modernization Act
       o Introduced February 10, 1999; Never signed into law
       o H.R. 665 permits bank holding companies to participate in any activity that
           the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and the Secretary of Treasury deem
           to be financial; subsidiaries of national banks may also participate in financial
           activities. In addition, the bill outlines cases where a bank holding company
           may participate in non-financial activities.

•   H.R. 1375: Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2004
       o Introduced March 20, 2003; Passed House March 18, 2004; Never signed into
           law
       o H.R. 1375 revises regulations on national bank shareholder elections, capital
           requirements, and dividend declarations. Furthermore, the bill waives the
          notice requirement for certain mergers and permits foreign banks at federal
           agencies to receive deposits from U.S. citizens/residents.
          o Savings associations are offered parity with banks with respect to investment
            adviser and broker-dealer requirements and they may merge or consolidate
            with any non-depository institution affiliate. In addition, H.R. 1375 increases
            to five percent of capital and surplus the amount a savings association may
            invest in small businesses and removes the percentage of assets limitation on
            savings associations when making small business loans.
          o The bill amends federal law by allowing interest-bearing business accounts.
            H.R. 1375 revises regulations on interest payments by federal reserve banks
            and permits a depository institution’s reserve ratio to be zero.

   •   H.R 3951: Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2002
          o Introduced March 13, 2002; Never signed into law
          o H.R. 3951 revises requirements for national banks including dividend
             calculations, voting procedures, requirements for establishing intrastate
             branches, and capital equivalency deposits for foreign banks. The bill
             modifies investment and mergers/consolidations regulations for savings
             associations, offers parity for savings associations, and clarifies the citizenship
             of federal savings associations. Credit unions may offer 15 year loans and
             check cashing and money transfer services; furthermore, H.R. 3951 revises
             credit union governance procedures and securities investment regulations.
             Depository institutions would have fewer restrictions on interstate mergers.

   •   S. 2856 Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act
           o Introduced May 18, 2006; Passed Senate May 25, 2006; Passed House
              September 27, 2006; Signed into law October 13, 2006
           o The Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act (FSRRA) allows the Federal
              Reserve to pay interest on certain reserve balances of depository banks. The
              Act reduces reserve requirements from three to14 percent to zero percent.
              Provisions pertaining to national banks include simplifying dividend
              calculations, changing shareholder voting requirements, and expanding banks'
              abilities to make community development investments.
           o S. 2856 offers parity to savings associations. Credit unions may increase the
              length of the loans they offer from 12 to 15 years and may offer check cashing
              services to members. With respect to depository institutions, the Act repeals
              certain reporting requirements on insider lending.

   •   H.R. 3505: Financial Regulatory Relief Act of 2005
          o Introduced July 28, 2005; Passed House March 8, 2006; Never signed into law
          o See S. 2856.


Matching Procedure

The matching of the lobbying and HMDA databases is a tedious task that needs to be done
manually using company names. We start with all the companies in the lobbying database
and perform a first stage of matching with HMDA based on company names. Then, we go
through the unmatched companies filing lobbying expense reports one by one manually to
mark any mergers and acquisitions (or other events) that might have induced a name change.
Once we obtain a list of previous and current names for each company, we apply a second-
stage matching based on an algorithm that finds potential matches by searching for common
words in the name strings. After the algorithm narrows down the potential matches of
lobbying firms among the HMDA lenders, we go through the list one by one once again to
determine the right match.

In order to be able to capture the full extent of the lobbying activities carried out by an entity,
we meticulously examine the corporate structure of the firms that appear in the lobbying
database and that might be matched to particular HMDA lenders based on our algorithm.
This is because, in many cases, we encounter firms that are not exactly the same but are
linked in a corporate sense. Based on the affiliation between the lobbying company and the
matches, we enter the lobbying amounts under four different variables: amount spent by the
lender itself, amount spent by the lender’s parent company, amount spent by the lender’s
affiliates, and amount spent by the lender’s subsidiary. To illustrate with an example,
Countrywide Financial Corp is a bank-holding company that owns Countrywide Home
Loans, Inc., Countrywide Bank N.A., Countrywide Mortgage Ventures, LLC, and
Countrywide Real Estate Finance. Both Countrywide Financial Corp and Countrywide
Home Loans, Inc. report lobbying expenses and all subsidiaries of Countrywide Financial
Corp but not the bank-holding company itself, file HMDA information. In this case, we
enter the lobbying expense of Countrywide Financial Corp as that of the “parent” in our
merged database for all the subsidiaries. The amount spent by Countrywide Home Loans,
Inc. is recorded as the lender’s own lobbying expense (“self”) while the same amount is
entered as that of the “sister” for the other affiliates in the HMDA database. Although it is
not the case in this example, it is also possible that the firm filing the lobbying expense report
might be a subsidiary while the parent company does not appear in the lobbying database but
only in the HMDA database. Such cases are recorded in the form of a fourth variable,
lobbying expense of the “child”. If there are no parent companies or affiliates or subsidiaries
or the company itself does not appear in the lobbying database, the corresponding lobbying
variable is set to zero.
                                  Table A1: List of Issues
Code   Issue
ACC    Accounting
ADV    Advertising
AER    Aerospace
AGR    Agriculture
ALC    Alcohol & Drug Abuse
ANI    Animals
APP    Apparel/Clothing Industry/Textiles
ART    Arts/Entertainment
AUT    Automotive Industry
AVI    Aviation/Aircraft/ Airlines
BAN    Banking
BNK    Bankruptcy
BEV    Beverage Industry
BUD    Budget/Appropriations
CHM    Chemicals/Chemical Industry
CIV    Civil Rights/Civil Liberties
CAW    Clean Air & Water (Quality)
CDT    Commodities (Big Ticket)
COM    Communications/ Broadcasting/ Radio/TV
CPI    Computer Industry
CSP    Consumer Issues/Safety/ Protection
CON    Constitution
CPT    Copyright/Patent/ Trademark
DEF    Defense
DOC    District of Columbia
DIS    Disaster Planning/Emergencies
ECN    Economics/Economic Development
EDU    Education
ENG    Energy/Nuclear
ENV    Environmental/Superfund
FAM    Family Issues/Abortion/ Adoption
FIRE   Firearms/Guns/ Ammunition
FIN    Financial Institutions/Investments/ Securities
FOO    Food Industry (Safety, Labeling, etc.)
FOR    Foreign Relations
FUE    Fuel/Gas/Oil
GAM    Gaming/Gambling/ Casino
GOV    Government Issues
HCR    Health Issues
HOU    Housing
IMM    Immigration
IND    Indian/Native American Affairs
INS    Insurance
LBR    Labor Issues/Antitrust/ Workplace
LAW    Law Enforcement/Crime/ Criminal Justice
MAN    Manufacturing
MAR    Marine/Maritime/ Boating/Fisheries
                               Table A1: List of Issues
Code   Issue
MIA    Media (Information/ Publishing)
MED    Medical/Disease Research/ Clinical Labs
MMM    Medicare/Medicaid
MON    Minting/Money/ Gold Standard
NAT    Natural Resources
PHA    Pharmacy
POS    Postal
RRR    Railroads
RES    Real Estate/Land Use/Conservation
REL    Religion
RET    Retirement
ROD    Roads/Highway
SCI    Science/Technology
SMB    Small Business
SPO    Sports/Athletics
TAX    Taxation/Internal Revenue Code
TEC    Telecommunications
TOB    Tobacco
TOR    Torts
TRD    Trade (Domestic & Foreign)
Table A2: Lobbying Report Filed by Bear Stearns
Table A3: Lobbying Report Filed by Citigroup
                                                             Table A4. Effect of Lobbying on Loan-to-Income Ratio: Additional Robustness Checks
                                                                          Dependent variable: Loan-to-income ratio at (lender, MSA, year) level

                                                                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)                   (5)               (6)                (7)
                                                                                                                                 Alternative        Alternative                              Lobbying
                                                                                                                                                                           Scaled
                                                                                                 MSA-             Drop           measure of         measure of                             expenditures
                                                                                                                                                                          lobbying                             Post-2005
                                                                                                clusters         outliers         lobbying           lobbying                               (including
                                                                                                                                                                        expenditures
                                                                                                                                expenditures      expenditures II                          associations)
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), lagged                                      0.002***         0.002***         0.005***            0.002***            0.008***           0.002***            0.0004
                                                                                                 [0.001]          [0.001]          [0.001]             [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.001]            [0.001]
Lobbying expenditures on specific issues (in logs), lagged*Dummy=1 if year>=2005                                                                                                                                0.007***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.001]
Assets (in logs)                                                                                0.006***         0.004***         0.006***            0.006***            0.006***           0.006***           0.006***
                                                                                                 [0.001]          [0.000]          [0.000]             [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]
Market share of lender                                                                          3.017***         2.032***         3.011***            3.017***            3.019***           3.017***           2.999***
                                                                                                 [0.111]          [0.069]          [0.090]             [0.090]             [0.090]            [0.090]            [0.090]
Average income of loan applicants (in logs)                                                    -0.031***        -0.014***         -0.031***           -0.031***           -0.031***          -0.031***         -0.031***
                                                                                                 [0.002]          [0.001]           [0.001]             [0.001]             [0.001]            [0.001]           [0.001]
Number of observations                                                                          406,035          399,984           406,035             406,035             406,035            406,035
R-squared                                                                                         0.12             0.16              0.12                0.12                0.12               0.12
MSA fixed effects                                                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes               Yes                Yes
Year fixed effects                                                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes               Yes                Yes
Lender fixed effects                                                                               Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes               Yes                Yes
MSA*year fixed effects                                                                             Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes               Yes                Yes
The regressions are run on a lender-MSA-year panel. Lobbying on specific issues refers to lobbying on bills and regulations related to mortgage lending and securitization. In column (2), we drop the top and bottom
first percentile of loan-to-income ratio and lobbying expenditures. In column (3), lobbying expenditures on specific issues are estimated by an alternative method, namely, by splitting total lobbying expenditures among
various issues using share of lobbying reports listing the specific issues as weights. Column (4) uses another alternative measure of lobbying expenditures, which are scaled by a measure of the importance of the law
and regulations for which the firm lobbies, giving higher weight to lobbying on bills that appear more often in the lobbying reports. In column (5), lobbying expenditures on specific issues are scaled by the assets of the
lender. Column (6) augments lobbying expenditures by the lender with expenditures by associations of which the lender is a member. The lobbying expenditure of associations is split among the members in accordance
with the size of the lenders. Column (7) adds a variable that interacts lobbying expenditures with a post-2005 dummy. See text for details. Standard errors denoted in parentheses are clustered at the MSA-level in
column (1) and lender-MSA level in columns (2)-(6). ***, ** and * represent statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
