                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           FINANCIALLY FRAGILE HOUSEHOLDS:
                              EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS

                                         Annamaria Lusardi
                                         Daniel J. Schneider
                                           Peter Tufano

                                        Working Paper 17072
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17072


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We would like to thank TNS Global and, in particular, Bertina Bus, Maria Eugenia Garcia Neder,
Ellen Sills-Levy, and Bob Neuhaus. We are grateful for the comments from our colleagues, seminar
participants at Columbia Business School, the American Economic Association meetings, the Association
for Public Policy Analysis and Management conference, and especially from Sumit Agarwal, George
Akerlof, Arie Kaptein, Adair Morse, Karen Pence, Kartini Shastry, the participants in the Spring 2011
Conference for the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Washington, D.C., March 17-18, 2011,
and the editors, David Romer, and Justin Wolfers. Lusardi gratefully acknowledges financial support
from Netspar. Schneider thanks the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (Grant
No. DGE-0646086) and Princeton University for financial support. Tufano thanks the HBS Division
of Research and Faculty Development for financial support for this work. We are grateful to Andrea
Ryan and Dan Quan for research assistance. The views expressed herein do not reflect those of TNS
Global or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Annamaria Lusardi, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financially Fragile Households: Evidence and Implications
Annamaria Lusardi, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano
NBER Working Paper No. 17072
May 2011
JEL No. D14,D91

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines households’ financial fragility by looking at their capacity to come up with $2,000
in 30 days. Using data from the 2009 TNS Global Economic Crisis survey, we document widespread
financial weakness in the United States: Approximately one quarter of Americans report that they
would certainly not be able to come up with such funds, and an additional 19% would do so by relying
at least in part on pawning or selling possessions or taking payday loans. If we consider the respondents
who report being certain or probably not able to cope with an ordinary financial shock of this size,
we find that nearly half of Americans are financially fragile. While financial fragility is more severe
among those with low educational attainment and no financial education, families with children, those
who suffered large wealth losses, and those who are unemployed, a sizable fraction of seemingly “middle
class” Americans also judge themselves to be financially fragile. We examine the coping methods
people use to deal with shocks. While savings is used most often, relying on family and friends, using
formal and alternative credit, increasing work hours, and selling items are also used frequently to deal
with emergencies, especially for some subgroups. Household finance researchers must look beyond
precautionary savings to understand how families cope with risk. We also find evidence of a “pecking
order” of coping methods in which savings appears to be first in the ordering. Finally, the paper compares
the levels of financial fragility and methods of coping among eight industrialized countries. While
there are differences in coping ability across countries, there is general evidence of a consistent ordering
of coping methods


Annamaria Lusardi                                    Peter Tufano
George Washington School of Business                 Harvard Business School
2201 G Street, NW                                    Baker Library 359
Washington, DC 20052                                 Soldiers Field
and NBER                                             Boston, MA 02163
alusardi@gwu.edu                                     and NBER
                                                     ptufano@hbs.edu
Daniel J. Schneider
Princeton University
Department of Sociology
Office of Population Research
Princeton, NJ 08544
djschnei@princeton.edu
Introduction
        Economists and policymakers have focused on various elements of consumer financial
behavior to gauge the overall well-being of households and of the economy.              For example, the
household savings rate, its converse—the rate of consumer spending, and household borrowing
levels are commonly used aggregate metrics. On the micro-level, researchers have studied the
distribution of wealth across the population, for example to assess households’ abilities to afford to
retire. Other research examines households’ abilities to withstand financial shocks, usually by
looking at their savings levels and access to credit. Yet other work examines bankruptcy filings as a
metric of financial problems. Our work builds upon this large literature, but characterizes financial
fragility by examining households’ abilities to access emergency funds from any source.               In
particular, we study US households’ abilities to come up with $2,000 in 30 days, and we compare
their coping ability with that of households in seven other industrialized countries.
        Using this $2,000/30 day metric of financial fragility, we find widespread financial weakness
in America: one quarter of Americans report that they certainly could not come up with the funds
needed to cope with such a shock within thirty days, and an additional 19% would cope at least in
part by selling or pawning possessions or taking payday loans. Adopting a broader definition of
financial fragility, we find that almost half of all households report that they certainly not or could
probably not come up with funds to deal with an ordinary financial shock of this size. We examine
the cross-sectional distribution of financial fragility and we show that it is not just a poor person’s
problem: a material fraction of the solidly middle class is pessimistic about their ability to come up
with $2,000 in a month. Our work allows us to begin to characterize a “pecking order” of coping
mechanisms, broadly rationalize them on the basis of direct and indirect costs, and suggest some
implications of these patterns. Finally, we compare the levels of financial fragility and methods of
coping across eight industrialized countries. While there exist differences in coping ability, we find a
largely consistent ordering of coping methods.
        This textured description of households’ financial fragility and coping mechanisms, while
raising many questions, is useful to advance economic research, public policy, and business practice.
We make two principal contributions to the research literature. First, the fragility measure we
propose may be a powerful metric that enlightens our understanding of important household
decisions. In related work, we have found that our simple measure of financial fragility is more
predictive than traditional demographic data in understanding consumer behavior, in particular
decisions with respect to cutting back health care usage and with respect to individuals’ attitudes
about financial regulation (Lusardi, Schneider and Tufano, 2010; Tufano, 2011). Second, just as

                                                                                                      2
pecking order theory led to advances in understanding of corporate financial decisions, we hope that
our work will stimulate new economic research on why households have certain ordered methods
for coping—and what the implications are for the interactions between various financial markets
and decisions.
        We believe that a full consideration of financial fragility will enlighten public policy.      In
advocacy and policy circles, asset building for long horizon goals (retirement, education, small
business development) has understandably been the primary focus. While the US government
provides extensive direct and indirect subsidies to long-horizon savings, there is much less, if any,
explicit policy related to short-term emergency savings.         For example, home borrowing (and
indirectly long-term savings in equity buildup) is tax advantaged through home mortgage deductions
and long-term investing is advantaged through long-term capital gains rates. At the same time,
income earned from emergency savings accounts receives no special treatment. To the contrary,
asset limits on many social programs actively discourage low-income families from building up
savings. While borrowing from family and friends is a critical element of household coping, it is
virtually invisible in public policy. Finally, discussions of regulating and banning high-cost, short-
term borrowing schemes do not typically acknowledge their place in the pecking order of coping
mechanisms.
        Finally, the level of financial fragility we identify suggests business opportunities for firms to
provide better products for households. For example, a debit card structure with an associated
credit line or overdraft facility represents two elements of the pecking order we observe, drawing
first from savings and then from credit. However, our work suggests that there might be the
possibility to draw first from savings, then from a constrained pool of friends and family funds, and
finally from credit.
        In the remainder of the paper we briefly summarize some of the related literature on
financial fragility and coping, describe our data source, summarize the results on financial fragility
levels, analyze the cross-sectional determinants of coping, describe the apparent hierarchy of coping
mechanisms, and report on cross-national comparisons. We conclude with a discussion of the
implications of our work.


Related Research
        Most of the work in both macroeconomics and microeconomics on how individuals manage
short-term risks and their exposure to shocks focuses on precautionary savings and asset levels.
According to theory, risk-averse individuals who face uninsurable risks accumulate wealth to shield

                                                                                                        3
themselves against shocks (Deaton 1992, Carroll, 1997). But many empirical studies, including one
based on recent data from the Financial Capability Study (Lusardi, 2010), find that, in fact, many
households hold few or no assets and no emergency funds and that they are very vulnerable to
shocks (Caner and Wolff, 2004). Others have documented the paucity of assets among certain
groups of the population (Oliver and Shapiro, 1995; Conley, 1999; Havemann and Wolff, 2004;
Bucks, Kennickell, and Moore, 2004; Sherraden, 2005). It has been very difficult to evaluate the
strength of the precautionary motive in the economy, and estimates of the amount of precautionary
wealth have varied considerably in the literature, from zero or very small values (Skinner, 1988) to
moderate values of less than ten percent of wealth (Hurst, Lusardi, Kennickell and Torralba, 2010)
to values of fifty percent of household wealth (Carroll and Samwick, 1997, 1998), depending on the
empirical specifications and the datasets under consideration.
       Looking at assets alone may be misleading. Households’ assets may be low not because they
did not accumulate wealth, but because they have already experienced shocks that depleted savings.
There are also numerous, often unobservable, characteristics about the individual and the
environment that determine how much wealth people wish to hold, including risk aversion, rate of
time preferences, and the subjective probability of facing shocks, for which we often do not have
good data (see Deaton, 1992, and Lusardi and Browning, 1996, for an overview of theoretical
models of precautionary savings).
       Most importantly, holding assets is not the only way in which individuals can buffer
themselves against shocks. Individuals could access credit for example, via credit cards, home equity
lines of credit, or loans on retirement accounts, all of which are options that have expanded
considerably over the past four decades. Indeed, in many theoretical models, positive amounts of
precautionary savings are generated by imposing liquidity constraints that prevent the individual
from borrowing or drawing down the assets to zero (Deaton, 1991). Given the significant access to
personal credit that has, until recently, been available in the US, these assumptions are debatable.
Second, as emphasized in the sociological literature, individuals can and do rely on networks of
family and friends to cope with unexpected financial shocks (Biggs, 1998; Sarkasian and Gerstel,
2004; Henley, Danziger, and Offer, 2005; Harknett and Knab, 2007). Some economic models have
argued that the family can be a very effective way to insure against longevity risk and can provide
insurance in place of or perhaps better than financial or insurance markets (Kotlikoff and Spivak,
1981). Moreover, there is evidence of significant borrowing and lending within the family and with
relatives and friends. For example, 24% of all Americans claim to have borrowed money from a
family member or friend during the Great Recession (Taylor, Morin, and Wang, 2010) and 9% of

                                                                                                   4
Americans reported having outstanding loans to family or friends in 2004 (El Hage, Schneider, and
Tufano, 2006). While economic models of precautionary savings have not incorporated this channel
into their schemes, other models have considered the possibility that individuals might make
adjustments on other margins, for example by increasing the labor supply or sending a non-working
spouse into the labor market.
        These considerations do not exhaust the list of activities that people can engage in when
faced with a shock. For example, according to Aguiar and Hurst (2005), the unemployed increase
their home production of goods, reducing their expenditure on goods but not their consumption as
much. Also, many hold non-financial assets that may be sold (car(s), furniture, jewelry, and so on),
items that are not normally included in measures of wealth (or liquid wealth).
        One feature we would like to better incorporate into existing models of savings is the wide
heterogeneity in household behavior that has been documented in all existing savings studies
(Browning and Lusardi, 1996) and that is documented in this paper as well. Heterogeneity in
behavior may reflect differences in economic circumstances and opportunity (e.g., education or
inheritances), differences in attitudes and preferences, or differences in financial capabilities (Lusardi,
2009). On the latter point, there is mounting evidence that many individuals, in the United States
and elsewhere, are not familiar with basic financial concepts, such as interest compounding,
inflation, and basic asset pricing (see Lusardi (2008) for an overview), and especially risk
diversification (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a). Variations in households’ abilities to cope could reflect
these factors. Moreover, the risk preferences used in many neo-classical models of saving seem at
odds with the prevalence and amount of gambling in large sectors of the population (Tufano et al.,
2011). In addition to naiveté or specific risk preferences, gambling may proxy for different attitudes
toward the future and may be related to households’ preparedness to cope with financial shocks.
        The financial crisis may heighten heterogeneity insofar as individuals were affected
differentially by shocks that accompanied the crisis, i.e., a surge in the unemployment rate and a
sharp decline in both the stock market and the housing market. Households’ abilities to cope would
likely be a function of the extent to which they experienced these shocks.


Data and Outline of Approach
        In this paper, we use an indicator of financial fragility that overcomes some of the problems
of the measures described above. We rely on a self-assessed measure of capacity to deal with
financial shocks, regardless of the source of funds. Thus, we ask the individual to assess whether, for
example, his/her assets, capacity to borrow, network of family and friends, or other strategies can

                                                                                                         5
shield him/her against shocks. Specifically, we ask respondents: “How confident are you that you could
come up with $2,000 if an unexpected need arose within the next month?” Respondents could reply, “I am
certain I could come up with the full $2,000,” “I could probably come up with $2,000,” “I could probably not come
up with $2,000,” or “I am certain I could not come up with $2,000.” They could also state that they do not
know, or they could refuse to answer. Because we are dealing with an unexpected event in the
future, it is important to ask about confidence rather than present a yes or no question. The $2,000
figure reflects the order of magnitude of the cost of an unanticipated major car repair, a large co-
payment on a medical expense, legal expenses, or a home repair.1 Our question asks whether
individuals could “come up with” the funds—not whether they have them in the form of savings.
This is again important, as individuals may not rely on saving only in dealing with shocks.
         This question has been used in other settings. The Australian Household Expenditure
Survey asked a similar question in 2002 (Worthington, 2003). In fact, these sorts of questions are
common in the financial planning literature, in which having emergency funds is one of the
recommendations that financial planners provide to households, but in which emergency funds are
sometimes considered synonymous with savings (Chieffe and Rakes, 1999). In our discussion, we
use the terms “capacity to cope” and “come up with the needed funds” interchangeably, although
the latter is more exact.
      While we believe this question is informative, it is important to acknowledge potential
limitations of its framing. First, there could be ambiguity in how respondents interpret the phrase
“could come up with $2,000.” Most importantly, there may be differences among respondents in
whether they would consider using savings that they already have as “coming up with” the funds.
Second, the amount we have chosen—$2,000—is for many respondents rather low and potentially
below the three months of income or expenses that many planners recommend individuals hold as
an emergency fund. Third, it is not clear whether respondents are thinking of a single shock or a
shock that is linked to a sequence of other shocks that would make coping difficult. We also do not
know whether respondents are thinking of a consumption shock (for example, the car breaking
down) or an income shock (becoming unemployed), which would have rather different
consequences. The time frame (30 days) may also influence what people can do and the cost of the
methods one can rely upon. Finally, it should be noted that this question was asked in a period of
crisis and responses may not reflect households’ ability to deal with shocks in general or in different

1
  Brobeck (2008) reports that low-income families claim to need about $1500 in savings for emergencies.
Edmunds.com, the auto web site, suggests that the replacement of an auto transmission can cost $2,000.
http://www.edmunds.com/ownership/techcenter/articles/43836/article.html.


                                                                                                               6
macroeconomic conditions. Answers could also reflect the higher uncertainty that exists in times of
crises, rather than actual financial fragility.
      To gauge how individuals would cope with a financial shock, survey respondents (except those
who stated that they would certainly be unable to come up with $2,000 in response to the prior
question) were asked: “If you were to face a $2,000 unexpected expense in the next month, how would you get the
funds you need?”2 Respondents were presented with a list of 14 options (plus “other” and “don’t
know”) and were instructed that “if there is one source that you would use, select it. If you would use multiple
sources, please select up to three.” The list of 14 options was randomized onscreen to avoid response-
order bias, and the category labels given below were not part of the survey. The list was composed
of the following methods, grouped by type:
     Savings: (1) draw from savings, (2) liquidate or sell investments, (3) liquidate some retirement investments
      even if it required me to pay a penalty, (4) borrow against my retirement savings at my employer3
     Family/friends: (5) borrow or ask for help from my family, (6) borrow or ask for help from my friends (not
      members of my family
     Traditional credit: (7) use credit cards, (8) open or use a home equity line of credit or take out a second
      mortgage, (9) take out an unsecured loan
     Alternative credit: (10) get a short term payday or payroll advance loan, (11) pawn an asset I own
     Work more: (12) work overtime, get a second job, or another member of my household would work longer or
      go to work
     Selling possessions: (13) sell things I own, except my home, (14) sell my home

        While the list is quite long, it does not necessarily encompass all of the methods that
respondents could use to get funds. For example, respondents could also stop or postpone paying
bills. Moreover, while the grouping is mostly for convenience in exposition, there are differences
even within these groups. For example, drawing from savings is less expensive than liquidating
retirement investments. Most importantly, it is limiting not to have information on coping methods
for those who have stated they are certain that they cannot come up with $2,000 in 30 days.
        These questions were added to a new survey fielded in 13 countries: the TNS Global
Economic Crisis survey. The survey was administered via an online panel by the survey research
firm TNS Global (www.tnsglobal.com) and in collaboration with two of the authors, Lusardi and
Tufano. TNS, which has substantial experience in designing and administering cross-national

2 Respondents in the UK were asked about £1,500 expense, respondents in Canada about a C$2,000 expense, and

respondents in France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, and the Netherlands about a €1,500 expense.
3 Due to the institutional details of certain retirement plans, funds can be accessed prematurely through borrowing.

According to the Financial Capability Survey, 9% of individuals who have self-directed retirement accounts have taken
out a loan from their retirement accounts and 5% have taken a hardship withdrawal (Lusardi, 2010). We include these
coping methods as drawing upon savings, rather than as borrowing from a third party. We also combine items 3 and 4
into a single response for the purposes of presentation.


                                                                                                                   7
surveys, reviewed the questions before they were fielded both in the United States and in other
countries. The various country surveys were fielded between June and September 2009. The
country samples were designed to be nationally representative and were subsequently weighted to
reflect each nation’s population. To the extent that internet access is stratified by socio-economic
status, we expect that the data may under-represent individuals who are the most at risk. This paper
deals primarily with the 2,148 United States survey participants, all of whom were between the ages
of 18 and 65. We also perform an international comparison to assess financial fragility in other
countries. To limit the comparison to countries that are relatively similar to the United States and to
each other in term of economic structure and development of financial markets, we study
respondents in eight high-wealth Western countries: the United States, the United Kingdom,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Portugal. Our final sample is composed of
9,147 observations. Additional information about the survey is available in the Appendix.
        To examine financial fragility in the wake of a financial crisis, the survey includes not only
demographic and economic attributes such as age, gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, presence of
children, and income but also information about wealth, wealth losses, and unemployment.
Specifically, respondents were asked to report current levels of financial assets. Moreover, to capture
recent financial shocks, respondents were asked if they were unemployed and looking for work, and
whether over the past year their wealth had increased (> 10% or 1% – 10%), stayed the same, or
decreased (1% – 10%; 10% – 29%; 30% – 50%; or > 50%). To capture behavioral heterogeneity,
we have also included proxies for financial literacy in general and risk literacy in particular. Following
Bernheim, Garrett, and Maki (2001), we have information on whether individuals were exposed to
financial education in school, a variable which is shown to be correlated with saving later in life.
Moreover, as reported in the Appendix, individuals were asked three questions aimed at measuring
knowledge of risk, which we name risk literacy. Finally, respondents were asked if they had played
the lottery or had engaged in betting on sports or games of chance in the year leading up the
financial crisis.
        In our empirical analysis, described in the next section, we examine American respondents’
perceived capacity to cope with an unexpected expense. Here, we are primarily concerned with
describing the level of coping capacity in the US population and with describing the correlation
between coping capacity and socio-economic and demographic characteristics.                 We tabulate
descriptive statistics and estimate probit models of the relationship between a dichotomous indicator
of confidence in ability to cope and the respondent characteristics. In these and in all analyses, we



                                                                                                        8
handle missing data by including indicators for non-response on covariates in our regression models,
but exclude respondents with missing data on the dependent variable.
         Second, we examine the ways in which US respondents foresee coping with such a financial
shock. Here, we examine the frequency with which different coping methods are named, including
savings but also taking account of a much more complete range of coping options. We next
describe a “pecking order” of coping responses. To establish this ordering, we examine three
indicators: (1) the ways in which coping methods are used in isolation or combined, (2) the
association between different coping methods and confidence in capacity to cope, and (3) the socio-
economic and demographic correlates of each type of coping method. For this final aspect of the
analysis, we estimate six separate probit regressions with the outcome variable being naming a
coping method involving (1) savings, (2) family/friends, (3) mainstream credit, (4) alternative
financial services, (5) additional work, and (6) selling possessions, and the predictors, in each case,
being the demographic and economic covariates described above.
         Third, we provide some comparative analysis, contrasting perceived capacity to cope, coping
methods, and number of coping methods in the United States and in the other seven Western
developed countries in our sample.


Americans’ Financial Fragility
         American’s capacity to cope with shocks is strikingly limited. The first row of Table 1
presents the share of respondents according to whether they could certainly cope with an
unexpected need in the next month that required them to come up with $2,000, probably could do
so, probably could not do so, and certainly could not do so. These figures reveal that half of
Americans report that they would probably or certainly be unable to cope with such an emergency.4
More specifically, 24.9% of respondents reported being certainly able to cope, 25.1% probably able
to cope, 22.2% probably unable to cope, and 27.9% certainly unable to cope.
         This finding is broadly consistent with other studies. For example, when asked whether they
have “set aside emergency or rainy day funds that cover your expenses for 3 months, in case of
sickness, job loss, economic downturn, or other emergencies,” only 49% of respondents in the 2009




4 These statistics exclude respondents who replied that they “did not know” if they could cope with an emergency of this
kind. Including all respondents, about 46% certainly or probably could raise the funds, 47% certainly or probably could not
raise the funds, and the remaining 7% claimed not to know.


                                                                                                                         9
Financial Capability Study responded affirmatively.5 Data from the most recent Survey of Consumer
Finances, fielded in 2007 before the recent prolonged recession, shows that households hold little in
liquid assets, such as checking, saving, and money market mutual funds; as many as 42.4% of
Americans have $2,000 or less in those liquid assets. Numerous studies on wealth have documented
that households have little other than their home and their pensions (Lusardi, 1999; Gustman,
Mitchell, Samwick, and Steinmeier, 1999).
         Another way to examine financial constraints is to look at this question from a different
angle when the constraints are relaxed, i.e, what do people do when they get access to money or
liquidity? Looking at the most recent tax rebate, Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McLelland (2011)
show that consumption and, in particular, vehicle purchases, increased at the time of the economic
stimulus payments disbursed by the US government in mid-2008. Similar findings are encountered
when looking at the use of tax refunds by those more likely to lack liquidity, such as subprime
borrowers. Loan applications and car sales spike precisely at tax rebate time (Adams, Einov, and
Levin, 2009). Stephens (2008) examines the consumption of families after they make the final
vehicle loan payment. Their discretionary income increases, since they do not have to make
additional loan payments, and consumption is found to increase as well. Stephens (2003) has also
shown that consumption is influenced by the timing of Social Security checks; large increases in
consumption are found the day of and the day immediately following the arrival of the monthly
Social Security check. Access to credit has a similar effect on consumption (Goss and Souleles,
2002). These studies evidence the “tightness” of many households’ budgets, pointing, from a
different angle, to their fragility.
         Another measure of financial fragility related to our $2000 in 30 days metric is the ability to
make ends meet. The Pew Research Center for the People and the Press has regularly asked a
nationally representative sample of Americans if they “often don’t have enough money to make ends
meet.” Forty-two percent of Americans completely or mostly agreed with that statement in 2009.
Similarly, nearly half of survey respondents in the Financial Capability Study reported facing
difficulties in covering monthly expenses and paying bills (Lusardi, 2010).



5
   In consultation with the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Literacy,
the FINRA Investor Education Foundation supported a national study of the financial capability of American adults,
named the Financial Capability Study. The overarching research objectives were to benchmark key indicators of financial
capability and evaluate how these indicators vary with underlying demographic, behavioral, attitudinal, and financial
literacy characteristics. For detail, see Lusardi (2010) and http://www.finrafoundation.org/resources/research/p120478



                                                                                                                   10
        The capacity to cope with a financial emergency is not only generally limited, but also varies
significantly with the economic and demographic characteristics of individuals and their households.
We observe a pronounced gradient in capacity to cope by income and education. While those with
higher income and greater educational attainment report higher capacity to cope, a high proportion
of individuals at middle class levels of income report they are certainly or probably not able to cope.
Moreover, even among those with some higher education, for example some college, more than half
judge that they would be certainly or probably unable to cope. While inability to cope is severe
among the less-educated and low-income populations, this phenomenon is not limited to the poor
or to a small group of the population. It seems somewhat unbelievable that nearly a quarter of
households making between $100,000 and $150,000 claim not to be able to raise $2,000 in a month,
but this fact may be less shocking when one considers costs of living in urban areas, costs of
housing and childcare, substantial debt service, and other factors (for an earlier discussion, see
Warren and Tyagi, 2003). During the 2008 presidential election, this issue came to the fore when
there was a vigorous debate about what “rich” and “middle class” means in our economy.
Moreover, as Venti and Wise (2001) documented, there is a sizable fraction of high lifetime income
households who have very little savings, again confirming the wide heterogeneity we observe in
household saving behavior.
        Similarly, while financial fragility is more pronounced among the young, many of those in
older age groups, who are presumably close to retirement and at a point in life when their wealth
accumulation should at its peak, report having difficulty in coping with a financial shock. Women
are also less likely to be able to cope with shocks than men. There also appear to be differences in
ability to copy by race/ethnicity with African Americans (and those of other race/ethnicity) more
likely to report being unable (certainly or probably) to deal with a shock, followed closely by
Hispanics. Respondents living in households that include minor children are less able to cope than
those that do not, and respondents living in households with their parents are also less able to cope
than those that do not.
        These characteristics are again consistent with the findings from the Financial Capability
Study (Lusardi, 2010) and other studies have also documented the paucity of wealth among certain
groups, such as minorities (Smith, 1995), which is confirmed here when looking at this new measure
of financial fragility.
        The financial crisis is a clear contributor to financial fragility. Those who suffered wealth
losses, particularly losses in excess of 30%, report greater inability to cope. This may explain why
even some people with sizable absolute amounts of wealth judge that they are unlikely to be able to

                                                                                                    11
cope—lowered wealth in conjunction with high fixed costs and inflexible commitments may leave
little room for flexibility. Not surprisingly, the unemployed are also much more financially fragile,
with just about one-third reporting they would certainly or probably be able to cope, and 41%
reporting they would certainly be unable to cope.
       Table 2 reports a multivariate analysis of the relationships between economic and
demographic characteristics and capacity to cope, presenting marginal effects from a probit
regression in which the dependent variable equals one if the respondent is probably or certainly able
to cope and zero if the respondent is probably or certainly not able to cope. We find that many of
the relationships described in the bivariate analysis hold true in the multivariate analysis. First, the
financial crisis appears to have diminished respondents’ abilities to cope with shocks: Those with
severe wealth losses and the unemployed are particularly vulnerable to shocks; wealth losses of more
than 50% decrease the ability to cope by 28 percentage points and being unemployed decreases the
ability to copy by 10 percentage points. Some groups, such as women and those with children are
much less able to deal with shocks, even after accounting for their characteristics and economic
circumstances. Moreover, having higher educational attainment improves the ability to deal with
shocks, even after accounting for income, wealth, and wealth losses. In the multivariate setting, we
see that the ability to cope increases with income, but only for those with income above $60,000.
Financial assets can also help smooth shocks, and we see a monotonic increase in the ability to deal
with shocks with increasing values of wealth above $2,000. Generally, these findings speak to the
quality of the data, as many of the relationships reported in the multivariate regressions have the
expected sign. These findings also speak against respondents simply “button mashing” to go quickly
through the questions. For example, the regressions show that, as we would expect, levels of wealth
below $2,000 are associated with an inability to deal with shocks of that magnitude.
       The picture that emerges from this analysis is that many Americans are vulnerable to shocks.
This vulnerability extends to large groups of the population, including those with higher than
average income and higher educational attainment. Women, those with children, and those living
with parents expressed a vulnerability to shocks, even after accounting for demographic and
economic characteristics.
       Model 1 (in Table 2) includes just standard demographic variables, but Model 2 adds
additional factors to explain variation in the ability to cope: (1) a dichotomous variable equal to one
if the respondent engaged in gambling, (2) a dichotomous variable equal to one if the respondent
had financial or economic education while in school, and (3) a dichotomous variable equal to one if
the respondent correctly answered the three risk literacy questions (which we take as a measure of

                                                                                                     12
being knowledgeable about risk). After controlling for all of the standard demographics, gamblers
are 7.9 percentage points less likely to be able to come up with $2,000 in a month.                          This could
reflect the depletion of their resources through gambling, a lack of self-control, a willingness to bear
more risk (by having fewer spare resources), or their use of gambling as an (ineffective) means to
take care of their future. On the latter point, a 2006 survey by the Consumer Federation of America
and the Financial Planning Association of a representative sample of more than 1,000 US adults
found that “21% of Americans, and 38% of those with incomes below $25,000, think that winning
the lottery represents the most practical way for them to accumulate several hundred thousand
dollars” (Consumer Federation of America, 2006).
         People who acknowledge having financial education in school are 10 percentage points more
likely to be able to cope, even after controlling for all of the various demographic factors. This is
consistent with previous finding on the effect of knowledge on financial behavior (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2011a; Bernheim, Garrett, and Maki, 2001). This relationship might be causal, or could
reflect some degree of self-selection of educational experiences by certain individuals. We do not
find a relationship between the particular risk literacy measures we tested and the ability to come up
with $2,000 in 30 days.
         These factors begin to suggest that financial fragility may be part of a broader set of
behaviors. We do not normally study savings and gambling together, but the results here suggest a
link between the two, at least for people’s ability to cope with emergencies.6 Moreover, financial
knowledge may also affect the ability to cope with shocks.


Americans’ Methods of Coping with Financial Emergency
         These bivariate and multivariate analyses point to some determinants of financial fragility,
but do not address how Americans cope with emergencies. We now examine how people who have
some capacity to cope do so. This analysis excludes those who reported that they are certain they
could not cope with a shock that requires coming up with $2,000.
           The first row of Table 3 shows that more than half of these respondents (55%) indicate
that they would use multiple coping methods. The first column of Table 3 indicates the share of
respondents selecting each coping method. For convenience, we have aggregated these methods into
six groups: savings, family or friends, mainstream credit, alternative credit, sale of possessions, and

6 This link is made clearer in lottery-linked savings schemes. See Kearney et al. (2011), Tufano et al. (2011), Tufano
(2008), and Cole et al. (2008).



                                                                                                                         13
increased work, but a more disaggregated list is provided at the end of that table. A large proportion
of those reporting an ability to cope select drawing from savings as a coping method (62%), even
though, for some, this method may require liquidating a retirement investment and paying a penalty
(see bottom of Table 3). Drawing from savings is one method individuals rely on, but clearly not
the only one. Approximately one in three (34%) of those who may be able to cope report relying on
family and friends. A similar proportion (31%) would resort to “mainstream credit,” mostly using a
credit card. Others would rely on alternative credit, such as payday loans or pawn shops. Moreover,
close to one in five (19%) would sell their possessions. Taken together with those who would pawn
their possessions, sell their home, or take out a payday loan, 25.7% of respondents who were asked
about coping methods (equal to 18.6% of all respondents) would come up with the funds for an
emergency by resorting to what might be seen as extreme measures. Along with the 27.9% of
respondents who report that they could certainly not cope with an emergency, this suggests that
approximately 46.5% of all respondents are living very close to the financial edge. These findings are
consistent with the wide diffusion of payday lenders. According to Skiba and Tobacman (2008),
payday lenders now have more storefronts in the United States than McDonald’s and Starbucks
combined. Moreover, according to the Financial Capability Study, more than one in five Americans
have used high-cost methods of borrowing, such as payday loans, tax refund loans, auto title loans,
pawn shops, and rent-to-own shops, in the past five years (Lusardi, 2010).
        Another method, which is chosen by 23% of those able to cope, is working more, which
includes working overtime, getting a second job, or increased work by another household member.
These findings highlight that individuals can and plan to adjust on several margins when facing a
shock, relying not only on formal methods such as drawing from saving or borrowing, but also
relying on assistance from networks of family and friends. Moreover, many plan to rely on the labor
margin, changing either hours of work or supply of labor, even though it is not clear that many jobs
allow workers to change their hours of work or that it is easy to find a job in a time of high
unemployment.
        Table 3 also presents the coping methods mentioned by respondents selecting one, two, or
three coping methods. The second column of the table (labeled “One”) shows that savings,
mentioned by 65% of respondents, is the predominant coping strategy among those naming just one
coping strategy. Savings is followed by just using family/friends (13%) and then by just using
mainstream credit (11%). Even smaller shares of respondents would turn to just using alternative
credit providers, just the sale of possessions, or just increased work.



                                                                                                   14
         The third column of Table 3 presents the coping strategies chosen by respondents who
select at least two coping strategies.7 Among these respondents, savings is still the most commonly
mentioned (64%), followed by family/friends and mainstream credit (at 36% and 39% respectively).
While alternative credit, work, and selling possessions were very rarely used in isolation, they are
somewhat more commonly used in combination with one other method, with 8% of respondents
naming an alternative credit provider and a fifth of respondents each mentioning selling possessions
and increasing work. Finally, the last column of Table 3 presents the coping strategies chosen by the
37% of eligible respondents who selected three coping methods.                       Here, we see that savings,
family/friends, and mainstream credit are chosen by at least half of those respondents using several
strategies in combination. Alternative credit (23%), the sale of possessions (37%), and increased
work effort (45%) are all much more common when used in combination. In other words, focusing
on saving or liquid assets to assess people’s ability to weather a shock severely limits the set of what
individuals do or plan to do when facing a shock. But it is also the case that few respondents would
use any coping method other than savings in isolation.
         While these figures show that respondents would use these six general coping strategies in
combination, they do not reveal the specific bundles of coping methods that respondents would
assemble. In order to identify these bundles of emergency support, we can create a two-dimensional
matrix of coping methods for respondents choosing two coping methods and a three-dimensional
matrix of methods for respondents choosing three methods (not presented in tables). These
matrices reveal that, among respondents choosing two coping strategies, the most commonly
assembled bundle is savings and mainstream credit, a combination employed by 24.8% of these
respondents. The next most common bundle is the combination of savings and family/friends
(12.3%) followed by combining two different savings strategies (9.8%). Smaller shares, none greater
than 10%, select the other possible combinations. Among respondents choosing three saving
strategies, the most commonly assembled bundles involve savings and are (1) savings,
family/friends, and mainstream credit (8.6%); (2) savings, family/friends, and increased work
(7.6%); and (3) savings, mainstream credit, and increased work (6.8%). The only common bundle
that did not involve savings was social support, sale of possessions, and increased work (7.9%).
Other combinations in this 6x6x6 matrix are mentioned by smaller shares of the respondents who
choose three strategies, most by no more than 2% of this group.

7 The sum of the percent listing each category of savings strategies is 189%, short of 200% because 11% of respondents
listed two strategies within the same broad category.



                                                                                                                   15
        Table 4 shows that respondents who were highly confident in their ability to cope with
emergency were much more likely to name just one coping strategy. Seventy-two percent of those
who were certain they could cope with the hypothetical emergency selected one coping strategy as
compared with just 26.7% of those who thought it probable that they could not cope with the
emergency.    Conversely, 54.5% of those who thought they could probably not cope with an
emergency selected three coping methods, as compared with just 13% of those who were certain
they could cope.     Together, these pieces of evidence suggest that method of coping, number of
ways of coping, and confidence in ability to cope are tightly bound together. Savings emerges as an
important, but not exclusive, coping strategy: it is the method most commonly used in isolation and
using just one strategy in isolation is associated with higher levels of confidence in ability to cope.
        Table 5 presents additional evidence on the factors that explain the use of each coping
strategy. The first model shows marginal effects from a probit regression predicting the use of
savings as a coping strategy, using the same rich set of variables employed in Table 2. Here, the
sample is not limited to respondents selecting a certain number of strategies and instead includes all
respondents who were asked about methods of coping. Models 2–6 present comparable results for
models in which the respondents selected family/friends, mainstream credit, alternative credit, sale
of possessions, and increased work.
        A look across these six models reveals that measures of economic advantage are linked to
the use of savings and mainstream credit and disadvantage to the use of family/friends and
alternative credit. While income is not significantly associated with selection of any of the six coping
strategies (when the income variables are tested jointly), wealth is strongly positively associated with
selecting savings and mainstream credit, while it is negatively linked with selecting family/friends,
the sale of possessions, and increased work effort. Unemployment, too, is negatively associated with
the selection of savings and mainstream credit and positively related to reliance on family/friends.
There are also strong positive associations between educational attainment and selecting savings as a
coping strategy, with those with a college education being 16.5 percentage points more likely to
select savings than respondents with a high school diploma or less (against an average of 60.6% of
respondents using savings).      There is also a negative relationship between education and the
selection of alternative credit, with those with a college degree 2.9 percentage points and those with
graduate education 2.7 percentage points less likely to select alternative credit (against an average of
10.8% of respondents choosing alternative credit).
        While risk literacy doesn’t relate to the overall ability to cope, it is correlated with the means by
which people intend to cope with shocks. Those who are risk literate are 11 percentage points more

                                                                                                          16
likely to indicate savings as copying strategy and are 7 percentage points less likely to cope with a
shock by selling things. Consistent with other findings, higher financial knowledge is related to
different types of financial decisions and differential use of financial and credit markets (Lusardi and
Tufano, 2009; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b).
        Some demographic markers of stability are also positively associated with selecting savings
and mainstream credit and negatively associated with the choice of other coping methods. For
instance, older respondents are less likely to select family/friends or increased work effort as coping
resources and more likely to indicate mainstream credit or savings. But there are relatively few
notable links between race/ethnicity and coping strategies, one exception being the greater reliance
of Hispanics on family/friends. There are also few significant relationships between marital status
and coping strategies, though there is some weak evidence that respondents who are divorced are
less likely to use savings. Finally, there are some regional differences in use of alternative credit, with
it being relatively less common in the Northeast and Midwest compared with the South.
        Gambling is also correlated with how people plan to cope with financial shocks: gamblers
are more likely to rely on credit, whether from traditional or alternative sources. This may reflect
both attitudes toward risk and depletion of financial resources via gambling.
        These findings show that while economic theories have emphasized the importance of
precautionary assets to shield against shocks and sociologists have emphasized the importance of
family or friends, in fact, both play a role in how individuals plan to cope with a financial shock.
Furthermore, adjustments in labor supply (both at the intensive and extensive margins) are also
observed in the data, as are sales of assets.
        Differences in coping methods may result from simple heterogeneity, or may suggest a more
generalized pecking order that households follow when dealing with a shock. In corporate finance,
Myers (1984) Myers and Majluf (1984), drawing on a long empirical tradition starting with
Donaldson (1961), posit that companies prioritize their sources of financing.              The empirical
observation was based on both case study evidence and aggregate data. In brief, the empirical
regularity is that firms tend to draw from internal finances before seeking external finances, then
draw upon “the safest securities” (i.e., debt) before issuing new equity. Myers (1984) and Myers and
Majluf (1984) posited that this empirical regularity could be explained by considering the
information asymmetries and associated deadweight costs of the different alternatives. Empirical
evidence, a consistent theoretical grounding, and new testable predictions have made the pecking
order theory useful in corporate finance. A pecking order describes a typical ordering, not a hard-
and-fast immutable set of rules.

                                                                                                       17
        Our work does not yet provide these three elements, but it does suggest a direction for
future research to establish whether a household pecking order theory is supportable—and whether
there is a single pecking order for all households, or different types of orderings for different types
of households, given their characteristics, financial knowledge, and preferences. Like corporations,
which first turn to internal funds, our evidence suggests that households first (or primarily) turn to
internal resources: their own savings. Four pieces of evidence point to this conclusion: savings is the
most commonly used coping method overall, it is the coping method most commonly used in
isolation, it is associated with greater certainty in being able to cope, and it is associated with greater
economic and demographic advantage and stability. That households might turn to savings first
stands to reason in part because these funds are “lower cost” on multiple dimensions: direct
financial costs, transaction costs, social costs, and private effort. Because borrowing rates tend to
exceed rates paid to savers, the foregone income on reducing savings is lower than the explicit
interest on borrowing. While the vast majority of family and friends loans charge zero interest (El
Hage, Schneider, and Tufano, 2006), the social costs of asking for funds, the potential for default,
and certain ethnic norms make such borrowing costlier than the interest rate might suggest.           The
large discounts on resale of items makes selling one’s possessions unattractive (though perhaps less
so in the wake of innovations like eBay). Generating funds by working more may be simple in some
jobs, but in others (e.g., professional jobs without overtime) it would require finding a second job
and working more hours. Savings dominates the other mechanisms on each of these dimensions,
and explaining why savings comes first—at least for households with savings—is fairly easy.
        The corporate finance pecking order posits internal funds, then debt, then equity; however
the ordering varies among firms—e.g., some technology firms raise equity before issuing debt. In
the same way, the “second choice” among households is both complex and interesting. A useful
household pecking order would help explain why the next choice for some is credit and for others is
family and friends. We posit that the second choice—after savings—will be determined by the
relevant costs of the alternatives. These costs could include sheer availability, direct costs (e.g.,
interest charges on loans or foregone interest on savings consumed), fees and other transaction
costs, effort involved (e.g., proxied by time), and social costs (e.g., drawing upon favors or social
capital.) Beyond explaining which is the “second” source for coping, a robust theory might give us
insight into the incentives to save. Where credit is easily available or kin networks are strong,
incentives to save may be smaller—a testable proposition, but not with our data. When the
transaction costs of selling goods go down (as with eBay), the use of this coping mechanism should
increase, and perhaps the desire to save might be reduced.

                                                                                                       18
        To simply state that some set of ordered methods exist is a first step to describing a pecking
order; there is substantial additional research that is needed to definitively demonstrate it, justify it,
and discuss the implications of an ordering of preferred methods.


International Comparisons
        The above analysis captures what appears to be a relatively high level of financial fragility in
the United States, with 28% of respondents certainly unable to come up with the funds needed to
cope with an emergency expense of $2,000 in the next thirty days and an additional 22% probably
unable to do so. However, the literature offers few comparisons, across time or space, to gauge the
severity of that level of fragility. Here, we provide some comparative perspective, undertaking a
cross-national comparison of respondents’ abilities to come up with funds in the event of an
unexpected expense. We set the precise levels of funds asked about in each country ($2,000 in the
US and Canada, £1,500 in the UK, and €1,500 elsewhere) in consultation with our local research
partners. They were intended to be roughly comparable, round-number amounts corresponding to
the level of a major auto repair and other similar shocks. Generally, all of the currency levels are
within 15% of average at USD exchange rates. On a purchasing power parity basis, the differentials
are broader, +/- 20% of the sample average PPP measure, although a crude PPP measure is unlikely
to capture price differences of emergency services.
        Table 6 shows that perceived capacity to cope with an emergency is lowest in the US, UK,
and Germany, all countries in which 50% of households or more would probably or certainly be
unable to come up with the emergency funds. France and Portugal occupy an intermediate position;
46% of respondents in Portugal would certainly or probably be unable to come up with the funds as
would 37% of those in France. The highest levels of coping capacity are found in Canada (28%
certainly or probably unable), Netherlands (27.9%), and Italy (20%). In sum, we see substantial
cross-national heterogeneity in perceived capacity to cope, with the United States at the upper end in
terms of financial fragility.
        We first test to see if these differences are explained by variation in individuals’
characteristics across countries. We pool the individual-level data on respondents in the US, UK,
Canada, France, Germany, and Italy and estimate a similar model to that presented in Table 2 (the
Netherlands is omitted because information on respondents’ demographic and economic
characteristics could not be harmonized with the information on respondents in the other seven
countries). The outcome for this probit model is equal to one if the respondent reported that she
could certainly or probably come up with the required funds and zero if she reported that she

                                                                                                      19
certainly or probably could not do so.                We include country fixed effects in the model and
harmonized measures of changes in wealth, education, age, gender, household composition, risk
literacy, gambling, and financial education. We examine whether the ordering of countries by ability
to cope changes after adjusting for these demographic and economic characteristics.
         In the simple descriptive statistics shown in Table 6, the share of respondents probably or
certainly able to come up with funds was, compared with the US, 2.2 percentage points lower in the
UK, 0.6 points lower in Germany, 4.1 points higher in Portugal, 12.7 points higher in France, 21.8
points higher in Canada, and 30 points higher in Italy. As we would expect, this ordering is
reproduced in the model that only includes the country fixed effects (Model 1 of Appendix Table 2).
But we also find that even after accounting for individual-level characteristics, the ranking of
countries is basically unchanged and the magnitudes of differences from the US are quite similar to
those in the unadjusted model (Model 2 of Appendix Table 2).
         If individual-level covariates do not explain this cross-national variation, national-level
characteristics might. However, given that our data is cross-sectional and limited to just eight
countries, we lack the ability to use a regression framework to test if national-level covariates might
explain these cross-national differences in capacity to come up with emergency funds. Instead,
below, we introduce and qualitatively discuss several factors that may help to explain these
differences. In this way we hope to set the stage for future work that might draw on additional
observations (either across time or across countries) to more formally test the relationships between
these factors and coping ability.
         We first consider the possibility that differences in coping capacity could be explained by
differences in poverty across countries.8 Measured as the share of households with less than 50% of
median income, poverty is highest in the US (17.1%), followed by Portugal (12.9%), Canada
(11.7%), and Italy (11.4%). At 8.3%, poverty is somewhat lower in the UK and lower still in the
Netherlands (7.7%) and France (7.1%) (OECD, 2010). The ordering of countries by poverty rate
demonstrates relatively little alignment with the ordering by capacity to come up with emergency
funds. While poverty is high and capacity to cope low in the US, and the converse is true in the
Netherlands, other countries do not follow the pattern. For instance, poverty is relatively high in
Italy, where capacity to come up with emergency funds is also high.



8While this type of variable could be included as an individual-level measure, our survey, which collected income as a
categorical measure in local currency, does not allow for easy harmonization and comparison across these seven
countries.


                                                                                                                         20
        The existence of national social safety net programs might provide a base level of support
for the most vulnerable households, allowing them and their family networks to build up greater
resources (saving, credit capacity, etc.) to deal with emergencies. The OECD measures government
social safety net spending (old age, survivors, disability, etc.) as a percentage of GDP (see Tesliuc,
2006). Using 2001 figures, the US and Canada had far lower social safety net spending (averaging
8.2%) than the other countries in the sample, yet had among the highest and lowest level of
confidence in ability to come up with $2,000 in 30 days. Comparing these two countries with the
others (whose social safety net spending as a fraction of GDP averaged 15.8%), the North American
countries had a slightly higher average level of ability to cope, primarily due to the high coping ability
by Canadians. Social safety nets alone cannot explain the patterns we observe.
        The large law and finance literature examines financial development of countries, and it
might be sensible to predict that citizens of better financially developed countries would show
greater abilities to cope with financial shocks. The World Bank has assembled an extensive dataset
of many of the financial development indicators.9 There are far more of these indicators than our
handful of observations, but it is possible to calculate correlations between various metrics of
financial market development and ability to cope (using the coefficients on the country fixed effects
from Model 1 from Appendix Table 2). Contrary to expectations derived from this literature in law
and finance, the simple correlations with ability to cope are generally negative, suggesting a lower
ability to cope in more well-developed financial markets, as measured by the negative correlations of
coping ability with private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions/GDP,
bank deposits/GDP, stock market capitalization/GDP, stock market total value traded/GDP, life
insurance premiums/GDP, non-life insurance premiums/GDP.
        An alternative explanation is that perceptions of economic well-being, rather than just actual
material resources, might affect confidence in capacity to come up with emergency funds. In the
period we study (2009), the severity of the economic crisis in each country might reasonably proxy
for such perceptions. While our individual-level analysis included a measure of recent shocks to
wealth from the crisis, that measure does not capture how the more general state of the national
economy might affect perceptions. We examined changes in unemployment rates between 2008 and
2009 in each of the eight countries (OECD, 2010). The UK and US had the largest increases in
unemployment, ticking up 45% and 60% to 7.7% and 9.3%, respectively. However, while German
respondents reported fairly low levels of coping capacity, German unemployment was fairly steady

9http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:20696167~pageP

K:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html (visited March 5, 2011)


                                                                                                      21
at 7.8% in 2009, an increase of only 3%.          France and Portugal each saw 25% increases in
unemployment between 2008 and 2009 to 9.2% and 9.5% respectively, smaller increases than in the
UK and US and in line with their middle position in terms of coping capacity. Among the countries
with the highest coping capacity, the Netherlands had very low unemployment (3.4%) in 2009, an
increase of about 21% over the prior year, and Italy’s unemployment rate rose about 16% from 2008
to 7.9% in 2009. But Canada had an 8.3% unemployment rate, about 36% higher than in 2008.
        We next consider the methods by which respondents report they would cope with a financial
emergency. This analysis serves a twofold purpose. First, this analysis serves to highlight and begin
to explain variation across countries in how those who could cope with emergency would do so.
Second, examining cross-national variation in how respondents would cope with an emergency may
also reveal something about the between-country differences in the share of respondents that could
come up with funds in the event of an emergency. While we asked respondents separately about
their confidence in ability to cope and the methods they would use to cope, perhaps respondents
considered their responses to the latter with the former in mind.
        For the most part, the tabulations of coping methods presented in Table 6 seem to present a
story of international similarity. Savings is the most commonly named coping method in every
country, generally followed by family/friends, with mainstream credit usually the third most
frequently named strategy, trailed by increased work effort, then the sale of possessions, with
alternative credit a distant fifth. However, there are several notable exceptions to this pattern.
        First, the use of savings is fairly low in Portugal (49.2%), quite high in Italy (71.3%), and
especially high in the Netherlands (88.8%). Second, the Netherlands is also distinct for having
comparatively low levels of family/friends support (just 10.3%) versus 24% – 36% elsewhere.
Third, the use of mainstream credit is also quite rare in the Netherlands (7.8%) and Portugal (12.4%)
and quite common in Canada (40.3%) against a more general range of 16% – 30%. Fourth,
Americans are the most likely to sell possessions, work more, or use alternative sources of credit.
They are also less likely to report that they “don’t know” what coping methods they would use.
        These findings track some of the aggregate characteristics of the countries. For example,
Italy and the Netherlands are relatively high savings rate countries with household savings rates of
8.6% and 6.8% respectively. These rates are much above the savings rates of the UK (-4.5%),
Portugal (-0.9%), the US (2.7%), and Canada (3.8%), but are lower than the savings rates of
Germany (11.2%) and France (11.6%) (OECD, 2010), in which savings was relatively less frequently
mentioned.



                                                                                                     22
            Individuals in the US, the UK, and Germany are much more likely to resort to family and
friends for financial emergencies than, for example, individuals in the Netherlands, and these figures
are consistent with some of the findings about trust in familiars as captured by the World Value
Survey. For example, consistent with the differences we observe in reliance on family and friends
for financial support, only 63.5% of Dutch respondents state that they trust their family completely
versus 86% in Great Britain, 82% in Germany, and 83% in Canada. Those in Italy and the
Netherlands also report little trust in people they know personally. In the Netherlands, the
percentage who completely trust the people they know personally is 30% and in Italy is 7%, as
compared with 53% in Great Britain and 47% in Canada.10
            Similarly, the very high reliance on sources of mainstream credit in Canada is interpretable in
light of the very high levels of short-term consumer credit in Canada, with the population of
approximately 33 million holding nearly 413 billion in short-term consumer debt, a ratio higher than
that of the US and orders of magnitude above France, Italy, the Netherlands, and Portugal. (OECD,
2010).11
            Finally, Table 6 also presents descriptive evidence of cross-national variation in the number
of ways respondents report that they would cope with an emergency. The United States, followed
by Canada and Germany, stands out for having the largest share of respondents—about a third—
who report three methods of coping with a financial emergency. This share is much lower in Italy
(13.8%), Portugal (15.6%), and the Netherlands (6.8%), countries that tend to have higher savings
rates than the United States. That same ordering applies to the share that would need only one
method of coping, with that share highest in Italy, Portugal, and the Netherlands, followed by the
UK and France, and trailed by the US, Canada, and Germany.
            These data on methods of coping are also somewhat helpful in understanding the cross-
national differences in confidence in capacity to cope. However, their usefulness in that regard is
constrained by the fact that the question about coping methods was not asked of respondents who
reported that they could certainly not come up with the emergency funds. That said, it is striking
that respondents in Italy and the Netherlands, the two countries with the highest levels of
confidence in ability to come up with emergency funds, are also characterized by very high levels of
reliance on savings as a coping method. In contrast, respondents in the US, UK, Germany, and
France, where confidence in ability to come up with emergency funds was relatively lower, were


10   Authors’ calculations from the World Values Survey.
11   Calculated by dividing total household liabilities in consumer credit (revolving and non-revolving) by total population.


                                                                                                                          23
more likely to name coping methods such as the use of alterative credit, the sale of possessions, and
increase in work.
        Overall, with eight data points we are reluctant to make any broad characterizations of the
differences in coping ability, but see some evidence that the propensity to save, financial market
development (specifically credit markets), and the extent of trust—which in turn affect the
availability of savings, credit, and family support—are likely candidates to explain variation in the
ability to come up with $2,000 in 30 days.


Conclusions and Implications
        The descriptive empirical results in this paper are fairly clear and are of some cause for
concern. The first finding is that a disturbingly high fraction of Americans report not being able to
come up with $2,000 in 30 days. Households with socioeconomic markers of vulnerability (income,
wealth, wealth losses, education, women, families with children) are more likely to be financially
fragile, and substantially more so.     The more surprising finding is that a material fraction of
seemingly “middle class” Americans also judge themselves to be financially fragile, reflecting either a
substantially weaker financial position than one would expect, or a very high level of anxiety or
pessimism. Both are important in terms of behavior and for public policy.
        There are fairly straightforward implications of high levels of financial fragility for scholars,
policymakers, and businesses people. Scholars need to better understand, through theory and
empirical work, the implications of financial fragility for explaining other consumer decisions. For
example, in a related paper, Lusardi, Schneider, and Tufano (2010) document how Americans cut
back on their use of non-emergency medical services in the wake of the financial crisis, much more
so than in other developed countries with national health care plans.               Even in empirical
specifications including wealth, income, and other economic measures, our measure of financial
fragility was one of the strongest predictors of the likelihood of cuts in non-emergency care. Tufano
(2011) examines Americans’ attitudes toward financial regulation and finds, in particular, that the
fragile—as defined here—were less likely to report that laws and regulations adequately protect their
financial interests.   This financial fragility measure, more so than traditional economic and
demographic factors, was one of the strongest predictors of attitudes toward regulation. These two
papers begin to examine how financial fragility is either a reduced form correlate of important
behaviors, or may perhaps be a causal factor in affecting household decisions. Much more research
needs to be done to trace out the link between financial fragility and various outcomes, but these
first few studies are quite suggestive. For example, it would be useful to know if financially fragile

                                                                                                      24
families, as we define them, are more likely to become homeless, bankrupt, experience marital
problems, etc.
        In addition to understanding the consequences of financial fragility, we need to better
understand the mechanisms that give rise to it. The lowest income households’ fragility—in the
form of lack of saving—could be attributable to tax disincentives to save, but this would not likely
explain the pervasive lack of savings among higher income Americans. Lack of savings and heavy
reliance on credit could also be due to overspending or attitudes toward risk and the future, partially
captured by the propensity for gambling. Failure to cope could reflect weakening social ties that
make it harder to access family and friends borrowing networks. The lack of financial knowledge
could also play a role in explaining lack of savings and crude methods of dealing with risk (such as
selling possessions). There needs to be substantially more work done on the factors that not just
describe the financially fragile but explain how they come to be fragile.
        A future research agenda on fragility would include many elements. Specifically, it would be
useful to complement the quantitative analysis we have performed in this paper with qualitative
analysis. For example, focus groups or in-depth interviews on those who state that they could
certainly come up with $2,000 could shed light on what individuals actually do when hit by a shock
and the reasons for lack of an emergency fund. Open-ended questions could also enrich the list of
methods of coping that we have considered in this paper and provide additional insights. Merely
asking for a specific ordering—by amount—would help clarify whether households perceive a
pecking order of funds. While there is much research left to be done, the evidence provided in this
paper shows that the simple representative model used in many macroeconomic model is unlikely to
be a correct characterization of the behavior we observe in the economy and that we need to enrich
the existing theoretical models to incorporate the heterogeneity we observe in the data.
        While this work needs to precede policy action, there are some steps policymakers might
consider to strengthen households’ abilities to weather financial storms. For example, there is
considerable direct and indirect federal support for long-term asset building, most of which is
delivered through tax policies. The Corporation for Enterprise Development estimates that federal
asset building expenditures in 2009 were $384 billion, with the major programs benefiting the
wealthiest Americans. Looking at the mortgage interest deduction, property tax deductions, and
preferential capital gains and dividend rates, the top 20% of Americans by income received 84% of
these benefits and the bottom 20% of Americans received just 0.04% of these benefits (Woo,
Rademacher, and Meier, 2010).        At the same time, some federal policies actively discourage
precautionary savings through asset limits (Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1995). To the extent that

                                                                                                    25
financial fragility has substantial negative consequences, federal policy could help households to
build emergency buffer stocks of savings. For example, interest and dividends on the first few
thousand dollars of savings could be tax free or could earn a refundable credit, asset limits on federal
assistance programs could be significantly increased, policy could support family and friends lending,
incentives could be created for banks and other financial institutions to open emergency accounts,
etc.     If self-control problems are substantial, the terms of these programs might include a
substantial commitment component, which has been documented by Ashraf et al. (2006) to be
effective. Improving financial literacy and promoting financial education may be another way to
address lack of precautionary savings. All of these interventions could be tested for effectiveness,
but all are motivated by a recognition of financial fragility.
         These high levels of financial fragility also suggest the presence of opportunities for financial
institutions that can tap into the market for products that facilitate emergency support. While bank
savings products, credit cards, payday lenders, pawn shops, overdraft programs, and other products
are used as coping mechanisms, one suspects that there might be different products to address these
needs.12 For example, while savings accounts are almost always associated with interest payments,
Christmas Clubs historically did not pay much interest, yet were quite popular.                      If one were to
design an emergency product, what service might be attached in lieu of interest to enhance the
popularity of the product? Might a household opening this account as an emergency account prefer
vouchers for a flu shot, AAA club membership, or other services as much as, or more than, interest?
Again, additional testing would be required to determine whether households would demand these
products, and if so, whether they would have any impact on the levels of financial fragility.
         These implications for academics, policy makers, and businesses flow from a consideration
of the high level of financial fragility. The second finding of our paper is that households use a
variety of mechanisms to cope with financial shocks, and that while savings is the most commonly
listed coping method, it is hardly the only coping method. Households rely on a broad set of
supports (credit, family and friends, increased labor, etc.) to deal with shocks. We empirically posit

12
   Credit unions have developed and piloted projects that address some of these needs. For example, the “2 Grand Plan”
program combines saving with borrowing to make sure emergency cash is available when needed most. In this program,
an individual deposits regularly to a savings account, but if an emergency occurs, an affordable rate loan is made
available so the savings plan is not disrupted. The “Big Payoff Loan” is another example of an innovative program
offered by credit unions. The borrower transfers a percentage of his/her unsecured debt to a 12-18 month personal loan
at a low fixed interest rate. When the borrower successfully pays down this portion of the debt, the credit union may
advance additional funds to pay down another portion of the debt. The cycle repeats itself until the debt is repaid. For
more detail, see Gabel (2011).



                                                                                                                    26
that these coping mechanisms might be sequenced in a form of pecking order or orders, and much
additional work would need to be done to validate this hypothesis.               It appears that just as
corporations tend to fund themselves first by drawing upon internal funds, households address
financial shocks first by drawing down savings. Just as the cost of funds, both direct transaction
costs and information asymmetries, may help explain corporate choices, the relative direct financial
costs, transaction costs, social costs, information costs, and effort might explain the ordering of
coping mechanisms for different households.
        This contention leads to opportunities for considerable additional research. For example,
among households with ready access to credit, does the size of the spread between borrowing and
savings rates affect the choice between dipping into savings and borrowing? Do the associated
transaction costs, in terms of time and ease of borrowing, explain this over time and across
countries? We find that friends and family are the second most popular coping mechanism. Does
the strength of friend and family ties affect the relative attractiveness of this choice? In particular, in
more tight-knight communities do we see greater use of friend and family financial support? Is
there a relationship between physical proximity and friend and family support—and would that
manifest itself in different patterns depending on migration patterns?            Some recent research
calculates the basis point premium that some borrowers will pay if offered certain types of marketing
(Bertrand et. al., 2010). We know that most friends and family loans charge zero percent interest.
Nevertheless, people may prefer to lose interest on savings to avoid the social cost of asking for
money. How large is this discount, how much does it vary, and how do social factors influence its
size? We find that 19% of people claim they would sell something they own as a coping mechanism.
Has eBay, which has made selling personal items easier—and arguably reduced the discount on
resale items—increased the use of this coping mechanism? We also find that financial education
and risk literacy affect the ability to cope and the methods of coping, suggesting ways to enrich
models of saving or public policies toward saving. Moreover, just as empirical work on corporate
financial choices both motivated, but then challenged, pecking order theory, work on household
coping mechanisms could enhance our understanding of the trade-offs involved.
        If research validated the notion of a pecking order, policy makers might see that many
different polices are relating to one another. If many of the financially fragile are low income, then
perhaps refundable tax credits could be used as a financial stimulant for savings.        The size of the
average tax refund is approximately equal to the amount of financial buffer that we study here
(Tufano and Schneider, 2009). Would it be possible to allow households to get their refunds in a
form that could serve as an emergency savings account? Would it be possible to borrow against

                                                                                                       27
next year’s refund through a reduction in withholdings? Could policy be used to support family and
friends borrowing?      Credit, in both the form of mainstream credit and alternative credit, are
important ways that households plan to deal with shocks. Government policy on small dollar credit
has recently focused on issues of affordability and pricing, as seen in the Talent Amendment, which
imposed a 36% interest rate ceiling on loans to members of the Armed Forces. But we can also ask
what government policy can do to make small dollar credit more widely available. The FDIC’s
Small Dollar Loan Pilot program may provide some answers in this regard. Again, our work merely
suggests research and interventions, but more work will need to be done.
        Were a pecking order of coping mechanisms to be a useful way to explain household
decision making, there would be implications for businesses to innovate new products. There are
already products that combine saving and borrowing, for instance in the form of a savings account
with an attached line of credit. Given the importance of family and friends lending, one wonders
whether it might be possible to create a group account where people open individual savings
accounts where a portion might be “drawn down” by others in the group, to be repaid by the
borrower with interest. There might be a mechanism by which the would-be lenders would need to
assent to the drawdown. This financial-institution administered product might be a modern version
of friends and family lending, better protect lenders from friend and family default, and increase the
stickiness and size of these accounts to the financial institution.
        Our research doesn’t indicate that any specific policy or business practice is the solution to
high levels of financial fragility. Rather, our goal is to document substantial levels of financial
fragility, a sense of the many means that families use to cope with it, and the implications for
research. We hope our work—and subsequent work on financial fragility that takes a broad
approach to understanding how households cope with financial shocks—can enlighten scholars,
policy makers, and businesses trying to understand and serve households’ financial needs.




                                                                                                   28
References

Adams, William, Liran Einav and Jonathan Levin. 2009. “Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect
   Information in Subprime Lending.” American Economic Review 99(1): 49-84.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2005. “Consumption Versus Expenditure.” Journal of Political Economy
    113(5): 919-948.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
    Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): 635-
    672.

Bernheim, D., D. Garrett, and D. Maki. 2001. “Education and saving: The long-term effects of high
    school financial curriculum mandates.” Journal of Public Economics 85: 435-565.

Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir and Jonathan Zinman. 2010.
    “What’s the Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field
    Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125: 263-305

Biggs, Xavier de Souza. 1998. “Brown Kids in White Suburbs: Housing Mobility and the Many
    Faces of Social Capital.” Housing Policy Debate 9(1): 177- 221.

Brobeck, Stephen. 2008. “Understanding the Emergency Savings Needs of Low- and Moderate-
    Income Households.”      Consumer Federation of America Manuscript available at
    http://www.consumerfed.org/elements/www.consumerfed.org/file/Emergency_Savings_Surv
    ey_Analysis_Nov_2008.pdf

Browning, Martin and Annamaria Lusardi. 1996. “Household Saving: Micro Theories and Micro
    Facts.” Journal of Economic Literature 34(4): 1797-1855.

Bucks, Brian K., Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore. 2006. “Recent Changes in U.S. Family
    Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve
    Bulletin A1 – A38.

Caner, Asena and Edward Wolff. 2004. “Asset Poverty in the United States, 1984-99: Evidence
    from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” Review of Income and Wealth 50(4): 493 – 518.

Carroll, Christopher. 1997. “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
    Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 1–56.

Carroll, Christopher and Andrew Samwick. 1997. “The Nature of Precautionary Wealth.” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 40: 41-71.

Carroll, Christopher and Andrew Samwick. 1998. “How Important is Precautionary Savings?” The
    Review of Economics and Statistics 8(3): 410-419.

Chieffe, Natalie and Ganas Kaye Rakes. 1999. “An Integrated Model for Financial Planning.”
    Financial Services Review 8(4): 261-268.


                                                                                              29
Cole, Shawn, Daryl Collins, Daniel Schneider, and Peter Tufano. 2008. "First National Bank's
    Golden Opportunity." Harvard Business School Case Study (208-072).

Conley, Dalton. 1999. Being Black, Living in the Red. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Consumer Federation of America. 2006. How Americans View Personal Wealth Versus How Planner's
   View This Wealth. Washington, DC.

Deaton, Angus. 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints.” Econometrica 59: 1221-1248.

Deaton, Angus. 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Donaldson, Gordon. 1961. Corporate Debt Capacity: A Study of Corporate Debt Policy and the Determination
   of Corporate Debt Capacity. Beard Books.

El Hage, Nabil, Daniel Schneider and Peter Tufano. 2006. Circle Lending. Harvard Business
    School Case Study.

Gabel, Denise. 2011. Blueprints for Innovation. Filene Research Institute.

Goss, David and Nicolas Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
   Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1):
   149-185.

Gustman, Alan, Olivia Mitchell, Andrew Samwick and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. “Pension and
    Social Security Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study.” (pp. 150-208) In Wealth. Work and
    Health: Innovations in Survey Measurement in the Social Sciences. Ed. R. Willis, University of Michigan
    Press.

Harknett, Kristen and Jean Knab. 2007. “More Kin, Less Support: Multipartnered Fertility and
    Perceived Support Among Mothers.” Journal of Marriage and Family 69: 237-253.

Havemann, Robert and Edward Wolff. 2004. “The Concept and Measurement of Asset Poverty:
   Levels, Trends, and Composition for the US 1983 – 2001.” Journal of Economic Inequality 2: 145 –
   169.

Henley, Julia, Sandra Danziger, and Shira Offer. 2005. “The Contribution of Social Support to the
   Material Well-Being of Low-Income Families.” Journal of Marriage and Family 67: 122 – 140.

Hubbard, Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Saving and Social
   Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy 103: 360-399.

Hurst, Erik, Annamaria Lusardi, Arthur Kennickell, and Francisco Torralba. 2010. “The
    Importance of Business Owners in Assessing the Size of Precautionary Savings.” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 92: 61-69.

Kearney, Melissa, Jonathan Guryan, Erik Hurst, and Peter Tufano. 2011. “Making Savers Winners:
    An Overview of Prize-Linked Savings Product.” Forthcoming in Financial Literacy: Implications for
    Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Eds. A Lusardi and O. S. Mitchell. Oxford

                                                                                                       30
    University Press.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and Avia Spivak. 1981. “The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market.”
    Journal of Political Economy 89(2): 372-391.

Lusardi, Annamaria. 1999. “Information, Expectations, and Savings for Retirement.” (pp. 81-115) In
       Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics. Ed. H. Aaron. Brookings Institution Press and
       Russell Sage Foundation.

Lusardi, Annamaria. 2008. “Financial Literacy: An Essential Tool for Informed Consumer Choice?”
    Working Paper, Joint Center for Housing Studies Working Paper, Harvard University.

Lusardi, Annamaria. 2009. “U.S. Household Savings Behavior: The Role of Financial Literacy,
       Information and Financial Education Programs.” (pp. 109-149) In Policymaking Insights from
       Behavioral Economics. Eds. C. Foote, L Goette, and S. Meier. Federal Reserve Bank of
       Boston.

Lusardi, Annamaria. 2010. “Americans’ Financial Capability,” Report Prepared for the Financial
    Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington, DC, February 2010.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011a. “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
    Retirement WellBeing.” Forthcoming in Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the
    Financial Marketplace. Eds. A Lusardi and O. S. Mitchell. Oxford University Press.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011b. “Financial Literacy Across the World: An
    Overview.” In preparation for the Journal of Pension Economics and Finance special issue on
    financial literacy.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Daniel Schneider and Peter Tufano, 2010, “The Economic Crisis and Medical
    Care Usage,” NBER Working Paper 15843.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Peter Tufano. 2009. “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and
    Overindebtedness,    NBER     Working Paper  14808.       Available  at    SSRN:
    http://ssrn.com/abstract=1366208

Myers, Stewart. 1984. “The Capital Structure Puzzle.” Journal of Finance 39(2): 575-592.

Myers, Stewart and Nicholal Majluf. 1984. “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
   Firms have Information that Investors Do Not Have.” Journal of Financial Economics 13(2): 187-
   221.

Oliver, Melvin and Thomas Shapiro. 1995. Black Wealth/White Wealth: A New Perspective on Racial
    Inequality. New York: Routledge.

OECD. 2010. OECD Factbook 2010: Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics. OECD Publishing.

Parker, Jonathan, Nicholas Souleles, David Johnson and Robert McClelland. 2011. “Consumer
    Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” NBER Working Paper n 16684.

                                                                                                      31
Sarkasian, Natalia and Naomi Gerstel. 2004. “Kin Support among Blacks and Whites: Race and
    Family Organization.” American Sociological Review 69(6): 812 – 837.

Skiba, Paige and Jeremy Tobacman. 2008. “Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy?” Mimeo, Wharton
    School.

Skinner, Jonathan. 1988. “Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption and Precautionary Saving.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 22: 237–255.

Sherraden, Michael. 2005. Inclusion in the American Dream: Assets, Poverty and Public Policy. New York:
    Oxford University Press.

Smith, James. 1995. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth in the Health and Retirement Study,”
    Journal of Human Resources 30: S158-S183

Stephens, Melvin. 2008. “The Consumption Response to Predictable Changes in Discretionary
    Income: Evidence from the Repayment of Vehicle Loans.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
    90(2): 241-252.

Stephens, Melvin. 2003.“’3rd of tha Month.’ Do Social Security Recipients Smooth Consumption
    Between Checks?” American Economic Review 93(1): 406-422.

Taylor, Paul, Rich Morin, and Wendy Wang. 2010. “One Recession, Two Americas: Most Lost
    Ground but Nearly Half Held their Own.” Pew Research Center, Social and Demographic
    Trends Project.

Tesliuc, Emil. 2006. “Social Safety Nets in OECD Countries.” Social Safety Nets Primer Notes
     No. 25, World Bank.

Tufano, Peter, 2008, "Savings Whilst Gambling: An Empirical Analysis of U.K. Premium Bonds."
    American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 98(2): 321-326.

Tufano, Peter. 2011. “Setting Financial Regulatory Priorities: Listening to Consumers.” Mimeo,
    HBS.

Tufano, Peter, Nick Maynard and Jan-Emmanuel De Neve. 2011. "Consumer Demand for Prize-
    linked Savings: A Preliminary Analysis." Forthcoming Economics Letters.

Tufano, Peter and Daniel Schneider. 2009. “Using Financial Innovation to Support Savers: From
    Coercion to Excitement.” In Insufficient Funds: Savings, Assets, Credit and Banking Among Low-
    Income Households. Eds. Rebecca Blank and Michael Barr. New York: Russell Sage.

Venti, Steven and David Wise. 2001. Choice, Chance and Wealth Dispersion at Retirement. In Aging
    Issues in the United States and Japan. Eds S. Ogura, Tachibanaki and D. Wise. University of
    Chicago Press.

Warren Elizabeth and Amelia W. Tyagi. 2003. The Two Income Trap: Why Middle-Class Mothers and
    Fathers Are Going Broke, New York: Basic Books.

                                                                                                    32
Woo, Beadsie, Ida Rademacher, and Jillien Meier. 2010. Upside Down. The $400 Billion Federal Asset-
   Building Budget. CFED Report.

Worthington, Andrew. 2003. “Emergency Finance in Australian Households: An Empirical Analysis
   of Capacity and Sources.” Discussion Paper 163. Queensland University of Technology,
   Brisbane, Australia.




                                                                                                33
 Table 1. Relationship between Economic and Demographic Characteristics and
 Confidence in Ability to Cope with Unexpected Expense
                              Certainly    Probably       Probably     Certainly Not
                               Able to    Able to Cope   Not Able to   Able to Cope
                                Cope                       Cope
All Respondents                 24.9          25.1          22.1           27.9
Change in Wealth Since
Crisis
Same                            23.8          28.6          22.4           19.9
Increase Wealth > 10%           40.4          15.6          26.4           17.6
Increase Wealth < 10%           34.9          27.4          22.1           15.6
Decrease Wealth < 10%           24.0          33.8          22.4           19.9
Decrease Wealth 10% to 29%      30.9          27.0          19.5           22.6
Decrease Wealth 30% to 50%      20.7          26.4          24.7           28.2
Decrease Wealth > 50%           10.0          8.3           24.1           57.7
Income
Less than $20,000               9.3           14.6          19.2           56.8
$20,000 - $29,999               11.4          21.2          27.7           39.7
$30,000 - $39,999               17.5          27.5          23.6           31.4
$40,000 - $49,999               17.0          26.1          29.9           27.0
$50,000 - $59,999               21.9          24.7          26.1           27.3
$60,000 - $74,999               33.1          27.9          21.8           17.3
$75,000 - $99,999               40.7          33.7          15.4           10.2
$100,000 - $149,999             49.0          27.3          12.9           10.8
$150,000 or more                58.1          27.5           4.7            9.8
Wealth
Zero                            5.8           11.9          21.8           60.5
Less than $1000                 2.4           14.9          36.5           46.2
$1,000 - $2,999                 6.3           27.6          37.7           28.4
$3,000 - $4,999                 10.3          35.7          30.3           23.7
$4,000 - $9,999                 19.0          35.6          243            21.1
$10,000 - $19,999               25.9          35.1          15.5           23.5
$20,000 - $49,999               36.4          27.8          19.6           16.1
$50,000 - $99,999               34.3          28.9          17.9           18.9
$100,000 - $249,999             48.7          25.3          10.9           15.1
$250,000 or more                55.1          26.3           8.3           10.3
Education
High School or Less             12.3          21.0          27.1           39.6
Trade School                    17.1          25.8          22.3           34.9
Some College                    23.0          24.7          22.9           29.5
College (Bachelor’s Degree)     34.5          27.1          19.7           18.8
Graduate Education              45.4          31.8          11.6           11.3


                                                                           (cont…)




                                                                                     34
Employment Status
Unemployed                                    15.3                15.7                27.8                 41.2
Not Unemployed                                26.5                26.7                21.1                 25.8
Age
18 – 34                                       17.8                24.6                29.0                 28.7
35 – 54                                       25.4                26.8                19.3                 28.6
55 – 65                                       43.0                21.1                12.3                 23.6
Gender
Female                                        21.2                24.3                22.7                 31.8
Male                                          28.6                 26.0                21.4                24.1

Race/Ethnicity
White                                         26.5                24.9                21.3                 27.3
Black                                         16.5                20.6                25.2                 37.7
Hispanic                                      18.3                25.2                27.2                 29.3
Asian                                         26.9                34.4                25.2                 13.5
Other Race/Ethnicity                           7.1                27.8                20.1                 45.1
Marital Status
Married/Cohabiting                            28.4                26.7                20.1                 24.5
Never Married                                 21.3                24.4                24.8                 29.5
Divorced or Widowed                           23.9                21.4                18.3                 36.4
Other Marital Status                          16.4                23.0                27.8                 32.8
Household Composition
No Children in Household                      29.4                24.2                20.4                 26.1
Children in Household                         18.4                26.5                24.4                 30.6
Does Not Live with Parents                    26.2                25.5                20.8                 27.5
Live with Parents                             15.3                22.3                31.5                 30.9
Region
South                                         25.2                24.6                22.2                 28.0
North-East                                    27.9                23.3                21.3                 27.6
Mid-West                                      23.5                25.3                22.7                 28.4
West                                          23.2                27.3                21.8                 27.7
Observations                                                                1931


 Notes:
 1. The tabulations of confidence in ability to cope by changes in wealth, income, and wealth, are based on fewer than
 1883 observations due to missing data. There are 1,681, 1,803, and 1,669 observations for each of those variables,
 respectively.




                                                                                                                         35
 Table 2. Relationship between Economic and Demographic Characteristics and Being
 Confident in Ability to Cope with an Unexpected Expense, Marginal Effects from Probit
 Regression (SE)

                                 Model 1        Model 2
Change in Wealth Since
Crisis
Same (reference)                     --             --
Increase Wealth > 10%            -0.017       -0.010
                                (0.060)       (0.059)
Increase Wealth < 10%             0.018        0.025
                                (0.050)       (0.051)
Decrease Wealth < 10%            -0.018       -0.017
                                (0.046)       (0.047)
Decrease Wealth 10% to 29%       -0.040       -0.046
                                (0.040)       (0.040)
Decrease Wealth 30% to 50%       -0.115 *     -0.111     *
                                (0.047)       (0.047)
Decrease Wealth > 50%            -0.277 ***   -0.272     ***
                                (0.050)       (0.050)
Income
Less than $20,000 (reference)         --            --
$20,000 - $29,999                 0.056        0.048
                                (0.057)       (0.057)
$30,000 - $39,999                 0.121 *      0.126     *
                                (0.053)       (0.054)
$40,000 - $49,999                 0.041        0.033
                                (0.057)       (0.058)
$50,000 - $59,999                 0.046        0.041
                                (0.059)       (0.060)
$60,000 - $74,999                 0.168 **     0.169     **
                                (0.054)       (0.054)
$75,000 - $99,999                 0.260 ***    0.260     ***
                                (0.052)       (0.053)
$100,000 - $149,999               0.246 ***    0.244     ***
                                (0.059)       (0.059)
$150,000 or more                  0.286 ***    0.287     ***
                                (0.077)       (0.077)
Wealth
Zero (reference)                      --            --
Less than $1000                  -0.045       -0.042
                                (0.063)       (0.064)
$1,000 - $2,999                   0.137 *      0.133 *
                                (0.066)       (0.067)

                                                                                         36
$3,000 - $4,999                     0.251    ***    0.237      ***
                                  (0.062)          (0.064)
$4,000 - $9,999                     0.294    ***    0.300      ***
                                  (0.054)          (0.054)
$10,000 - $19,999                   0.342    ***    0.334      ***
                                  (0.049)          (0.050)
$20,000 - $49,999                   0.363    ***    0.357      ***
                                  (0.045)          (0.047)
$50,000 - $99,999                   0.327    ***    0.315      ***
                                  (0.050)          (0.051)
$100,000 - $249,999                 0.359    ***    0.359      ***
                                  (0.047)          (0.048)
$250,000 or more                    0.409    ***    0.401      ***
                                  (0.044)          (0.046)
Education
High School or Less (reference)         --                --
Trade School                        0.029           0.030
                                  (0.056)          (0.056)
Some College                        0.080 *         0.068
                                  (0.037)          (0.037)
College                             0.124 **        0.098      *
                                  (0.038)          (0.039)
Graduate Education                  0.245 ***       0.222      ***
                                  (0.052)          (0.055)

Unemployed                         -0.105 **       -0.109      **
                                  (0.041)          (0.041)
Age
18-34 (reference)                       --                --
35 – 55                             0.064 *         0.076      *
                                  (0.032)          (0.032)
55 – 65                             0.129 **        0.144      **
                                  (0.048)          (0.048)

Female                             -0.081 **       -0.077      **
                                  (0.027)          (0.028)
Race/Ethnicity
White (reference)                       --                --
Black                              -0.006          -0.008
                                  (0.051)          (0.051)
Hispanic                            0.007           0.023
                                  (0.068)          (0.068)
Asian                               0.102           0.103
                                  (0.064)          (0.065)

                                                                     37
Other Race/Ethnicity                        -0.002             -0.014
                                           (0.094)             (0.092)
Marital Status
Married (reference)                              --                  --
Never Married                               -0.041             -0.049
                                           (0.041)             (0.040)
Divorced or Widowed                         -0.031             -0.029
                                           (0.044)             (0.044)
Other Marital Status                        -0.079             -0.077
                                           (0.049)             (0.050)
Household Composition
Children in Household                       -0.071 *           -0.075      *
                                           (0.030)             (0.030)
Live with Parents                           -0.142 **          -0.146      **
                                           (0.046)             (0.046)
Region
South (reference)                                --                   --
North-East                                  -0.002              0.011
                                           (0.038)             (0.038)
Mid-West                                    -0.014             -0.012
                                           (0.034)             (0.034)
West                                         0.010              0.003
                                           (0.036)             (0.037)

Gambled                                          --            -0.079      **
                                                               (0.028)
Financial Education                              --             0.102      ***
                                                               (0.031)
Risk Literacy                                    --             0.060
                                                               (0.037)
Observations                                 1931               1931
Pseudo R2                                    0.218              0.226
 + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

 Notes:
 1. Dependent variable = 1 if respondent is certainly or probably able to cope and = 0 if certainly or probably unable to
     cope
 2. Models also include dichotomous indicators of having missing data on income, wealth, or change in wealth.




                                                                                                                     38
 Table 3. Coping Mechanisms for All Respondents, by Number of Coping Strategies (Percent of Respondents) (TNS, 2009)

                                                                                                                         Number of Coping Methods
                                                                                                      All
                                                                                                                         One       Two      Three
Share of Respondents                                                                                  100                 46.5           18.6           34.9
Coping Methods by Type
 Savings                                                                                             60.6                 65.4           63.0           52.8
 Family/Friends                                                                                      34.2                 13.4           36.7           60.6
 Mainstream Credit                                                                                   29.5                 10.9           38.5           49.5
 Alternative Credit                                                                                  10.8                  1.7            7.8           24.5
 Sell Possessions                                                                                    19.1                  3.2           20.7           39.5
 Work More                                                                                           22.9                  5.3           21.3           47.2
Coping Methods Listed Individually
 Draw from Savings                                                                                   52.4                 61.3           47.6           43.2
 Liquidate or Sell Investments                                                                        2.3                   0             6.2           3.4
 Liquidate Some Retirement Investments, Even If Required to Pay a Penalty                            11.1                  4.1           19.0           16.1
 Borrow or Ask for Help from My Family                                                               29.6                 10.8           30.8           54.1
 Borrow or Ask for Help from My Friends                                                               7.4                  2.7            6.8           14.0
 Use Credit Cards                                                                                    20.9                  7.3           29.0           34.5
 Open or Use a Home Equity Line of Credit or Take Out a Second Mortgage                               4.3                  1.4            4.3           8.3
 Take Out an Unsecured Loan                                                                           7.1                  2.1            6.5           14.0
 Get a Short Term Payday or Payroll Advance Loan                                                      3.6                  0.7            1.5           8.7
 Pawn an Asset I Owned                                                                                7.7                  1.1            6.4           17.1
 Sell Things I Owned, Except My Home                                                                 18.8                  2.9           20.0           39.3
 Sell My Home                                                                                         0.4                  0.4            0.7           0.2
 Work Overtime, Get a Second Job, or Other Household Member Increase
                                                                                                     22.9                 5.3            21.3           47.2
 Work
Other                                                                                                  0                   0               0              0
Don't Know                                                                                            1.9                 1.6             6.1             0
Observations                                                                                         1255                 582             236            437
 Note:
 Respondents indicating multiple coping methods of the same general type (i.e. multiple coping strategies within the savings category) are not double-counted in the
 statistics listed in the final two columns.

                                                                                                                                                                       39
 Table 4. Percent listing Zero, One, Two, or Three Coping Strategies by
 Confidence in Ability to Cope.

                                      Certainly         Probably       Probably Not
                                       Able to           Able to       Able to Cope
                                        Cope              Cope

Number of Coping
Strategies
One                                      72.1              37.8              26.7
Two                                      15.0              22.1              18.9
Three                                    13.0              40.1              54.5

Observations                                               1255
 Notes:
 1. Respondents who were “certain” that would not be able to cope with an unexpected expense are
     excluded because they were not asked any questions about coping mechanisms.




                                                                                                   40
 Table 5. Relationship between Economic and Demographic Characteristics and Types of Coping Responses, Marginal Effects
 from Probit Regression (SE)

                                  Savings    Family/Friends Mainstream      AFS Credit    Sell Things    Work More
                                                              Credit
Change in Wealth Since Crisis
Same (reference)                       --            --              --           --             --             --
Increase Wealth > 10%              0.043        -0.044          -0.056       -0.025          0.003         -0.001
                                 (0.063)       (0.057)         (0.052)      (0.023)        (0.048)        (0.047)
Increase Wealth < 10%              0.088 +      -0.128 **       -0.079 +      0.037         -0.003         -0.016
                                 (0.051)       (0.044)         (0.043)      (0.029)        (0.042)        (0.043)
Decrease Wealth < 10%              0.087 +      -0.082 +         0.007       -0.002          0.033          0.009
                                 (0.050)       (0.045)         (0.046)      (0.026)        (0.041)        (0.042)
Decrease Wealth 10% to 29%        -0.025         0.015          -0.094 *      0.060 *        0.068 +       -0.005
                                 (0.048)       (0.044)         (0.037)      (0.028)        (0.039)        (0.036)
Decrease Wealth 30% to 50%         0.033        -0.055          -0.053        0.037          0.037         -0.005
                                 (0.055)       (0.052)         (0.046)      (0.034)        (0.045)        (0.045)
Decrease Wealth > 50%             -0.071        -0.011          -0.032        0.047          0.044         -0.021
                                 (0.087)       (0.076)         (0.068)      (0.047)        (0.064)        (0.058)
Income
Less than $20,000 (reference)          --            --              --           --             --             --
$20,000 - $29,999                 -0.092        -0.014           0.097        0.022          0.018         -0.040
                                 (0.077)       (0.073)         (0.075)      (0.034)        (0.054)        (0.051)
$30,000 - $39,999                 -0.097         0.013           0.084       -0.001          0.041          0.035
                                 (0.076)       (0.072)         (0.073)      (0.029)        (0.055)        (0.059)
$40,000 - $49,999                 -0.036         0.091           0.046        0.002         -0.018          0.014
                                 (0.074)       (0.077)         (0.070)      (0.029)        (0.047)        (0.058)
$50,000 - $59,999                  0.029        -0.048          -0.008       -0.035          0.016          0.058
                                 (0.076)       (0.071)         (0.072)      (0.021)        (0.056)        (0.066)
$60,000 - $74,999                 -0.007        -0.048           0.073       -0.053 **      -0.015          0.049


                                                                                                                     41
                                  (0.074)          (0.069)          (0.073)     (0.018)          (0.050)       (0.062)
$75,000 - $99,999                   0.076           -0.105            0.085      -0.038 +         -0.048         0.059
                                  (0.071)          (0.066)          (0.075)     (0.022)          (0.047)       (0.065)
$100,000 - $149,999                 0.144 *         -0.076            0.110      -0.047 *         -0.072        -0.049
                                  (0.070)          (0.072)          (0.082)     (0.020)          (0.045)       (0.056)
$150,000 or more                    0.042            0.087            0.060       0.059           -0.067        -0.039
                                  (0.107)          (0.114)          (0.104)     (0.072)          (0.063)       (0.084)
Wealth
Zero (reference)                        --               --               --          --               --            --
Less than $1000                    -0.140            0.151    +       0.052      -0.001            0.031        -0.041
                                  (0.087)          (0.083)          (0.078)     (0.031)          (0.057)       (0.052)
$1,000 - $2,999                     0.022            0.025            0.139      -0.018            0.052         0.004
                                  (0.085)          (0.079)          (0.087)     (0.028)          (0.064)       (0.064)
$3,000 - $4,999                     0.139    +      -0.114    +       0.237 *    -0.050    **     -0.037        -0.020
                                  (0.075)          (0.067)          (0.094)     (0.018)          (0.052)       (0.062)
$4,000 - $9,999                     0.271    ***    -0.112    +       0.114      -0.045    *      -0.050        -0.114    **
                                  (0.050)          (0.065)          (0.088)     (0.019)          (0.048)       (0.042)
$10,000 - $19,999                   0.246    ***    -0.160    **      0.225 *    -0.017           -0.141 ***    -0.074
                                  (0.056)          (0.057)          (0.088)     (0.029)          (0.027)       (0.049)
$20,000 - $49,999                   0.281    ***    -0.186    ***     0.102      -0.046    *      -0.040        -0.100    *
                                  (0.051)          (0.052)          (0.079)     (0.020)          (0.047)       (0.043)
$50,000 - $99,999                   0.226    ***    -0.149    **      0.153 +    -0.044    *      -0.033        -0.170    ***
                                  (0.059)          (0.057)          (0.081)     (0.020)          (0.049)       (0.031)
$100,000 - $249,999                 0.291    ***    -0.187    ***     0.034      -0.047    *      -0.103 **     -0.148    ***
                                  (0.049)          (0.054)          (0.079)     (0.020)          (0.037)       (0.036)
$250,000 or more                    0.273    ***    -0.247    ***     0.051      -0.075    ***    -0.090 *      -0.109    *
                                  (0.054)          (0.045)          (0.083)     (0.012)          (0.041)       (0.046)
Education
High School or Less (reference)         --               --              --           --              --             --



                                                                                                                                42
Trade School             0.085        -0.011        -0.003     -0.009        -0.027      -0.059
                       (0.063)       (0.062)       (0.061)    (0.025)       (0.042)     (0.044)
Some College             0.042         0.006         0.034     -0.022        -0.020       0.011
                       (0.045)       (0.042)       (0.040)    (0.017)       (0.031)     (0.035)
College                  0.172 ***    -0.045         0.029     -0.053 **     -0.046      -0.027
                       (0.045)       (0.045)       (0.045)    (0.017)       (0.032)     (0.037)
Graduate Education       0.124 *      -0.047         0.088     -0.055 ***    -0.020      -0.087 *
                       (0.056)       (0.057)       (0.062)    (0.014)       (0.044)     (0.041)
Unemployed              -0.140 **      0.187 ***    -0.030      0.047 +       0.071 +    -0.049
                       (0.053)       (0.053)       (0.043)    (0.027)       (0.040)     (0.035)
Age
18-34 (reference)            --            --            --         --            --          --
35 – 55                  0.112 **     -0.100 **      0.003     -0.021        -0.052 +    -0.117 ***
                       (0.038)       (0.034)       (0.034)    (0.017)       (0.027)     (0.027)
55 – 65                  0.128 *      -0.249 ***    -0.015     -0.058 ***    -0.072 *    -0.185 ***
                       (0.052)       (0.035)       (0.050)    (0.015)       (0.033)     (0.025)
Female                   0.065 *       0.059 +       0.007     -0.019        -0.051 *     0.046 +
                       (0.032)       (0.030)       (0.028)    (0.014)       (0.023)     (0.025)
Race/Ethnicity
White (reference)            --            --            --         --            --          --
Black                    0.007         0.090         0.005      0.008        -0.068 +     0.064
                       (0.063)       (0.066)       (0.057)    (0.027)       (0.035)     (0.056)
Hispanic                 0.022         0.073        -0.076     -0.051 ***    -0.063       0.035
                       (0.080)       (0.077)       (0.061)    (0.015)       (0.044)     (0.060)
Asian                   -0.102         0.024         0.098     -0.030        -0.061       0.004
                       (0.069)       (0.065)       (0.067)    (0.022)       (0.042)     (0.053)
Other Race/Ethnicity     0.014         0.158         0.011      0.017        -0.090 +     0.070
                       (0.112)       (0.112)       (0.098)    (0.057)       (0.051)     (0.098)




                                                                                                      43
Marital Status
Married (reference)           --            --          --         --             --           --
Never Married             0.015         0.029      -0.044       0.014         0.024        0.004
                        (0.046)       (0.045)     (0.042)     (0.023)       (0.036)      (0.036)
Divorced or Widowed      -0.087         0.086       0.009       0.031         0.064        0.012
                        (0.057)       (0.054)     (0.049)     (0.031)       (0.046)      (0.045)
Other Marital Status     -0.034         0.080      -0.026       0.008         0.033        0.086 +
                        (0.059)       (0.058)     (0.050)     (0.028)       (0.044)      (0.051)
Household Composition
Children in Household    -0.147 ***     0.074 *     0.021       0.050 **      0.026       -0.000
                        (0.035)       (0.033)     (0.030)     (0.018)       (0.025)      (0.027)
Live with Parents         0.060         0.116 *     0.000      -0.018         0.026       -0.026
                        (0.055)       (0.057)     (0.052)     (0.022)       (0.044)      (0.039)
Region
South (reference)             --            --          --          --            --           --
North-East                0.025        -0.059       0.014      -0.044 **      0.007       -0.002
                        (0.044)       (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.014)       (0.032)      (0.035)
Mid-West                 -0.014         0.037      -0.003      -0.039 **      0.029       -0.031
                        (0.043)       (0.041)     (0.037)     (0.014)       (0.031)      (0.030)
West                     -0.016         0.044       0.046      -0.016        -0.002       -0.023
                        (0.042)       (0.040)     (0.038)     (0.017)       (0.031)      (0.031)
Gambled                  -0.019         0.048       0.062 *     0.060 ***     0.040       -0.008
                        (0.033)       (0.032)     (0.029)     (0.017)       (0.024)      (0.025)
Financial Education       0.047        -0.023      -0.011       0.030 *       0.016        0.040
                        (0.037)       (0.036)     (0.033)     (0.014)       (0.026)      (0.028)
Risk Literacy             0.111 **     -0.018       0.009      -0.009        -0.073 **    -0.046
                        (0.038)       (0.039)     (0.036)     (0.017)       (0.026)      (0.029)
Observations              1255          1255        1255        1255          1255         1255
Pseudo R2                 0.184         0.170       0.037       0.178         0.089        0.103


                                                                                                     44
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
Notes:
1. Models also include dichotomous indicators of having missing data on income, wealth, or change in wealth.
2. Savings = (1) draw from savings, (2) liquidate or sell investments, (3) borrow against retirement savings, and/or (4) liquidate some retirement investments
3. Family/Friends = (1) borrow or ask for help from family and/or (2) borrow or ask for help from my friends (not family)
4. Mainstream Credit = (1) use credit cards, (2) open or use home equity line of credit/second mortgage, and/or (3) unsecured loan
5. AFS Credit = (1) payday or payroll advance loan and/or (2) pawn an asset
6. Sell Things = (1) sell things I owned, except my home and/or (2) sell my home
7. Work More = (1) Work overtime, get a second job, or another member of my household would work longer or go to work




                                                                                                                                                                 45
Table 6. Cross-national Comparisons of Confidence in Capacity to Cope and Methods of Coping, Percent of Respondents by
Country


                                  US         UK        France    Germany     Canada      Italy    Portugal Netherlands
 Confidence in Ability to
 Cope
  Certainly Able to Cope          24.9       24.1       36.2       30.7        44.3       48.2      31.0        57.7
  Probably Able to Cope           25.1       23.7       26.6       18.7        27.4       31.9      23.1        15.5
  Probably Not Able to Cope       22.1       16.7       18.5       21.7        12.3       11.0      13.8         8.0
  Certainly Not Able to Cope      27.9       35.5       18.8       28.9        15.9        9.0      32.1        18.9
 Coping Method by Type
  Savings                         60.6       53.6       57.5       54.8        58.9       71.3      49.2        88.8
  Family or Friends               34.2       33.7       33.0       35.9        25.6       23.9      28.0        10.3
  Mainstream Credit               29.5       26.2       15.9       21.5        40.3       16.6      12.4         7.8
  Alternative Credit              10.8       4.1        5.2        7.3          7.0        6.4       6.3         0.5
  Sell Possessions                19.1       14.8       12.9       11.0         9.5        3.7       4.3         1.5
  Work More                       22.9       15.4       16.8       14.2        12.9       10.6      14.7         1.5
  Other                             0         0          0          0            0          0         0          1.8
  Don't Know                       1.9       3.8        5.5        6.0          7.5        3.4      11.6         5.9

 Number of Coping Methods
  One                             46.5       59.8       59.9       54.7        48.3       67.0      71.2        84.3
  Two                             18.6       16.0       17.8       16.6        21.3       19.3      13.2         8.9
  Three                           34.9       24.2       22.2       28.8        30.4       13.8      15.6         6.8
 Observations                    1,931       1,001      1,097      1,107      1,132       935       1,011       1,001




                                                                                                                         46
Appendix: Survey Methods


The data we draw upon in this paper was collected from respondents surveyed in the United States,
Canada, Great Britain, France, Germany, Portugal, Italy, and the Netherlands as part of the TNS
Global Economic Crisis survey. This survey was administered to members of existing online TNS
panels of respondents. TNS panels are assembled through convenience sampling, with panel
members recruited through a wide range of channels with the intent of drawing in a broad group of
internet users and of minimizing the bias that might be associated with any one method of
recruitment. Members of these panels opt-in to panel membership and are then contacted to
participate in surveys fielded by TNS on a diverse range of topics.
       For this particular survey, panel members were selected for contact based on gender,
education, age, and region in an effort to assemble a group of respondents that matched, on those
attributes, the population of each country. Response rates to the invitation to participate in the
survey ranged from 7.5% – 19.5% of panel members contacted, depending on the country. A
reminder email was issued to the group of selected panel members three days after initial contact. In
the case of the TNS Global Economic Crisis survey, these procedures yielded samples of 2,148 US
respondents, 1,132 Canadian respondents, 1,001 British respondents, 1,097 French respondents,
1,107 German respondents, 1,011 Portuguese respondents, 935 Italian respondents, and 1,001
Dutch respondents. These data were then weighted to ensure that they reflected the national
population of each country on the basic demographic characteristics noted above.
       Appendix Table 1 displays univariate statistics for basic demographic and economic
measures for the United States and compares the distributions of responses from the TNS survey
with pooled 2006–2008 American Community Survey (ACS) data and with data from the 2007
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) for the United States. In general, our sample matches well in
terms of basic demographics, including age, gender, and geography. However, our sample is
underrepresented with respect to minorities and families with children and is slightly better educated
than the ACS sample. Our sample is also quite similar to the overall population, as measured by the
2007 SCF, in terms of wealth.
       The methodology used here has the virtue of permitting the survey to be rapidly
implemented in multiple countries at a fairly low cost. However, several important drawbacks to
this methodology should be noted. While our sample matches quite well with the United States
population (as measured by the ACS and SCF) on observable economic and demographic


                                                                                                   47
characteristics, respondents were drawn from a convenience sample and, as such, may differ from
the general population on other characteristics.
        In particular, our sample is restricted to internet users. Access to home broadband is not
universal in any of the countries examined here and generally ranges between 40% and 80% of
households (OECD, 2011). However, the share of internet users is likely somewhat higher than the
share with broadband access because some households still use dial-up connections and others
access the internet outside of the home. For example, 67% of US households have broadband, but
78% of American adults are internet users (Horrigan, 2010).           Our sample then likely under-
represents the most vulnerable groups of the population, such as migrant workers, and over-
represents those who are more technically savvy. While we account for observable measures of
socio-economic status, these biases might still lead us to misstate the financial fragility of the
populations examined here if these characteristics are associated with SES or financial acumen.
        Further, though our sample matches the general population well in terms of education and
wealth, there is some suggestion that it may slightly under-represent the highest income households.
This may be because members of the TNS panels opt-in to participation and receive small monetary
rewards for participation, perhaps making participation particularly appealing to those with more
time and lower income. This later bias, if present, would perhaps lead us to overstate the extent of
financial fragility in the population. However, when polled, few members of the TNS panels report
that their decision to participate is primarily driven by economic factors.
        TNS implements several system-wide checks on data quality.            Most notability, mean
response times to each survey are calculated and respondents’ whose completion times are more
than two standard deviations from the mean are flagged. Respondents’ who are flagged multiple
times are excluded from future surveys. In any given survey, the percent of respondents flagged in
this way is generally 1 - 2%.



References for the Appendix:

OECD Broadband Statistics. 2011. Households with broadband access 2000–2009. Available from:
   www.oecd.org/sti/ict/broadband

Horrigan, J. 2010. Broadband adoption and use in America. OBI Working Paper Series No. 1.
       Federal Communications Commission.




                                                                                                  48
Appendix Table 1. Descriptive Statistics: Economic and Demographic Characteristics
(TNS Survey, ACS Pooled 2006 – 2008 Sample, 2007 SCF)
                                        TNS     External Data
 Change in Wealth Since Crisis
 Same                                  27.09           --
 Increase Wealth > 10%                  7.76                     --
 Increase Wealth < 10%                 10.56                     --
 Decrease Wealth < 10%                 12.54                     --
 Decrease Wealth 10% to 29%            21.66                     --
 Decrease Wealth 30% to 50%            11.70                     --
 Decrease Wealth > 50%                  8.69                     --
 Income
 Less than $20,000                     13.29                 14.8
 $20,000 - $29,999                     11.96                 9.17
 $30,000 - $39,999                     12.88                 9.72
 $40,000 - $49,999                     13.27                 9.25
 $50,000 - $59,999                     11.29                 8.67
 $60,000 - $74,999                     13.13                11.15
 $75,000 - $99,999                     11.18                13.79
 $100,000 - $149,999                    9.53                13.85
 $150,000 or more                       3.47                 9.59
 Wealth
 Zero                                  12.93                 9.02
 Less than $1000                       14.70                17.19
 $1,000 - $2,999                        7.22                12.46
 $3,000 - $4,999                        5.31                 5.76
 $4,000 - $9,999                        7.54                 8.91
 $10,000 - $19,999                      8.24                 9.19
 $20,000 - $49,999                     12.02                11.54
 $50,000 - $99,999                     12.34                 8.05
 $100,000 - $249,999                   10.27                 9.13
 $250,000 or more                       9.45                 8.75
 Education
 High School or Less                   22.34                42.71
 Trade School                           8.23                    --
 Some College                          34.81                31.15
 College (Bachelor’s Degree)           26.71                17.21
 Graduate Education                     7.89                 8.93
 Unemployed                            13.92                     --
 Age
 18 – 34                               39.11                36.82
 35 – 54                               47.06                45.93
 55 – 65                               13.83                17.25
                                                            (cont…)

                                                                                     49
 Female                                               49.61                  50.05
 Race/Ethnicity
 White                                                80.48                  66.55
 Black                                                 7.78                  12.06
 Hispanic                                              4.34                  14.44
 Asian                                                 5.03                   4.69
 Other Race/Ethnicity                                  2.37                   2.26
 Marital Status
 Married/Cohabiting                                   54.16                  56.24
 Never Married                                        23.65                  31.81
 Divorced or Widowed                                  11.55                  11.95
 Other Marital Status                                 10.65                      --
 Household Composition
 Children in Household                                41.36                  53.41
 Live with Parents                                    11.62                      --
 Region
 South                                                36.21                  36.54
 Northeast                                            18.83                  18.25
 Midest                                               22.46                  21.83
 West                                                 22.50                  23.37

Notes:
1. ACS data is used for all comparison measures but for wealth, which is calculated from the 2007 SCF.
2. The census categorizes Hispanic as an ethnic category separate from racial categories. Calculations were done on ACS
data to ensure that the race data presented here were for ages 18–64 and that Hispanics were not also included in other
racial categories (e.g., white, black).
3. The ACS does not categorize separately those who “cohabitate.” The ACS category “married” includes all married
persons who are either living together, separated, or designated as “other married.”
4. The most comparable ACS data are provided here: all persons who have their own children in the household.




                                                                                                                   50
Questions to Measure Risk Literacy

Q1. For the same amount of money, a person can enter either one of these two lotteries. Lottery A
pays a prize of [US $200, GB £140, GER & FRA 150 Euros] and the chance of winning is 5%.
Lottery B pays a prize of [US $90,000, GB £60,000, GER & FRA 65,000 Euros] and the chance of
winning is 0.01%. In either case, if one does not win, one does not get any money. Which lottery
pays the higher average amount?
(Please pick one option only)
1. Lottery A
2. Lottery B
3. These two lotteries pay the same average amount
4. I do not know
5. I refuse to answer


Q2. You can invest in two projects. Project A will either deliver a return of 10% or 6%, with either
outcome equally likely. Project B will either deliver a return of 12% or 4%, with either outcome
equally likely. Which of the following is true? Compared to Project B, Project A has….
(Please pick one option only)
1. Higher return and lower risk
2. Same average return and lower risk
3. Lower return and higher risk
4. I do not know
5. I refuse to answer


Q3 As a general rule, if you were investing in stocks [GB change to: investing in stocks and shares],
which of the two types of investments listed below is likely to be riskier?
(Please pick one option only)
1. Investing in a single stock
2. Investing in a fund that holds 100 different stocks
3. I don’t know
4. I refuse to answer




                                                                                                  51
Appendix Table 2. Country Level Effects on Capacity to Cope. Marginal Effects from Probit
Regression (SE)


                                             Model 1             Model 2

 United States (reference)                        --                  --
 United Kingdom                              -0.018 ***          -0.008
                                            (0.000)             (0.007)
 Germany                                     -0.006 ***           0.062 ***
                                            (0.000)             (0.014)
 Portugal                                     0.085 ***           0.103 ***
                                            (0.000)             (0.015)
 France                                       0.130 ***           0.182 ***
                                            (0.000)             (0.009)
 Canada                                       0.212 ***           0.204 ***
                                            (0.000)             (0.009)
 Italy                                        0.299 ***           0.290 ***
                                            (0.000)             (0.004)
 Individual Controls                            N                     Y
 Observations                                7551                 7551
 Pseudo R2                                   0.036                0.123
Marginal effects
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Notes:
1. Model 2 controls for age, education, gender, presence of children in household, changes in wealth, financial
education, gambling, and risk literacy.




                                                                                                                  52
