                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           UNEMPLOYMENT IN AN ESTIMATED NEW KEYNESIAN MODEL

                                           Jordi Galí
                                          Frank Smets
                                         Rafael Wouters

                                       Working Paper 17084
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17084


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2011




Prepared for the NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011 Conference, held in Cambridge, MA on April
8-9, 2011. We have benefited from comments by Larry Christiano, Marco del Negro, Keith Kuester,
Richard Rogerson, Carlos Thomas, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute, SED Conference
(Montréal), Banque de France, Harvard, EUI (Florence), Bank of Cyprus, CREI-UPF, ECB, Leuven,
Insead and PSE. Galí acknowledges the financial support from the European Research Council through
an Advanced Grant (Project Reference #229650). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jordi Galí, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployment in an Estimated New Keynesian Model
Jordi Galí, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters
NBER Working Paper No. 17084
May 2011
JEL No. D58,E24,E31,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

We reformulate the Smets-Wouters (2007) framework by embedding the theory of unemployment
proposed in Galí (2011a,b). We estimate the resulting model using postwar U.S. data, while treating
the unemployment rate as an additional observable variable. Our approach overcomes the lack of identification
of wage markup and labor supply shocks highlighted by Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2008) in their
criticism of New Keynesian models, and allows us to estimate a "correct" measure of the output gap.
In addition, the estimated model can be used to analyze the sources of unemployment fluctuations.


Jordi Galí                                    Rafael Wouters
                                              National Bank of Belgium
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25                         Brussels
08005 Barcelona                               rafael.wouters@nbb.be
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat

Frank Smets
European Central Bank
Postfach 16 03 19
D-60311 Frankfurt
GERMANY
frank.smets@ecb.int
1         Introduction
Over the past decade an increasing number of central banks and other pol-
icy institutions have developed and estimated medium-scale New Keynesian
DSGE models.1 The combination of a good empirical …t with a sound, mi-
crofounded structure makes these models particularly suitable for forecasting
and policy analysis. However, as highlighted by Galí and Gerter (2009) and
others, one of the shortcomings of these models is the lack of a reference
to unemployment. This is unfortunate because unemployment is an impor-
tant indicator of aggregate resource utilization and the central focus of the
policy debate. Recently, a number of papers have started to address this
shortcoming by embedding in the basic New Keynesian model various the-
ories of unemployment based on the presence of labor market frictions (e.g.
Blanchard and Galí (2007), Christo¤el et al (2007), Gertler, Sala and Tri-
gari (2008), Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2009), and de Walque et al
(2008)).
        The present paper takes a di¤erent approach. Following Gali (2011a,b),
it reformulates the Smets and Wouters (2007; henceforth, SW) model to
allow for involuntary unemployment, while preserving the convenience of
the representative household paradigm. Unemployment in the model results
from market power in labor markets, re‡ected in positive wage markups.
Variations in unemployment over time are associated with changes in wage
markups, either exogenous or resulting from nominal wage rigidities.2
    1
     See, for example, Smets et al. (2010) for a short description of the two aggregate euro
area models used at the ECB. Two of the DSGE models used at the Federal Reserve are
described in Edge et al. (2007) and Erceg et al. (2006).
   2
     The general approach builds on Galí (1996). See also Blanchard and Galí (2007),



                                             1
    The proposed reformulation allows us to overcome an identi…cation prob-
lem pointed out by Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2008; henceforth, CKM)
and interpreted by these authors as an illustration of the immaturity of New
Keynesian models for policy analysis. Their observation is motivated by the
SW …nding that wage markup shocks account for almost 50 percent of the
variations in real GDP at horizons of more than 10 years. However, with-
out an explicit measure of unemployment (or, alternatively, labor supply),
these wage markup shocks cannot be distinguished from preference shocks
that shift the marginal disutility of labour. The policy implications of these
two sources of ‡uctuations are, however, very di¤erent. Variations in wage
markup shocks are ine¢ cient and a welfare-maximising government should
be interested in stabilising output ‡uctuations resulting from those shocks
(at least partly). In contrast, output and employment ‡uctuations driven
by preference shocks shifting the labor supply schedule, should in princi-
ple be accommodated. Put it di¤erently, the relative importance of those
two shocks will in‡uence the extent to which ‡uctuations in output during
a given historical episode should or should not be interpreted as re‡ecting
movements in the welfare relevant output gap (i.e. the distance between the
actual and e¢ cient levels of output). By including unemployment as an ob-
servable variable, this identi…cation problem can be overcome, and "correct"
measures of the output gap can be constructed, as we show in Section 4.
    When we estimate the reformulated SW model using unemployment as an
observable variable, we …nd a much diminished role for wage markup shocks
Casares (2010), and Zanetti (2007) for related applications to the New Keynesian model.
After having circulated a …rst draft of the present paper we became aware of Casares,
Moreno and Vázquez (2011), which contains an exercise close in spirit (but with substantial
di¤erences in details) to the one presented here.


                                            2
as a source of output and employment ‡uctuations, even though those shocks
preserve a large role as drivers of in‡ation. Our estimates lead us to classify
the multiple shocks in the model in three categories (which we label "de-
mand", "supply", and "labor market" shocks), on the basis of their implied
joint comovement among output, employment, the labor force, unemploy-
ment, in‡ation and the real wage, as captured by their associated impulse
response functions (IRFs). In addition, we show how the implied measure
of the welfare-relevant output gap is to a large extent the mirror image of
the unemployment rate, and resembles conventional measures of the cyclical
component of log GDP, based on statistical detrending methods (though the
correlation is far from perfect).
   Our estimates of the reformulated SW model allow us to address a num-
ber of additional questions of interest which could not be dealt with using the
model’s original formulation. Thus, in section 5 we assess quantitatively the
relative importance of di¤erent shocks as sources of unemployment ‡uctua-
tions and their role during speci…c historical episodes, including the recent
recession. Also, our approach allows us to uncover a measure of the natural
rate of unemployment (i.e. the ‡exible wage counterfactual) and to study
its comovement with actual unemployment. That comovement is shown to
be particularly strong at low frequencies, as expected, but the gap between
the two caused by wage rigidities is estimated to be large and persistent. We
also revisit the evidence on the joint behavior of in‡ation and unemployment
under the lens of our estimated model. This allows us to give a structural
interpretation to empirical Phillips curves, both for wage and price in‡ation.
In section 6 we discuss the robustness of our …ndings to the use of alternative


                                      3
sample period and data. Section 7 concludes.
   In addition to reformulating the wage equation in terms of unemployment,
our model shows a number of small di¤erences with that in SW (2007). First,
and regarding the data on which the estimation is based, we use employment
rather than hours worked, and rede…ne the wage as the wage per worker
rather than the wage per hour. We do so since the model focuses on variations
in labor at the extensive margin, in a way consistent with the conventional
de…nition of unemployment. Given that most of the variation in hours worked
over the business cycle is due to changes in employment rather than hours
per employee, this change does not have major consequences in itself. We
also combine two alternative wage measures in the estimation, compensation
and earnings, and model their discrepancy explicitly. Second, we generalise
the utility function in a way that allows us to parameterize the strength of
the wealth e¤ect on labour supply, as shown in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009).
This generalisation yields a better …t of the joint behavior of employment and
the labor force, as we discuss in detail. Third, for simplicity, we revert to
a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator rather than the Kimball aggregator used in SW
(2007).
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the
modi…ed Smets-Wouters model. Next, Section 3 presents the data and es-
timation. Section 4 contains the discussion of the CKM critique. Section 5
analyses di¤erent aspects of unemployment ‡uctuations which the reformu-
lation of the SW model makes possible. Section 6 presents some robustness
exercises and, …nally, Section 7 concludes.




                                      4
2        Introducing Unemployment in the Smets-
         Wouters Model
2.1      Staggered Wage Setting and Wage In‡ation Dy-
         namics

This section introduces a variant of the wage setting block of the SW model,
which is in turn an extension of that in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000;
henceforth, EHL). The variant presented here, based on Galí (2011a,b), as-
sumes that labor is indivisible, with all variations in hired labor input taking
place at the extensive margin. That feature gives rise to a notion of unem-
ployment consistent with its empirical counterpart.
      The model assumes a (large) representative household with a continuum
of members represented by the unit square and indexed by a pair (i; j) 2
[0; 1]   [0; 1]. The …rst dimension, indexed by i 2 [0; 1], represents the type of
labor service in which a given household member is specialized. The second
dimension, indexed by j 2 [0; 1], determines his disutility from work. The
                              '
latter is given by   t   tj       if he is employed, zero otherwise, where        t   > 0 is an
exogenous preference shifter (referred to below as a "labor supply shock"),
  t   is an endogenous preference shifter, taken as given by each individual
household and de…ned below, and '                        0 is a parameter determining the
shape of the distribution of work disutilities across individuals.
      Individual utility is assumed to be given by:
                           X
                           1
                      E0            t        et (i; j)
                                         log C           1t (i; j)   t   tj
                                                                              '

                           t=0

      et (i; j)
where C              Ct (i; j)          hC t 1 , with h 2 [0; 1].and with C t     1   denoting
(lagged) aggregate consumption (taken as given by each household), and

                                                   5
where 1t (i; j) is an indicator function taking a value equal to one if individ-
ual (i; j) is employed in period t, and zero otherwise. Thus, as in SW and
related monetary DSGE models, we allow for (external) habits in consump-
tion, indexed by h.
       As in Merz (1995), full risk sharing of consumption among household
members is assumed, implying Ct (i; j) = Ct for all (i; j) 2 [0; 1]                                      [0; 1] and t.
Thus, we can derive the household utility as the integral over its members’
utilities, that is:

                                                                                   Z           Z                      !
        X
        1                                         X
                                                  1                                        1        Nt (i)
 E0           t
                  Ut (Ct ; fNt (i)g)        E0              t       et
                                                                log C      t   t
                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                             j djdi
        t=0                                       t=0                                  0        0

                                                  X1                               Z       1
                                                            t       et                         Nt (i)1+'
                                        = E0                    log C      t   t                         di
                                                  t=0                              0            1+'

where Nt (i) 2 [0; 1] denotes the employment rate in period t among workers
                                et
specialized in type i labor and C                     Ct        hC t 1 .3 We de…ne the endogenous
preference shifter           t   as follows:
                                                             Zt
                                            t
                                                   Ct         hC t   1

where Zt evolves over time according to the di¤erence equation


                                       Zt = Zt1   1   (C t      hC t 1 )

       Thus Zt can be interpreted as a "smooth" trend for (quasi-di¤erenced)
aggregate consumption. Our preference speci…cation implies a "consump-
tion externality" on individual labor supply: during aggregate consumption
   3                                                                          et , as a "prim-
     Alternatively, we can take the consumption utility of the household, log C
itive," without making any assumption on how that consumption is distributed among
household members, possibly as a function of employment status.

                                                        6
booms (i.e. when C t       hC t   1   is above its trend value Zt ), individual (as well
as household-level) marginal disutility from work goes down (at any given
level of employment).
       The previous speci…cation generalizes the preferences assumed in SW
by allowing for an exogenous labor supply shock,                     t,   and by introducing
the endogenous shifter       t,   just described. The main role of the latter is to
reconcile the existence of a long-run balanced growth path with an arbitrarily
small short-term wealth e¤ect. The latter’s importance is determined by the
size of parameter       2 [0; 1]. As discussed below in detail, that feature is
needed in order to match the joint behavior of the labor force, consumption
and the wage over the business cycle. That modi…cation is related to, but
not identical, to the one proposed by Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) as a key
ingredient in order to account for the economy’s response to news about
future productivity increases.4
       Note that under the previous preferences, the household-relevant marginal
rate of substitution between consumption and employment for type i workers
in period t is given by:


                                                    Un(i);t
                            M RSt (i)
                                                     Uc;t
                                           =           e
                                                   t t Ct Nt (i)
                                                                 '


                                                                 '
                                           =       t Zt Nt (i)
   4
    In particular, and leaving aside the presence of habits, our speci…cation assumes that
the period utility is separable in consumption and employment, in contrast with that
in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009). This facilitates aggregation of individual utilities into
the household utility, and simpli…es the analysis by implying equalization of consumption
across individuals in the presence of risk sharing within each household.



                                               7
where the last equality is satis…ed in a symmetric equilibrium with C t = Ct .
   Using lower case letters to denote the natural logarithms of the origi-
nal variables, we can derive the average (log) marginal rate of substitution
        R1
mrst     0
           mrst (i) di by integrating over all labor types:

                                mrst = zt + 'nt +                 t

            R1
where nt     0
                 nt (i) di is (log) aggregate employment and                          t   log   t.

   We assume nominal wages are set by "unions," each of which represents
the workers specialized in a given type of labor, and acting in an uncoor-
dinated way. As in EHL, and following the formalism of Calvo (1983), we
assume that the nominal wage for a labor service of a given type can only
be reset with probability 1        w   each period. That probability is indepen-
dent of the time elapsed since the wage for that labor type was last reset,
in addition to being independent across labor types. Thus, and by the law
of large numbers, a fraction of workers                  w   do not reoptimize their wage in
any given period, making that parameter a natural index of nominal wage
rigidities. Furthermore, all those who reoptimize their wage choose an iden-
tical wage, denoted by Wt , since they face an identical problem. Following
SW, we allow for partial wage indexation between re-optimization periods,
by making the nominal wage adjust mechanically in proportion to past price
in‡ation. Formally, and letting Wt+kjt denote the nominal wage in period
t + k for workers who last reoptimized their wage in period t, we assume

                                                 x       p                p 1
                     Wt+kjt = Wt+k     1jt           (   t 1)
                                                                  w   (    )    w



                                                              p
for k = 1; 2; 3; :::and Wt;t = Wt , and where                 t       Pt =Pt    1   denotes the (gross)
                           p                                                                    x
rate of price in‡ation,        is its corresponding steady state value,                              is the

                                             8
steady state (gross) growth rate of productivity, and                             w   2 [0; 1] measures the
degree of wage indexation to past in‡ation.
       When reoptimizing their wage in period t, workers (or the union represent-
ing them) choose a wage Wt in order to maximize their respective households
utility (as opposed to their individual utility), subject to the usual sequence
of household ‡ow budget constraints, as well as a sequence of isoelastic de-
mand schedules of the form Nt+kjt = (Wt+kjt =Wt+k )                                w;t
                                                                                         Nt+k , where Nt+kjt
denotes period t + k employment among workers whose wage was last reopti-
mized in period t, and where                  w;t   is the period t wage elasticity of the relevant
labor demand schedule.5 We assume that elasticity varies exogenously over
time, thus leading to changes in workers’market power.
       The …rst order condition associated with the wage-setting problem can
be written as:
        X1
                                Nt+kjt                  Wt+kjt
           ( w )k Et                                                    Mnw;t+k M RSt+kjt             =0         (1)
           k=0
                                Ct+k                    Pt+k
                                                                                      '
where, in a symmetric equilibrium, M RSt+kjt                                    t Zt Nt+kjt    is the relevant
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and employment in pe-
riod t + k, and Mnw;t             w;t
                                      w;t
                                              1
                                                  is the natural (or desired) wage markup in
period t, i.e. the one that would obtain under ‡exible wages.
   Under the above assumptions, we can write the aggregate wage index
      R1         1 w;t
                            1
                          1 w;t
Wt     0
         W t (i)       di       as follows:
                                                                                                          1
                       x       p                  p 1
  Wt         w (Wt 1       (   t 1)
                                      w   (         )    w   )1   w;t
                                                                        + (1    w )(Wt    )1    w;t   1    w;t   (2)

       Log-linearizing (1) and (2) around a perfect foresight steady state and
combining the resulting expressions, allows us to derive (after some algebra)
   5
    Details of the derivation of the optimal wage setting condition can be found in EHL
(2000).

                                                             9
                                                                w
the following equation for wage in‡ation                        t        wt    wt     1      :

            w                  p                    w                 p                                n
            t   =    w   +   w t 1   + Et f         t+1             w tg           w ( w;t             w;t )     (3)

                                      p        x                    (1     w )(1    w)           n
where   w       (1       )((1    )        +        ),    w               w (1+ w ')
                                                                                         ,       w;t     log Mnw;t is
the (log) natural wage markup, and


                                 w;t          (wt        pt )       mrst                                         (4)

is the (log) average wage markup, i.e. the log deviation between the average
real wage and the average marginal rate of substitution. As equation (3)
makes clear, variations in wage in‡ation above and beyond those resulting
from indexation to past price in‡ation are driven by deviations of average
wage markup from its natural level, because those deviations generate pres-
sure on workers currently setting wages to adjust those wages in one direction
or another.
   One might argue that the previous model provides, if interpreted liter-
ally, an unrealistic description of wage setting in the U.S. We view it instead
as a simple modelling device, consistent with the labor market block of the
medium-scale DSGE models currently used for policy analysis (as exempli…ed
by the SW model), and embedding three features of actual labor markets:
(i) nominal wage rigidities, (ii) staggered wage-setting, and (iii) the presence
of average wage levels above their perfectly competitive counterparts, result-
ing from di¤erent sources of market power by workers which prevent their
underbidding by the unemployed.




                                                    10
2.2           Introducing Unemployment

Consider an individual specialized in type i labor and with disutility of work
          '
 t   tj       . Using household welfare as a criterion, and taking as given current
labor market conditions (as summarized by the prevailing wage for his labor
type), that individual will …nd it optimal to participate in the labor market
in period t if and only if

                                    1      Wt (i)
                                                               t        t       j'
                                    et
                                    C       Pt

     Evaluating the previous condition at the symmetric equilibrium, and let-
ting the marginal supplier of type i labor be denoted by Lt (i), we have:

                                      Wt (i)                        '
                                             =        t Zt Lt (i)
                                       Pt

     Taking logs and integrating over i we obtain

                                    wt   pt = zt + 'lt +                    t        (5)

                  R1
where lt           0
                       lt (i) di can be interpreted as the (log) aggregate participation
or labor force.
     Following Galí (2011a,b), we de…ne the unemployment rate ut as:

                                          ut     lt       nt                         (6)

     Note that under our assumptions, the unemployed thus de…ned include
all the individuals who would like to be working (given current labor market
conditions, and while internalizing the bene…ts that this will bring to their
households) but are not currently employed. It is in that sense that one can



                                                 11
view unemployment as involuntary.6
       Combining (4) with (5) and (6), the following simple linear relation be-
tween the average wage markup and the unemployment rate can be derived


                                           w;t   = 'ut                                 (7)

which is also graphically illustrated in Figure 1.
       Finally, combining (3) and (7) we obtain an equation relating wage in‡a-
tion to price in‡ation, the unemployment rate and the wage markup.

              w                 p                w         p                  n
              t   =   w   +   w t 1   + Et f     t+1     w tg   w 'ut   +   w w;t      (8)

       Note that in contrast with the representation of the wage equation found
in SW and related papers, the error term in (8) captures exclusively shocks
to the wage markup, and not preference shocks (even though the latter have
been allowed for in our model). That feature, made possible by reformulating
the wage equation in terms of the (observable) unemployment rate, allows
us to overcome the identi…cation problem raised by CKM in their critique of
New Keynesian models. We turn to this issue below, when we discuss our
empirical …ndings.
       Finally, note that we can de…ne the natural rate of unemployment, unt , as
the unemployment rate that would prevail in the absence of nominal wage
rigidities. Under our assumptions, that natural rate will vary exogenously
   6
     As noted by one of our discussants, unemployed individuals will enjoy a higher utility
ex-post, since their consumption will be the same but won’t experience any disutility from
work. This is, of course, an unavoidable consequence of our assumption of full consumption
risk-sharing within the household. Under the latter assumption, and given the in…nitesimal
weight of each individual in the household, not internalizing the bene…ts to the latter of
an individual’s employment would unavoidably lead to no participation.



                                                 12
in proportion to the natural wage markup, and can be determined using the
simple relation:
                                      n
                                      w;t   = 'unt                           (9)



        The remaining equations describing the log-linearized equilibrium condi-
tions of the model are presented in the appendix. Those equations are iden-
tical to a particular case of the speci…cation in SW (2007), corresponding
to logarithmic consumption utility. In addition to the wage markup and la-
bor supply shocks discussed above, the model includes six additional shocks:
a neutral, factor-augmenting productivity shock, a price markup shock; a
risk premium shock, an exogenous spending shock, an investment-speci…c
technology shock and a monetary policy shock.


3         Data and Estimation
3.1        Data

We estimate our model on US data for the sample period 1966Q1-2007Q4 us-
ing Bayesian full-system estimation techniques as in SW (2007). We end our
estimation period in 2007Q4 to prevent our estimates from being distorted
by the non-linearities induced by the zero lower bound on the federal funds
rate and binding downward nominal wage rigidities during the most recent
recession.7 In Section 5 below we nevertheless use the estimated model to
interpret the behaviour of unemployment in the recent recession, i.e. beyond
    7
    For some discussion on how downward nominal wage rigidity may distort the the
estimates of the New Keynesian wage Phillips curve, see Gali (2011a).




                                            13
the estimated period. Section 7 on robustness discusses brie‡y the impact of
estimating our model over an extended sample period ending in 2010Q4.
   Five of the seven data series used by SW (2007) are also used here: GDP,
consumption, investment, GDP de‡ator in‡ation, and the federal funds rate,
with the …rst three expressed in per capita terms and log di¤erenced. As
the SW model is reformulated in terms of employment (given our interest in
explaining unemployment), we use per capita employment rather than hours
worked. The main results are not a¤ected if we use hours instead, as discussed
in Section 7. In addition, we experiment with two wage concepts. The …rst
one is total compensation per employee obtained from the BLS Productivity
and Costs Statistics.8 The second one is "average weekly earnings" from the
Current Employment Statistics. Finally, we add the unemployment rate as
an additional observable variable. In the following section, we systematically
compare the model estimated with and without the latter variable as an
observable variable.
   The properties of both wage series are quite di¤erent.9 This is illustrated
in Figure 2, which plots their quarterly nominal growth rates. First, average
wage in‡ation based on compensation per employee is signi…cantly higher
than that based on earnings per employee (1.24 versus 1.02). Given average
price in‡ation, the compensation series appears more compatible with a bal-
anced growth path in which real wages grow at the same rate as real output,
consumption and investment. Second, the compensation series is much more
volatile than the earnings series, especially over the past two decades. The
   8
     Note that SW (2007) used compensation per hour instead, in a way consistent with
their model speci…cation.
   9
     See Abraham, Spletzer and Stewart (1999) and Mehran and Tracy (2001) for a dis-
cussion about the sources of some of those di¤erence.


                                         14
standard deviation of wage in‡ation based on compensation is 0.70, com-
pared to 0.56 for the earnings-based series. Finally, the correlation between
both wage in‡ation measures is surprisingly low at 0.60.
       For our baseline estimation, we use both wage series as imperfect measures
of the model-based wage concept. This is done by adding measurement error
to the corresponding measurement equations and allowing for a separate,
smaller trend in the earnings series.10 In the section on robustness, we brie‡y
discuss the estimation results when we only use the compensation series. In
the rest of the paper, we focus on the model with both wage concepts and
measurement error.

3.2       Estimation Results

Table 1 compares the estimated structural parameters of the model obtained
with and without unemployment being used as an observable variable. As
discussed above, adding unemployment allows us to separately identify wage
markup and labour supply shocks. In addition, it allows us to exploit the
model’s prediction of proportionality between the unemployment rate and
the wage markup (see equation (7)), in order to identify and estimate the
elasticity of substitution between di¤erent labor types, which in turn deter-
mines the steady-state wage markup. In the model without unemployment
this parameter is not identi…ed; instead, we calibrate it to be very similar to
the mean of the estimate in the model with observable unemployment.
       Overall, most of the estimated structural parameters are very similar in
  10
    A similar strategy is followed by Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2011). They
show how using a single series (compensation) and not allowing for measurement error
implies a standard deviations for the estimated wage markup shocks that is six times
higher than in their baseline model.


                                          15
the two models.11 Focusing on the parameters that are important for the
labour market, a number of …ndings are worth emphasizing.12 First, the
estimated labour supply elasticity is quite similar whether one uses unem-
ployment or not as an observable variable: the inverse of the Frisch elasticity
increases slightly from 3.3 to 4.0 as one includes unemployment. In the latter
case, the steady state wage markup is identi…ed and estimated to be slightly
below 20 percent, which is consistent with an average unemployment rate of
about 5 percent.
       Turning to some of the other parameters that enter the wage Phillips
curve, the estimated degree of wage indexation is relatively small (around
0.15) and robust across the two models. The estimated Calvo probability
of unchanged wages falls somewhat from 0.61 to 0.47, suggesting relatively
‡exible wages with average contract durations of 2 quarters. Overall, the
introduction of unemployment as an observable variable leads to a somewhat
steeper wage Phillips curve.
       Third, the parameter, , governing the short-run wealth e¤ects on labour
supply, changes quite dramatically from 0.73 to 0.02. Roughly speaking this
amounts to a change from preferences close to those in King, Plosser and
Rebelo (1988; henceforth, KPR), characterized by strong short-run wealth
e¤ects on labor supply, to a speci…cation closer to that in Greenwood, Her-
cowitz and Hu¤man (1988). In the latter case, wealth e¤ects are close to
  11
     A robust feature of the model with observed unemployment is that the labour pref-
erence shock and the productivity shock are positively correlated. Allowing for such a
correlation further improves the …t of the model, but does not a¤ect the estimation results
discussed below.
  12
     Unless otherwise noted, we will consistently refer to the mode of the posterior proba-
bility distribution when discussing estimates. Table 1 also reports the mean and 5 and 95
percentiles of the posterior distribution.


                                            16
zero in the short run. As discussed below, this helps ensure that not only
employment, but also the labour force moves procyclically in response to
most shocks.13
    Finally, it is worth pointing out that the monetary policy reaction coef-
…cient to the output gap (de…ned as the deviation relative to the constant
markup output), doubles from 0.07 to 0.15. As discussed below, this is mainly
due to the lower volatility of the output gap once unemployment is used to
identify wage markup shocks.

3.3     Impulse Responses

Figures 3 to 5 show the estimated impulse responses of output, in‡ation, the
real wage, the interest rate, employment, the labour force, the unemployment
rate, and the output gap to the eight structural shocks. Figure 3 focuses on
the four "demand" shocks, which include the investment-speci…c technology
shock, the risk premium shock, the exogenous spending shock and the mone-
tary policy shock. We use the label "demand" to refer to those shocks because
they all imply a positive comovement beween output, in‡ation and the real
wage. It is particularly noteworthy that employment and the labour force
comove positively in response to all those shocks. Note, however, that the
size of the labour force response is typically much smaller than that of em-
ployment, so that unemployment ‡uctuations are mostly driven by changes
in employment. This is consistent with the unconditional second moments of
detrended data (see, e.g., Galí (2011c), as well as the empirical VAR evidence
  13
     Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) have argued that small short-run wealth e¤ects on labour
supply are necessary to generate a positive response of output to favorable news about
future productivity.



                                           17
on the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks as shown in Christiano et al. (2010).
   Figure 4 reports the dynamic responses to the labour supply and markup
shocks, which we group under the heading of "labor market" shocks. These
shocks generate a negative comovement of in‡ation and the real wage with
output. An adverse wage markup shock has a sizeable positive impact on
price in‡ation and unemployment and a negative one on output, employment
and the output gap, thus generating a clear trade-o¤ for policy makers. On
the other hand, an adverse labor supply shock has similar negative e¤ects on
output, employment and the output gap (and positive e¤ects on in‡ation),
but instead leads to a rise in the output gap and a drop in the unemployment
rate, so that no signi…cant policy trade-o¤ arises. It is this di¤erent e¤ect on
unemployment and the output gap associated with the two labour market
shocks that makes their separate identi…cation so important from a policy
perspective, as further discussed below.
   Figure 5 displays the estimated model’s implied impulse responses to
a positive neutral technology shock and a (negative) price markup shock.
We refer to those shocks as "supply" shocks, their distinctive feature being
that they generate simultaneously a procyclical real wage response and a
countercyclical response of in‡ation. It is worth noting, that, in line with
much of the empirical evidence (e.g. Galí (1999), Barnichon (2010)), in our
estimated model a positive technology shock leads to a short-run decline
in employment and a rise in the unemployment rate. This is in contrast
with the predictions of conventially calibrated real business cycle or search
and matching models. Secondly, and in a way analogous to wage markup
shocks, we see that price markup shocks also create a policy trade-o¤ between


                                      18
stabilizing in‡ation and the output gap. This is not the case for technology
shocks, since they drive both these variables in the same direction.

   Before turning to several interesting questions that can be addressed with
our estimated model, we wish to emphasize the importance of departing from
conventional KPR preferences in order to match certain aspects of the data.
Note that under standard KPR preferences ( = 1) the labor supply equation
(5) can be written as
                           wt   pt = ct + 'lt +   t


where habit formation is omitted to simplify the argument. As emphasized by
Christiano et al. (2010) the previous equation is at odds with their empirical
estimates of the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks, which show a counter-
cyclical response of wt    pt   ct coexisting with a procyclical response of
the labor force lt . Instead, under the assumed preferences, a procyclical re-
sponse of the labor force is consistent with the model as long as the short
run wealth e¤ect is su¢ ciently weak, implying a small adjustment of zt and
hence a procyclical response of wt    pt   zt . This is illustrated in Figure 6
which compares the impulse responses of employment, the labor force and
the unemployment rate to a monetary policy shock under (i) our baseline
estimated model and (ii) an otherwise identical model with KPR preferences
(corresponding to   = 1). Note that in the latter case, and in contrast with
the evidence, the labor force indeed falls signi…cantly following an easing
of monetary policy, amplifying the response of the unemployment rate and
becoming as important a driver of the latter as employment.




                                     19
4        Wage Markup vs. Labour Supply Shocks:
         Addressing the CKM Critique
In this section we address one of the CKM criticisms pointing to an im-
plausibly large variance of wage markups shocks and a large contribution
of the latter to output and employment ‡uctuations, often implied by esti-
mated DSGE models (e.g. SW (2007)). As argued by CKM, that evidence
cannot be of much use to policymakers since the SW model is not able to
distinguish between wage markup and labor supply shocks. They are e¤ec-
tively "lumped together" as a residual in the wage equation, even though–as
discussed above–they have very di¤erent policy implications.
       As discussed above, that problem of incomplete identi…cation is over-
come by our reformulation of the SW model using the unemployment rate
as an observable variable.14 In particular, the estimated parameters of the
ARMA(1,1) process for the exogenous wage markup reported in Table 1
imply the latter’s standard deviation drops from 23 to 12 percent once un-
employment is included as an observable. Based on equation (7) and the
estimated inverse labour supply elasticity, this implies a standard deviation
of the natural unemployment rate of the order of 3%. This estimate is rela-
tively high, but not unreasonable, especially given that much of that volatility
is concentrated at low frequencies, unrelated to business cycles.
       How important are wage markup shocks in driving output and employ-
  14
    Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2010) seek to overcome that problem by as-
suming a di¤erent stochastic structure for both driving forces: purely transitory in the
case of markup shocks, and potentially persistent (as allowed for by an AR(1) process) for
the labor supply shock. Their assumption of a white noise wage markup shock is at odds
with our estimated process for that shock, which displays an important low frequency
component.


                                           20
ment ‡uctuations in our estimated model? Table 2 presents the variance
decomposition of the forecast errors of the eight observable variables at the
10 quarter and 10 year horizons. The …rst entry in each cell gives the percent
contribution of each shock to ‡uctuations in each variable in the model with
unemployment as an observable, whereas the second entry given the corre-
sponding share in the model without unemployment. CKM argue that the
contribution of the wage markup shocks to output and employment ‡uctua-
tions (about 50 and 80 percent at the 10 year horizon in the model without
unemployment) was too high to be plausible. Distinguishing labour supply
shocks from wage markup shocks by introducing unemployment helps ad-
dress this issue. From Table 2 it is clear that the contribution of the wage
markup shocks to output (employment) ‡uctuations at the 10 year horizon
drops substantially, from 45 (77) percent to 17 (39) percent, in the model
with unemployment. Furthermore, in the latter labor supply shocks (which
are now separately identi…ed) account for about 17, 40 and 89 percent of
‡uctuations in output, employment and the labor force respectively (instead
they are ignored in the model without unemployment, as in SW (2007)).
   As discussed by CKM, the identi…cation of wage markup and labor sup-
ply shocks has implications for monetary policy, since those two shocks have
very di¤erent e¤ects on the e¢ cient level of output and thus on the welfare-
relevant output gap. Figure 7 plots the output gap, de…ned as the log devi-
ation between actual output and the level of output that would prevail with
constant mark-ups and ‡exible prices and wages. Two versions of the same
variable are shown, as implied by the estimated models with and without un-




                                     21
employment, respectively.15 Figure 7 shows that the separate identi…cation
of labor supply shocks allowed by our reformulation has a substantial impact
on the estimated output gap, which now looks considerably more stationary.
       How does our estimated output gap relate to other variables often used as
cyclical indicators? Figure 8 shows that our estimate of the output gap is to
a large extent the mirror image of the unemployment rate. The correlation
between the two is         0:95. This …nding suggests that variations in wage
markups, whether exogenous or induced by wage rigidities, are a key factor
underlying ine¢ cient output ‡uctuations.16 That …nding is consistent with
the evidence in Galí, Gertler and López-Salido (2007).17
       Finally, Figure 9 emphasizes that the model-based output gap resem-
bles conventional measures of the cyclical component of log GDP, based on
a variety of statistical detrending methods (HP …lter, band-pass …lter and
quadratic detrending, as well as the CBO measure).18 There are, however,
periods such as the 2005-2006 boom period with substantial deviations from
the conventional measures. The output gap correlation with each of the four
measures lies in the 0:6       0:8 range, with quadratic detrending showing the
  15
      Note that, under the assumptions of the model, the output gap thus de…ned will di¤er
from the gap relative the e¢ cient level of output by an additive constant.
   16
      See also the analysis in Galí (2011b) in the context of a much simpler model. A
similar qualitative …nding is uncovered in Sala, Soderstrom, and Trigari (2010), though
their approach is subject to the CKM critique.
   17
      It would also appear to be consistent with the evidence on the so-called "labor wedge"
(e.g. Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2007), Shimer (2010)). Note, however, that the
concept of "labor wedge" often used in the literature refers to the gap between the marginal
rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor (as opposed to the wage). As a
result (and despite its name) it captures variations in goods makets distortions, like price
markups, in addition to labor market ones.
   18
      Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2011) obtain a qualitatively similar …nding,
using an approach that does not exploit the connection between unemployment and wage
markups, assuming instead a particular stochastic structure for the latter (white noise).



                                            22
highest value.


5     Understanding Unemployment Fluctuations
In the present section we use our estimated model to analyze di¤erent aspects
of unemployment ‡uctuations, which the reformulation of the SW model
makes possible.
    First, we can assess the role of wage rigidities as a factor underlying ob-
served unemployment ‡uctuations by comparing the observed unemployment
rate to its estimated natural counterpart, where the latter is de…ned as the
unemployment rate that would be observed in the absence of nominal wage
rigidities, as determined by equation (9). Figure 10 shows the time series
for both variables, together with the gap between the two. The …gure makes
clear that the natural rate of unemployment accounts for a large fraction of
the low-frequency movements in the observed unemployment rate. Yet, it
is clear that the natural rate cannot account for the bulk of unemployment
‡uctuations at business cycle frequencies, which are captured by the unem-
ployment gap. Those ‡uctuations should thus be attributed to the presence
of wage rigidities, interacting with the di¤erent shocks.
    The variance decomposition reported in Table 1 shows that about 50
percent of unemployment ‡uctuations at the 10-quarter horizon is due to
"demand " shocks, with a prominent role attributed to risk premium shocks.
The other half is mostly due to wage mark-up shocks. In the longer run (10-
year horizon), the contribution of demand shocks drops to 17 percent and
wage markup shocks become the dominant driving force. Interestingly, those
wage markup shocks also explain a dominant share of the ‡uctuations in


                                      23
price and wage in‡ation at all horizons. In contrast, labor supply and other
supply shocks have only a limited impact on unemployment. The labor force
instead is mostly driven by labor supply shocks, with most other shocks
having a very limited impact on that variable.
   The importance of demand and wage markup shocks in driving unem-
ployment can also be illustrated by means of the historical decomposition
depicted in Figure 11. The secular rise of unemployment and in‡ation in
the 1970s and early 1980s is mostly driven by cost-push factors coming from
increasing wage markups. This is reversed in the mid 1980s. On the other
hand, most of the unemployment ‡uctuations at business cycle frequencies
are seen to be driven by demand shocks. This is particularly the case since the
early 1990s. Both the 2001 and 2007-2008 recessions are driven by negative
demand shocks. Figure 12 zooms in on the most recent recession, displaying
the contribution of each individual shock to the rise of unemployment over
this period. We see that about three quarters of the 5 percentage point in-
crease in the unemployment rate is due to demand factors, with adverse risk
premium shocks playing a large role at the start of the crisis, thus capturing
the tightening of …nancial conditions. As of 2009 our estimates identify an
"e¤ective" tightening of monetary policy, which we attribute to the attain-
ment of the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate, and which is shown
to contribute about 1 to 2 percentage points to the rise in the unemployment
rate. Finally, it is also worth noting that our estimates suggest a signi…cant
contribution of wage markup shocks to the recent rise in the unemployment
rate. As conjectured by Gali (2011a), this may be due to downward nominal
wage rigidities interacting with very low in‡ation, which may have prevented


                                      24
the average real wage from adjusting as much as it would be warranted by
the decline in in‡ation and the rise in unemployment.
   Finally, we can use the estimated model to interpret the observed co-
movements between the unemployment rate and measures of wage and price
in‡ation. With that objective, Figure 13 displays the joint variation in wage
in‡ation and the unemployment rate conditional on each shock, as well as
their unconditional joint variation (bottom-right diagram). The evidence
makes clear that whatever Phillips-curve-like negative comovement between
wage in‡ation and unemployment can be found in the data it is largely the
result of the four demand shocks. By contrast, wage markup shocks generate
what looks like a positive lower frequency comovement in both variables, and
are largely reponsible for the lack of a clean Phillips-curve-like pattern in the
observed data. Supply shocks, on the other hand, lead to a near-zero co-
movement. Note that this is still consistent with wage in‡ation equation (3)
(given the forward-looking nature of the latter), for their implied responses
of unemployment display a sign switch (see Figure 5), thus leaving wage
in‡ation largely unchanged as a result.
   Figure 14 displays analogous evidence for unemployment and price in‡a-
tion. As in the case of wage in‡ation, the four demand shocks generate a
clear negative comovement between price in‡ation and the unemployment
rate, while wage markup shocks underlie a low frequency positive comove-
ment. Contrary to traditional textbook analyses, productivity shocks are
also shown to generate a negative comovement between price in‡ation and
the unemployment rate. On the other hand, price markup shocks produce a
nearly vertical Phillips curve, since their impact on the unemployment rate


                                       25
is tiny, while their e¤ect on price in‡ation is substantial.


6        Robustness
In this section we brie‡y summarize the …ndings based on a number of alter-
native speci…cations. First, we use hours worked rather than employment as
our measure of labour input. While the benchmark model is written in terms
of employment, the actual labour input that enters the production function
should be total hours worked. Using employment will therefore distort the
estimated productivity process. When we use hours, we leave the unemploy-
ment rate unchanged, thus making the implicit assumption that those who
are unemployed want to work the same number of hours as those who are em-
ployed.19 In that alternative speci…cation we also use wage per hour. When
we leave the model unchanged but use hours worked rather than employ-
ment as our measure of labour input, the main results emphasized above are
not a¤ected. The full set of results is available on request. Two di¤erences
are worth mentioning. First, as expected, the contribution of productivity
shocks to output ‡uctuations becomes less important. Second, the degree
of wage rigidity is estimated to be higher (0.60) and as a result the slope of
the Phillips curve becomes less steep, due to the greater cyclical volatility of
wage per worker relative to wage per hour.
       Second, we also estimate the model using only the compensation series as
a wage measure. Again, the main results are unchanged. The main impact of
the higher volatility in the compensation series is to increase the estimate of
  19
   In order to address these issues, ideally we need to explicitly include the intensive
margin, i.e. hours worked per employee, in the model and re-estimate it accordingly.
That extension is part of our currently ongoing research.


                                          26
the inverse Frisch elasticity of the labour supply to 5.6 when unemployment
is added. With higher observed volatility of wages, the response of labour
supply to real wages is estimated to be less. This has an additional impact
on some of the other parameters, such as the degree of habit formation.
   Thirdly, we have also estimated the model under KPR preferences (i.e.,
imposing   = 0) and an alternative set of Jaimovich-Rebelo preferences where
the Zt factor evolves in line with aggregate productivity instead of aggregate
consumption. The model with KPR preferences leads to a signi…cant dete-
rioration of the empirical …t by about 15 points. As discussed above, in this
case the labor force moves countercyclically in response to monetary policy
and other demand shocks. However, the modi…ed JR model leads to a signi…-
cantly improved empirical …t by about 28 points. Moreover, the parameter
rises back to 0.9 (from 0.02 in the baseline model) suggesting that in response
to productivity shocks the data prefer stronger short-run wealth e¤ects on
labor supply. We still need to think harder about the interpretation of these
results.
   Finally, we have also re-estimated our model using data up to 2010Q4,
thus ignoring the potential problems raised earlier (likely mis-speci…cation
of the interest rate rule and the wage equation due to nonlinearities at work
during this period). The main di¤erence with the benchmark results is that
the estimated wage stickiness rises and the overall persistence in the economy
as captured by the persistence of the shocks also goes up.




                                      27
7     Conclusion
In this paper we have developed a reformulated version of the Smets-Wouters
(2007) framework that embeds the theory of unemployment proposed in Galí
(2011a,b). We estimate the resulting model using postwar U.S. data, while
treating the unemployment rate as an additional observable variable. This
helps overcome the lack of identi…cation of wage markup and labor supply
shocks highlighted by Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2008) in their criticism
of New Keynesian models. In turn, our approach allows us to estimate a
"correct" measure of the output gap. In addition, the estimated model can
be used to analyze the sources of unemployment ‡uctuations.
    A number of key results emerge from our analysis. First, we show that
wage markup shocks play a smaller role in driving output and employment
‡uctuations than previously thought. Secondly, ‡uctuations in our estimated
output gap are shown to be the near mirror image of those experienced by the
unemployment rate, and to be well approximated by conventional measures
of the cyclical component of GDP. Thirdly, demand shocks are the main
driver of unemployment ‡uctuations at business cycle frequencies, but wage
markup shocks are shown to be more important at lower frequencies. Finally,
our estimates point to an adverse risk-premium shock as the key force behind
the initial rise in unemployment during the Great Recession. The important
role uncovered for monetary policy and wage markup shocks at a later stage
may be interpreted as capturing the likely e¤ects of the zero lower bound on
the nominal rate and of downward wage rigidities (as opposed to those of
truly exogenous shocks).



                                    28
   References

   Abraham, Katharine G., James R. Spletzer, and Jay C. Stewart (1999):
“Why Do Di¤erent Wage Series Tell Di¤erent Stories,”American Economic
Review vol. 89, no. 2, 34-39.
   Barnichon, Regis (2010): "Productivity and Unemployment over the
Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics 57(8), 1013-1025.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2007): “Real Wage Rigidities and
the New Keynesian Model,”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, supple-
ment to volume 39, no. 1, 35-66.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2010): "Labor Markets and Mone-
tary Policy: A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment," American Eco-
nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 (2), 1-33.
   Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Frame-
work,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
   Casares, Miguel (2010): "Unemployment as Excess Supply of Labor: Im-
plications for Wage and Price In‡ation," Journal of Monetary Economics
57(2), 233-243.
   Casares, Miguel, Antonio Moreno, and Jesús Vázquez (2011): "An Esti-
mated New Keynesian Model with Unemployment as Excess Supply of La-
bor," unpublished manuscript, Universidad Pública de Navarra.
   Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2007): "Business
Cycle Accounting," Econometrica 75(3), 781-836.
   Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2009): "New
Keynesian Models: Not Yet Useful for Policy Analysis," American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1), 242-266.


                                    29
   Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin (2010):
"Involuntary Unemployment and the Business Cycle," mimeo.
   Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin (2011):
"DSGE Models for Monetary Policy," in B. Friedman and M. Woodford
(eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Elsevier.
   Christo¤el, Kai, Keith Kuester and Tobias Linzert (2009), "The Role of
Labor Markets for Euro Area Monetary Policy", European Economic Review,
53 (2009), 908-936.
   de Walque; Gregory, Olivier Pierrard, Henri Sneessens, Raf Wouters
(2009), "Sequential bargaining in a Neo-Keynesian Model zith Frictional Un-
employment and Staggered Wage Negotiations", Annals of Economics and
Statistics, 95/96, July/December.
   Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley and Jean-Philippe Laforte (2007):
"Documentation of the Research and Statistics Division’s Estimated DSGE
Model of the U.S. Economy: 2006 Version," Finance and Economics Discus-
sion Series 2007-53, Federal Reserve Board, Washington D.C.
   Erceg, Christopher J., Luca Guerrieri, Christopher Gust (2006): “SIGMA:
A New Open Economy Model for Policy Analysis,”International Journal of
Central Banking, vol. 2 (1), 1-50.
   Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000):
“Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,”Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics vol. 46, no. 2, 281-314.
   Galí, Jordi (1996): "Unemployment in Dynamic General Equilibrium
Economies," European Economic Review 40, 839-845.
   Galí, Jordi (1999), "Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle:


                                     30
Do Technology Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations ?", American Eco-
nomic Review, March 1999, 249-271.
   Galí, Jordi (2011a): "The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve," Journal
of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
   Galí, Jordi (2011b): Unemployment Fluctuations and Stabilization Poli-
cies: A New Keynesian Perspective, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA), forthcom-
ing.
   Galí, Jordi (2011c): "Monetary Policy and Unemployment," in B. Fried-
man and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3A,
Elsevier B.V., 2011, 487-546.
   Galí; Jordi and Mark Gertler (2007), “Macroeconomic Modeling for Mon-
etary Policy Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (4), 2007,
25-45.
   Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and David López-Salido (2007): "Markups,
Gaps, and the Welfare Costs of Business Fluctuations," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 89(1), 44-59.
   Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari (2009), "Unemployment Fluctua-
tions with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining", Journal of Political Economy
117 (1), pp. 38-86
   Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory Hu¤man (1988): "In-
vestment, Capacity Utilization and the Real Business Cycle," American Eco-
nomic Review 78(3), 402-17.
   Jaimovich, Nir and Segio Rebelo (2009): "Can News about the Future
Drive the Business Cycle?," American Economics Review 99 (4), 1097-1118.
   Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (2011):


                                     31
"Is There a Trade-O¤ Between In‡ation and Output Stabilization?," unpub-
lished manuscript.
   King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio Rebelo (1988): "Produc-
tion, Growth and Business Cycles I: The Basic Neoclassical Model," Journal
of Monetary Economics 21 (2/3), 195-232.
   Mehran, Hamid and Joseph Tracy (2001): "The E¤ects of Employee Stock
Options on the Evolution of Compensation in the 1990s," FRBNY Economic
Policy Review, 17-33.
   Merz, Monika (1995): “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business
Cycle”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 269-300.
   Phillips, A.W. (1958): "The Relation between Unemployment and the
Rate of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957,"
Economica 25, 283-299.
   Sala, Luca, Ulf Söderström, and Antonella Trigari (2010): "The Out-
put Gap, the Labor Wedge, and the Dynamic Behavior of Hours," Sveriges
Riksbank Working Paper Series no. 246.
   Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Sto-
chastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the Euro-
pean Economic Association, vol 1, no. 5, 1123-1175.
   Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US
Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,”American Economic Review,
vol 97, no. 3, 586-606.
   Smets, Frank; Kai Christo¤el, Günter Coenen, Roberto Motto and Mas-
simo Rostagno (2010). "DSGE models and their use at the ECB," SERIEs,
Spanish Economic Association, vol. 1(1), pages 51-65, March.


                                    32
   Thomas, Carlos (2008a): "Search and Matching Frictions and Optimal
Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (5), 936-956.
   Trigari, Antonella (2009): "Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows, and
In‡ation Dynamics," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41 (1), 1-33.
   Walsh, Carl (2003b): “Labor Market Search and Monetary Shocks”, in S.
Altug, J. Chadha and C. Nolan (eds.) Elements of Dynamic Macroeconomic
Analysis, Cambridge University Press (Cambridge, UK), 451-486.
   Walsh, Carl (2005): “Labor Market Search, Sticky Prices, and Interest
Rate Rules”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 829-849
   Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices. Foundations of a Theory
of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press (Princeton, NJ).
   Zanetti, Francesco (2007): "A non-Walrasian labor market in a monetary
model of the business cycle," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31,
2413-2437.




                                   33
   APPENDIX

   In this appendix, we summarize the remaining log-linear equations of the
model. For a more detailed presentation, we refer to the discussion in SW.
      Consumption Euler equation:

           b
           ct = c1 Et [b
                       ct+1 ] + (1             c1 )b
                                                   ct   1
                                                                bt
                                                            c2 (R    Et [bt+1 ]     "bt )
                                                                                    b

with c1 = 1=(1 + h); c2 = c1 (1           h) where h is the external habit parameter.
"bt is the exogenous AR(1) risk premium process.
b
      Investment Euler equation:

                      bit = i1bit   1   + (1                     bkt + b
                                                  i1 )bit+1 + i2 Q     "qt

with i1 = 1=(1 + ); i2 = i1 =            where          is the discount factor; and            is the
                                                    "qt is the exogenous AR(1)
elasticity of the capital adjustment cost function. b
process for the investment speci…c technology.
      Value of the capital stock:

        bkt =
        Q        bt
                (R        Et [bt+1 ]      "bt ) + q1 Et [rt+1
                                          b               k
                                                              ] + (1         q1 )Et [Qkt+1 ]

with q1 = rk =(rk + (1       )) where rk is the steady state rental rate to capital,
and   the depreciation rate.
      Aggregate demand equals aggregate supply:
                             c       i b     g    rk k
                    ybt    =   b
                               ct +    it + b
                                            "t +         bt
                                                         u
                             y       y             y
                           = Mp ( bkt + (1      bt + b
                                               )L     "at )

with Mp re‡ecting the …xed costs in production which corresponds to the
                              "gt ; b
price markup in steady state. b     "at are the AR(1) processes representing
exogenous demand components and the TFP process.

                                                  34
       Price-setting under the Calvo model with indexation:
                                                                                   p
                   bt       p bt 1   =        1    Et [bt+1 ]        p bt       2 bt      "pt
                                                                                         +b

with    1    = ;    2   = (1         p    )(1          p )=[ p (1   + (Mp           1)"p )]; with   p   and   p

respectively the probability and indexation of the Calvo model, and "p the
curvature of the aggregator function. The price markup bpt is equal to the
                             c t = (1
inverse of the real marginal mc                                  bt +
                                                                )w           rbtk        bt :
                                                                                         A
       Capital accumulation equation:
                            b                 b                       b +     "qt
                            kt =          1   kt   1   + (1         1 ) it   2b


with    1 =1          = (i =k )(1+ ) : Capital services used in production
                 (i =k );   2

is de…ned as: b    bt + b
              kt = u     kt 1
       Optimal capital utilisation condition:

                                          bt = (1
                                          u                   )= rbtk

with        is the elasticity of the capital utilisation cost function.
       Optimal capital/labor input condition:

                                         b    bt
                                         kt = w                      bt
                                                              rbtk + L

       Monetary policy rule:

       bt =
       R           b
                 R Rt 1     + (1           R )(r       bt + ry (ygap
                                                                 d t) + r            y     (ygap    "rt
                                                                                             d t) + b

with ygapt = ybt - ybtf lex ; the di¤erence between actual output and the output

in the ‡exible price and wage economy in absence of distorting price and
wage markup shocks.
   The following parameters are not identi…ed by the estimation procedure
and therefore calibrated:                = 0:025; "p = 10:

                                                        35
Table 1: Posterior Estimates for the model with and without unemployment as
observed variable - Complete list of parameters
                      prior distribution                           posterior distribution
                                                         With UR                          Without-UR
                     type mean st.dev         mode       mean    5%    95%         mode     mean    5%        95%
    st.dev. of the innovations1
       a              U       2.5   1.44       0.41       0.42  0.37     0.46      0.42        0.42    0.37   0.46
       b              U       2.5   1.44       1.73       1.60  0.56     2.50      0.73        0.91    0.35   1.66
       g              U       2.5   1.44       0.47       0.48  0.43     0.52      0.47        0.48    0.43   0.52
       q              U       2.5   1.44       0.42       0.42  0.34     0.49      0.38        0.38    0.30   0.46
       r              U       2.5   1.44       0.21       0.22  0.19     0.24      0.23        0.23    0.21   0.26
       p              U       2.5   1.44       0.05       0.11  0.03     0.18      0.06        0.32    0.02   0.73
       w              U       2.5   1.44       0.04       0.06  0.01     0.13      0.07        0.10    0.03   0.20
       ls             U       2.5   1.44       1.07       1.17  0.89     1.45        -           -       -      -
       wC             U       2.5   1.44       0.45       0.46  0.41     0.50      0.45        0.45    0.40   0.50
       wE             U       2.5   1.44       0.34       0.36  0.32     0.41      0.33        0.34    0.29   0.39
    persistence of the exogenous processes:   = AR(1),     = MA(1)
      a               B      0.5     0.2       0.98       0.98  0.97     0.99      0.98        0.97    0.96   0.99
      b               B      0.5     0.2       0.36       0.42  0.19     0.67      0.66        0.64    0.39   0.86
      g               B      0.5     0.2       0.97       0.97  0.96     0.99      0.98        0.98    0.96   0.99
      q               B      0.5     0.2       0.72       0.75  0.62     0.88      0.75        0.74    0.62   0.86
      r               B      0.5     0.2       0.09       0.10  0.02     0.17      0.09        0.11    0.02   0.19
      p               B      0.5     0.2       0.76       0.43  0.07     0.79      0.84        0.64    0.23   0.93
      w               B      0.5     0.2       0.99       0.98  0.97     1.00      0.99        0.99    0.99   1.00
       p              B      0.5     0.2       0.59       0.57  0.24     0.96      0.68        0.73    0.46   0.97
       w              B      0.5     0.2       0.67       0.63  0.35     0.91      0.66        0.65    0.38   0.91
    a_g 2             N       0.5   0.25       0.69       0.69  0.55     0.83      0.71        0.70    0.56   0.85
    structural parameters
                      N       4.0    1.0       4.09      3.96    2.34    5.58     3.33         3.77    2.32   5.20
    h                 B      0.7    0.10       0.78      0.75    0.65    0.85     0.66         0.68    0.57   0.81
    '                 N       2.0    1.0       3.99      4.35    3.37    5.32     3.32         3.46    2.27   4.66
                      B      0.5     0.2       0.02      0.02    0.01    0.04     0.73         0.70    0.50   0.92
      p               B      0.5    0.15       0.58      0.62    0.53    0.71     0.60         0.71    0.56   0.84
      w               B      0.5    0.15       0.47      0.55    0.44    0.66     0.61         0.66    0.56   0.76
       p              B      0.5    0.15       0.26      0.49    0.20    0.78     0.26         0.46    0.16   0.82
       w              B      0.5    0.15       0.16      0.18    0.07    0.29     0.17         0.20    0.08   0.31
                      B      0.5    0.15       0.57      0.56    0.36    0.75     0.41         0.42    0.24   0.60
    Mp                N      1.25   0.12       1.74      1.74    1.61    1.88     1.71         1.73    1.59   1.86
      R               B      0.75   0.10       0.85      0.86    0.82    0.89     0.83         0.84    0.79   0.89
    r                 N       1.5   0.25       1.91      1.89    1.62    2.16     2.03         1.96    1.65   2.26
      ry              N      0.12   0.05       0.15      0.16    0.11    0.22     0.07         0.07    0.04   0.10
    r y               N      0.12   0.05       0.24      0.25    0.20    0.30     0.27         0.28    0.22   0.33
                      G      0.62    0.1       0.62      0.66    0.49    0.83     0.79         0.80    0.61   0.99
    100( 1 1)         G      0.25    0.1       0.31      0.31    0.17    0.43     0.21         0.22    0.11   0.33
    l                 N       0.0    2.0      -1.65      -1.52   -3.83   0.77     3.56         3.37    1.46   5.29
                      N       0.4    0.1       0.34      0.34    0.30    0.37     0.40         0.39    0.36   0.43
      wE              N       0.2    0.1       0.07      0.08    0.03    0.12     0.11         0.10    0.05   0.15
    Mw                N      1.25   0.25       1.18      1.22    1.15    1.29     1.253        1.253     -      -
                      N       0.3   0.05       0.17      0.17    0.14    0.20     0.16         0.16    0.13   0.19
1  The IG-distribution is de…ned by the degree of freedom. 2 The e¤ect of TFP innovations on
exogenous demand. 3 The steady state wage mark-up is not identi…ed if the unemployment rate
is not observed.
                      Table 2: Variance Decomposition
Variance Decomposition      output       in‡ation     real wage     employment     labor force   unemployment
10 quarter horizon
Demand Shocks
  Risk premium               6 / 14       2   /   8     3   /   6     16 /25         0 / 15         20 / 25
  Exogenous demand            3/5         1   /   0     1   /   0     7 / 10          1/9            8/1
  Investment spec. techn.     9/7         3   /   2     8   /   2     12 / 9          2/3           10 / 2
  Monetary policy             5/7         8   /   8     6   /   4     11 / 12         0/4           11 / 10
Supply Shocks
  Productivity              59 / 46       6/4          40 /32          5/2           3/4             4/1
 Price mark-up               2/6         27 / 33       30 / 45         3/6           5/3             0/1
Labor Market shocks
 Wage mark-up                6 / 15      53 / 46       12 / 11        18 / 35        3 / 61         41 / 61
 Labor supply                11 / -       0/-           1/-            29 / -        86 / -          5/-

40 quarter horizon
Demand Shocks
 Risk premium                2   /   5    1   /   6     1   /   3      6   /   8     0   /   6       7   /   7
 Exogenous demand            1   /   2    1   /   0     1   /   0      3   /   5     1   /   8       3   /   0
 Investment spec. techn.     5   /   3    2   /   1     6   /   3      4   /   3     1   /   2       3   /   0
 Monetary policy             2   /   3    5   /   7     3   /   3      4   /   4     0   /   2       4   /   3
Supply Shocks
 Productivity               56 / 39       4/3          71 / 59         3/1           2/1             1/0
 Price mark-up               1/2         18 / 26       13 / 26         1/2           2/1             0/0
Labor Market shocks
 Wage mark-up               17 / 45      67 / 57        5/6           39 / 77        5 / 81         80 / 89
  Labor supply               17 / -       0/-           0/-            40 / -        89 / -          2/-

    Note: each cell reports the contributions to the forecast error variance
    of the corresponding variable for the models estimated with and without
    unemployment, respectively.
              Figure 2. Two Wage Inflation Measures

4




3




2




1




0

              Compensation per worker
              Average weekly earnings
-1




-2
1965   1970       1975      1980        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010
               Figure 3. Dynamic Responses to Demand Shocks
              Output                   Inflation                     Real Wage                     Interest Rate
 0.6                       0.06                           0.15                          0.2


 0.4                       0.04                            0.1                          0.1


 0.2                       0.02                           0.05                            0


   0                             0                          0                           -0.1


 -0.2                      -0.02                       -0.05                            -0.2
        0       10       20      0        10         20      0           10        20          0        10         20


            Employment               Labor Force                 Unemployment Rate                 Output Gap
                                                          0.05                          0.6

0.25                       0.25                             0
                                                                                        0.4
 0.2                         0.2                       -0.05

0.15                       0.15                           -0.1
                                                                                        0.2
 0.1                         0.1                       -0.15

0.05                       0.05                           -0.2
                                                                                          0
   0                             0                     -0.25

-0.05                      -0.05                                                        -0.2
        0       10       20      0        10         20          0       10        20          0        10         20
                  Risk Premium          Investment               Monetary Policy          Exogenous spending
            Figure 4. Dynamic Responses to Labor Market Shocks

             Output                       Inflation                    Real Wage                     Interest Rate
  0                           0.2                           0.2                            0.1

-0.1                                                                                      0.08
                             0.15                          0.15

-0.2                                                                                      0.06
                              0.1                           0.1
-0.3                                                                                      0.04

                             0.05                          0.05
-0.4                                                                                      0.02


-0.5                           0                             0                              0
       0       10       20          0        10       20          0        10        20          0        10         20


           Employment                   Labor Force               Unemployment Rate                  Output Gap
0.2                           0.2                           0.3                            0.4

0.1                           0.1                           0.2                            0.2

  0                            0                            0.1                             0


-0.1                         -0.1                            0                            -0.2

-0.2                         -0.2                          -0.1                           -0.4


                                                           -0.2                           -0.6
       0       10       20          0        10       20          0        10        20          0        10         20
                                           Wage Markup                Labor Supply
              Figure 5. Dynamic Responses to Supply Shocks

              Output                       Inflation                      Real Wage                    Interest Rate
   1                           0.1                            0.4                           0.05

 0.8
                                0                             0.3                             0

 0.6
                              -0.1                            0.2                        -0.05
 0.4

                              -0.2                            0.1                           -0.1
 0.2


   0                          -0.3                             0                         -0.15
        0       10       20          0        10        20          0         10       20      0            10         20


            Employment                   Labor Force                Unemployment Rate                  Output Gap
                                                                                             0.2

 0.1                           0.1                           0.15
                                                                                              0
0.05                          0.05                            0.1

   0                            0                            0.05
                                                                                            -0.2
-0.05                     -0.05                                0

 -0.1                         -0.1                          -0.05
                                                                                            -0.4
-0.15                     -0.15                              -0.1

 -0.2                         -0.2                                                          -0.6
        0       10       20          0        10        20          0         10       20          0        10         20
                                             Productivity               Price Markup
            Figure 6. Monetary Policy Shocks and the Role of Wealth Effects

               Employment                    Labor Force                        Unemployment Rate
0.25                                                                0.05




 0.2                             0.05                                  0




0.15                                0                               -0.05




 0.1                             -0.05                               -0.1




0.05                              -0.1                              -0.15




   0                             -0.15                               -0.2




-0.05                             -0.2                              -0.25




 -0.1                            -0.25                               -0.3
        0          10       20           0       10            20           0          10           20
                                    Baseline model         KPR-preferences
          Figure 7. Two Measures of the Output Gap


10


 8


 6


 4


 2


 0


 -2


 -4


 -6


 -8


-10

 1965   1970   1975    1980      1985     1990    1995      2000   2005   2010
                      Outputgap with UR     Outputgap without UR
       Figure 8. The Output Gap and the Unemployment Rate

6




4




2




0




-2




-4


                                              Outputgap
-6                                            Unemployment Rate

                                           correlation = -0.95


-8
1965    1970   1975   1980   1985   1990     1995       2000      2005   2010
           Figure 9. The Output Gap vs. Detrended GDP

 6



 4



 2



 0



 -2



 -4


          hp
 -6
          bk
          qt
          cbo
 -8
          model


-10
  1965   1970     1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010
          Figure 10. The Natural Rate of Unemployment

12



10



8



6



4



2



0



-2



-4

1965   1970   1975      1980       1985       1990     1995    2000   2005   2010

                     observed UR          natural UR      UR gap
       Figure 11. Sources of Unemployment Rate Fluctuations

                       Unemployment Rate decomposition
                                                          historical UR
10                                                        supply shocks
                                                          demand shocks

8


6


4


2
1965    1970   1975   1980    1985      1990      1995   2000     2005     2010



                                                           historical UR
10                                                         labor supply
                                                           wage mark-up

8


6


4


2
1965    1970   1975   1980    1985      1990      1995   2000     2005     2010
Figure 12. Unemployment during the Great Recession
                      Figure 13. Unemployment and Wage Inflation

Conditional Phillips Curves: price inflation
    2                                        2                            2
  1.5                   productivity       1.5           price markup   1.5                 risk premium

    1                                       1                             1
  0.5                                     0.5                           0.5
    0                                       0                             0
  -0.5                                   -0.5                           -0.5
         2      4         6         8            2   4     6        8          2       4         6        8


    2                                       2                             2
                    exogenous spending                    investment                       monetary policy
  1.5                                     1.5                           1.5
    1                                       1                             1
  0.5                                     0.5                           0.5
    0                                       0                             0
  -0.5                                   -0.5                           -0.5
         2      4         6         8            2   4     6        8          2       4         6        8


    2                                     2.5                             3
                         labor supply                    wage markup                            actual data
  1.5                                       2
                                                                          2
    1                                     1.5
  0.5                                       1                             1

    0                                     0.5
                                                                          0
  -0.5                                      0
         2      4         6         8            4   6     8       10              4   6    8        10   12
                      Figure 14. Unemployment and Price Inflation

Conditional Phillips Curves: wage inflation
    2                                       2                            2
                         productivity                   price markup                       risk premium
  1.5                                     1.5                          1.5
     1                                     1                             1
   0.5                                   0.5                           0.5
     0                                     0                             0
  -0.5                                   -0.5                          -0.5
         2      4         6         8           2   4     6        8          2       4         6        8


     2                                     2                             2
                    exogenous psending                   investment                       monetary policy
   1.5                                   1.5                           1.5
     1                                     1                             1
   0.5                                   0.5                           0.5
     0                                     0                             0
  -0.5                                   -0.5                          -0.5
         2      4         6         8           2   4     6        8          2       4         6        8


     2                                   2.5                             3
                         labor supply                   wage markup                            actual data
   1.5                                     2
                                                                         2
     1                                   1.5
   0.5                                     1                             1

     0                                   0.5
                                                                         0
  -0.5                                     0
         2      4         6         8           4   6     8       10              4   6    8        10   12
