                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FUNDING IN PUBLIC SECTOR PENSION PLANS - INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE

                                            Eduard Ponds
                                           Clara Severinson
                                             Juan Yermo

                                        Working Paper 17082
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17082


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




The authors would like to thank Monika Bütler, Michael Orszag, Jeffrey Brown, participants of the
NBER State and Local Pensions Conference on Aug.19-20, 2010 and Delegates to the OECD Working
Party on Private Pensions for their helpful comments. They are also grateful to Yuecheng Liu for research
assistance. The study has benefited from a research grant from Netspar. The views expressed are the
sole responsibility of the authors and do not reflect those of their organisations, the National Bureau
of Economic Research, or the governments of OECD Member countries. The authors are solely responsible
for any errors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Eduard Ponds, Clara Severinson, and Juan Yermo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Funding in Public Sector Pension Plans - International Evidence
Eduard Ponds, Clara Severinson, and Juan Yermo
NBER Working Paper No. 17082
May 2011
JEL No. H55,H6,H7,H75,H83

                                             ABSTRACT

Most countries have separate pension plan for public sector employees. The future fiscal burden of
these plans can be substantial as the government usually is the largest employer, pension promises
in the public sector tend to be relatively generous, and future payments have to be paid out directly
from government revenues (pay-as-you-go) or by funded plans (pension funds) which tend to be underfunded.
The valuation and disclosure of these promises in some countries lacks transparency, which may be
hiding potentially huge fiscal liabilities that are being passed on to future generations of workers.

In order to arrive at a fair comparison between countries regarding the fiscal burden of their DB public
sector pension plans, this paper gathers more evidence on public sector pension plans regarding the
type of pension promise and quantifies the future tax burden related to these pension promises. The
reported liabilities are recalculated using both a fair value approach (local market discount rates) and
a common, fixed discount rate across all countries which reflects projected growth in national income.
We also estimate for a number of plans from a sample of OECD countries the size of the net unfunded
liabilities in fair value terms as of the end of 2008. This fiscal burden can also be interpreted as the
implicit pension debt in fair value terms.


Eduard Ponds                                        Juan Yermo
Tilburg University                                  OECD
Economics of Collective Pension Plans               Directorate For Financial and Enterprise Affaires
The Netherlands                                     2, rue André Pascal
eduard.ponds@apg-am.nl                              75016 Paris
                                                    Juan.YERMO@oecd.org
Clara Severinson
OECD Financial Affairs Division
2 Rue André Pascal
75016 Paris FRANCE
Clara.SEVERINSON@oecd.org
         FUNDING IN PUBLIC SECTOR PENSION PLANS - INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE



                             By Eduard Ponds, Clara Severinson and Juan Yermo 1

Section 1. Introduction

     In many countries the sustainability of fiscal policies is being questioned. A major driving force of
this growing concern is age-related expenditure, such as health care and social security spending (public
pensions). A sometimes overlooked reason for the sustainability problems, however, involves the pensions
for government employees. In most countries there are separate pension plans for public sector employees.
Traditionally, these specific arrangements are justified because they guarantee the security, integrity and
independence of the employees and because they contribute to the attractiveness of a career in the civil
service2. General findings from research indicate that compared to pensions in the private sector, public
sector pensions tend to offer more generous terms and feature lower funding levels (Palacios and
Whitehouse 2006).

     Reforms have been undertaken in many countries. These reforms have been oriented at bringing
remuneration practices in the public sector more in line with those found in the private sector. Such
reforms have generally involved lowering the generosity of public-sector pension schemes (e.g. Finland,
France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, and Sweden). In some countries public sector workers have been
transferred to the main public pension system (e.g. Austria, Chile, Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary,
Mexico, Poland, Spain, and the United States), which in some cases include a fully-funded, defined
contribution component (e.g. Chile, Denmark, Hungary, Mexico, and Poland).3

     In addition, initiatives have been taken in a number of countries to introduce some degree of
prefunding of public sector pensions via the establishment of reserve funds (e.g. Australia, Belgium,
Finland, Germany, Ireland, and Sweden). Sometimes, however, fiscal pressures have overwhelmed the
drive to prefunding as in 2003 when the Belgian government transferred the assets and liabilities of
1
    The authors of this paper are Mr. Eduard Ponds of Netspar and Clara Severinson and Juan Yermo of the OECD.
            The authors would like to thank Monika Bütler, Michael Orszag, Jeffrey Brown, participants of the NBER
            State and Local Pensions Conference on Aug.19-20, 2010 and Delegates to the OECD Working Party on
            Private Pensions for their helpful comments. They are also grateful to Yuecheng Liu for research
            assistance. The study has benefited from a research grant from Netspar. The views expressed are the sole
            responsibility of the authors and do not reflect those of their organisations or the governments of OECD
            Member countries. The authors are solely responsible for any errors.
2
    Pensions are an important component of total remuneration. Pensions may therefore help to explain that generally
            spoken gross wage pay in public sector is lower than in the market as the higher pension entitlements in the
            public sector compensate for gross wages differences (Disney et al. 2009).
3
    There have been some important pension policy reversals in recent years. At the end of 2010, the Hungarian
           government decided to stop contributions to the mandatory funded pillar for 14 months and to introduce
           coercive measures to switch people back into the public, PAYG system. At the beginning of 2011, the
           Polish government announced that it would reduce the mandatory contribution rate to the funded pillar
           from 7.3 percent to 2.3 percent of salaries.


                                                            3
Belgacom, the former state-owned telephone monopoly, to the state system. The Portuguese government
recently announced a similar planned assumption of the assets and liabilities of Portugal Telecom. Such
moves, though worrisome if they lead to a depletion of the pension reserves, have also been justified as a
way to unify pension arrangements between public and private sector workers.

      Pre-funding implies that, in principle, the costs of pension promises are borne when those pension
promises are accrued. In some countries, public sector DB schemes are pre-funded, but in other countries,
public sector DB schemes are financed on a pay-as-you-go basis or deeply underfunded. On the liability
side, sometimes benefits are not provisioned for at all in the public sector balance sheets. Those benefits
that are accounted for in public sector balance sheets are not necessarily comparable to those provisioned
for in the private sector as the assumptions employed may not use market-level discount rates, comparable
longevity estimates or do not take into account the effect of future salary increases on benefits that have
already been accrued. On the asset side, contribution levels are not necessarily sufficient. Finally,
underfunding may persist for a long time in view of lax solvency regulations.

      The funding practice of public sector plans has received increased attention in the United States,
where US state governments offer their employees defined benefit pension plans. These pensions are
generally pre-funded to a high extent. A recent study (Novy-Marx and Rauh 2009), however, reports that
the market-valued underfunding of the pension liabilities of the state pension funds amounts on average to
24% of gross state product at the end of 2008. While these numbers have been disputed (see e.g. Angelo
et al. 2010 and Lav and McNichol 2011), they reflect a high level of concern regarding the growing cost of
public sector pension liabilities.

     This study provides a survey of public sector pension plans outside the United States. In particular we
are interested in public sector pension funds and their funding status. The calculations show that public
sector funded DB plans outside the United States also tend to be underfunded.

     The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of public sector pension plans in
OECD countries. Section 3 examines specific public sector pension schemes in detail, describing the plan
rules and financing mechanisms.

     In Section 4 which deals with the funding position of public sector pension funds, the valuation
method for liabilities is a key issue for this topic. We compare the funding positions of different plans as
disclosed by the plan sponsors, as well as based on market discount rates in each country and using a
common fixed discount rate. The plans generally tend to be underfunded. In order to put the underfunding
in perspective, we compare in sections 5 and 6 the size of underfunding with the present value of future
payments of unfunded plans.

     The study stays away from the debate on whether and to what extent pension plans for public sector
workers should be funded. Prefunding can be justified on various grounds. Firstly, it facilitates
intergenerational tax smoothing (see e.g. D’Arcy et al. 1999), ensuring that each generation pays a more or
less constant percentage of taxable income. Secondly, it can reap the benefits of diversification of pension
fund investment, in particular into foreign markets. Thirdly, it can protect beneficiaries from the possibility
of bankruptcy of the sponsoring governmental entity.

     At the same time, there are various possible justifications for underfunding such public pension
commitments. First, to the extent that funding risks can be smoothed over time as they can be shared with
future generations of tax payers, underfunding in market value terms may be an optimal strategy (see e.g.
Cui et al. 2010 and Munnell et al. 2010). Secondly, a funding surplus might also mobilize pressure to
increase benefits which in turn leads in the longer term to higher funding costs and so underfunding. So for
taxpayers it is rational to aim at underfunding rather than full funding or overfunding. Moreover, a funding


                                                      4
surplus will enforce contribution cuts and once contributions are reduced, it is difficult to get them
increased. The accountability horizon of pension fund management and politicians is much shorter than the
horizon over which pension promises have to be met by adequate funding. This horizon gap may lead to
pressure to underestimate costs and risks and to overestimate the earning capacity of assets. Thirdly, to the
extent that prefunding leads to investment in domestic government bonds, a circularity in government
funding may be created, with little added value relative to a PAYG system.

     Ultimately, therefore, there is no single answer on what the optimal level of funding should be for
such special DB arrangements. Each plan should target a level of funding that is appropriate given its
circumstances. One critical element of this evaluation is the relationship between the growth rates of
pension costs and the contribution or tax base. A related question is how the pension cost should be divided
between the government and employees. To the extent that the government is at least partly responsible for
financing pension benefits, increases in life expectancy lead to a growing wealth transfer from private
sector tax-payers towards public sector pensioners. The government’s contribution rate to the special DB
arrangements of public sector workers has to grow in line with life expectancy.

     One key policy message from the study is that better disclosure and transparency is needed over the
pension commitments made by governments to their employees, as currently, information on public sector
arrangements is often partial or not readily available. A debate should also be opened on how to compare
these commitments between governments, not only on a domestic level, but also on an international basis.
This paper is a first step in providing internationally comparable data on such arrangements for a sample of
OECD countries.

Section 2. Experience with Pension Plans for Government Workers in OECD Countries

     Pension promises for government workers are a major policy challenge for four main reasons. Firstly,
the state is often a country’s largest employer and as such, has large pension commitments to its public
sector employees. Secondly, public sector pension promises are often of a defined benefit nature and tend
to be relatively generous compared to private sector arrangements. In some countries, although not all,
generous pension promises appear to have been made to make up for relatively lower cash pay in the
public sector as compared to the private sector. Thirdly, these pension promises are in some countries
underfunded or not funded at all (that is, financed on a pay-as-you-go basis). Fourthly, there is as yet no
internationally standardised method of reporting public sector pension liabilities in contrast to the
significant disclosure requirements that exist for exchange-listed private-sector companies and that are
quite standardised across many countries. Practice varies widely by country, as does the extent to which
the liabilities associated with these promises are disclosed and valued. Such lack of transparency and
valuation requirements that may not be sufficiently conservative could mean that huge fiscal liabilities are
potentially hidden, to be passed on to future generations of workers. This section and the next section
discuss in turn of each of these issues.

2.1 Share of government workers in total labour force

    As can be seen in Figure 2.1, government workers make up a substantial section of the labour force of
many OECD countries, with the OECD average at close to 15% of the total. In Norway and Sweden,
government employees account for nearly 30% of the labour force. In contrast, in Korea and Japan
employees in the state sector account for about 5% of the total employees in each country.

     If employees of state-owned enterprises are included, the level of labour force coverage increases by a
few percentage points in most countries. Figure 2.1 also shows the relative stability in the level of
employment in general government and public corporations as a percent of the labour force between 1995
and 2005.


                                                     5
      Figure 2.1 Employment in general government as a percentage of the labour force (1995 and 2005)




Source: Government at a Glance 2009

Data revised for Germany (2005 instead of 2004) - Governmental source

Greece: data refers to 2006 - Governmental Source - Staff under private law has been taken into account

Ireland: Governmental Source

Source of the data for UK: National Statistics Office (FTE)

Data for Slovak Republic: ILO and OECD

Last data available for Korea: 2004

Portugal: data refers to 1996 instead of 1995. Data in 1996 not including Madeira Autonomous Region in Subcentral
Government




                                                               6
2.2 Types of pension plans for government workers in OECD countries

     Government workers’ pension plans can be classified according to three key criteria. Financially
speaking, the main distinction in the administration of government workers’ pension arrangements is
between funded and unfunded arrangements, but partially funded and book reserved arrangements should
also be considered:

          Funded arrangements are those where an independent legal entity is established to hold pension
           plan assets on behalf of the plan members. Typically, assets would be held in a (legally separate)
           pension fund, although some countries allow public sector plan sponsors to purchase insurance to
           cover their pension obligations.

          Unfunded, or pay-as-you-go, arrangements are financed directly out of the government’s
           coffers, though there may be reserves set up which are the legal property of the employer
           (government).

          Another category may be considered, book reserved arrangements, where the sponsoring
           government recognizes a liability (debt) on its balance sheet which reflects the accrued pensions
           of its members, but there are no legally separated pension assets.

          Some plans are partially funded, where the plan sponsor specifically targets a funding level that
           is less than 100%. The remainder could be unfunded (pay-as-you-go) or it could be book-
           reserved.

    A second classification is whether the pension plan is specific to government workers’ or part of a
broader arrangement, such as a national pension system. In the former case, it is also important to know
whether the plan substitutes for or complements the nationwide pension system.

     Finally, pension plans may be classified into defined benefit (DB), defined contribution (DC) and
hybrid pension arrangements. DB plans provide benefits that are ultimately guaranteed by the state as
sponsor. In DC plans, by contrast, the government’s cost is limited to a prespecified contribution rate and
hence do not create any future fiscal liabilities.4 In some countries, the DC plans can be considered
“protected” (Pugh and Yermo 2008), where the pension entity or provider guarantees or targets a specific
rate of return or benefit, but there is no automatic claim to the sponsoring employer in case of under-
funding. In collective DC plans, risks are shared across the plan membership. Hybrid pension arrangements
are those that offer a minimum return or benefit guarantee (e.g. cash balance plans) and may offer a
variable (DC-like) benefit on top.

Main features of pension arrangements for public sector workers in OECD countries

     Following Pinheiro (2004), Palacios and Whitehouse (2006) and further research, we describe in
Table 2.1 the main features of pension arrangements for public sector workers in OECD countries. The
table states whether such workers are covered by the main, national social security arrangement and
whether they have a special arrangement (substitute or complementary to the general social security
system). It also describes the main features of these special pension arrangements. In particular, it
describes the financing mechanisms (funded with legal entities set up to hold the assets on behalf of

4
    Some DC systems, however, have DB elements and may involve contingent liabilities for governments if for
          example, the state provides or underwrites minimum return or pension guarantees.


                                                      7
beneficiaries, unfunded schemes - though reserves may be built up – and book reserved plans) and the
pension formula (DB or DC).

          Table 2.1 Main features of pension arrangements for public sector workers in OECD countries

  Country           Are public sector workers covered by the        Is the substitute or complementary plan for
                    general social security system?                 public sector workers DB or DC? Is it
                                                                    funded, unfunded or book reserved?

  Australia                 No, they are excluded from the                  The Australian Public Sector
                            mandatory DC system                             Superannnuation Scheme (PSS), a
                                                                            partially funded (with assets at about
                                                                            30% of liabilities), partially book-
                                                                            reserved DB plan for employees of
                                                                            the central government, was closed in
                                                                            2005 and replaced with a DC plan
                                                                            (PSSap) for new workers. Each State
                                                                            has its own plan for its employees,
                                                                            most of which are funded and based
                                                                            on either DB or hybrid pension
                                                                            formulas.

  Austria                   Yes                                             DB, unfunded

  Belgium                   No                                              DB, unfunded

  Canada                    Yes                                             There is a funded, DB pension plan
                                                                            for federal government workers for
                                                                            service after 2000 (book reserved
                                                                            before then). Provincial governments
                                                                            tend to offer specific, DB plans to
                                                                            their personnel. These plans are
                                                                            usually funded, though some are run
                                                                            under the book reserve system.

  Chile                     Yes, except military personnel. The             There is no specific arrangement for
                            mandatory pension system includes               public sector workers, except military
                            a fully-funded DC pillar.                       personnel (unfunded, DB)

  Denmark                   Yes                                             Collective DC, funded

  Finland                   No, but the rules are the same as for           There is an unfunded DB pension
                            private sector workers                          plan for central government workers
                                                                            (VaEL). However, a buffer fund has
                                                                            been established and the target
                                                                            funding level is 25% of the VaEL
                                                                            plan’s liabilities.    There is an
                                                                            unfunded DB plan for local
                                                                            government workers (KuEL). A fund
                                                                            has been established to cover the
                                                                            KuEL plan’s annual costs on a short-
                                                                            term basis.

  France                    No                                              DB, unfunded, plus a complementary
                                                                            (voluntary) full-funded DC plan


                                                         8
                                                    (Prefon) and a         complementary
                                                    funded DB scheme.

Germany        Employees are covered by the          All plans are DB arrangements. The
              general system and supplementary      supplementary pension arrangements
              pension     arrangements.  Civil      are partially funded. For civil
              servants appointed for life are       servants appointed for life of almost
              covered by a special pension          all federal states as well as at federal
              system.                               level reserve funds have been set up.

Greece        Yes                                   DB, unfunded

Hungary       Yes. The mandatory pension            There is no specific arrangement for
              system includes a fully-funded DC     public sector workers.
              pillar.

Iceland       Yes                                   Collective DC, funded

Italy         Yes                                   Some public sector employees (e.g.
                                                    teachers) have a complementary DC
                                                    plan.

Korea         No, there are separate arrangements   The military, civil servants and
              for public sector workers.            university and school teachers have
                                                    each their own unfunded, DB
                                                    arrangement.

Japan         Yes                                   DB, unfunded

Mexico        Yes, for new public sector            There is no specific arrangement for
              employees since 2007. Mandatory       new public sector workers since
              pension system includes a fully-      2007. Older workers are covered by
              funded DC pillar.                     an unfunded, DB plan.

Netherlands   Yes                                   There is a funded DB pension plan
                                                    for government workers at all levels
                                                    and education (ABP) and a funded
                                                    DB plan for health care sector
                                                    (PfZW).

Norway        Yes                                   DB, funded arrangements for local
                                                    government workers. DB, partially
                                                    funded,   partially   book-reserved
                                                    arrangement for federal government
                                                    workers.

Poland        Yes. The mandatory pension            There is no specific arrangement for
              system includes a fully-funded DC     public sector workers.
              pillar.

Spain         Yes                                   Central government workers have
                                                    both an unfunded DB and a funded,
                                                    DC plan. Some regional governments
                                                    (e.g. Basque Country and Catalonia)
                                                    sponsor funded DB plans for their


                                          9
                                                                   personnel

  Slovak                 Yes                                       There is no specific arrangement for
  Republic                                                         public sector workers.

  Sweden                 Yes                                       Arrangements for local and federal
                                                                   employees include both DB and DC
                                                                   elements. Arrangements are funded
                                                                   for federal government workers. For
                                                                   local       government       workers
                                                                   arrangements are partially funded or
                                                                   book-reserved and partially pay-as-
                                                                   you-go.      (For local-government
                                                                   workers, pre-1997 obligations are
                                                                   pay-as-you go, whereas post-1997
                                                                   obligations are funded or book-
                                                                   reserved.)

  Switzerland            Yes                                       DB, funded arrangements for central
                                                                   and local government workers.

  Turkey                 Yes, except military personnel, coal      There is no specific arrangement for
                         miners and school teachers.               public sector workers, except military
                                                                   personnel who are covered by a DB,
                                                                   funded plan (Oyak). Coal miners and
                                                                   primary school teachers also have
                                                                   their own DB plan.

  United                 Yes, although some are contracted         There is a book-reserved, DB plan
  Kingdom                out of the state pension system.          for civil servants of the central
                                                                   government and funded, DB plans for
                                                                   employees of local authorities. There
                                                                   are also separate book-reserved DB
                                                                   plans for employees of the National
                                                                   Health Service, for teachers, fire
                                                                   department, armed forces and police.

  United States          Yes, for most states and central          New U.S. federal civilian employees,
                         government workers hired after            first   hired    after    1983,   are
                         1983. Some states maintain                automatically covered by FERS, a
                         arrangements that substitute for          three tiered system that consists of
                         social security.                          social security, a specific, unfunded
                                                                   DB plan and the Thrift Savings Plan
                                                                   which is a funded, DC plan. States
                                                                   and local governments offer mainly
                                                                   DB plans, which are often funded.



     Most OECD governments, with few exceptions, offer special DB arrangements for public sector
workers, which in most instances are complementary to the general social security system. These special
DB plans create a pension liability for governments beyond that already reported in social security
arrangements. Table 2.1 also shows that at the federal level, unfunded (pay-as-you-go) schemes are the
most common, followed closely by the number of funded schemes. At the local government level, funded



                                                     10
schemes are more popular than unfunded (pay-as-you-go schemes). Some schemes at the federal and local
government level are book-reserved, whereas a small number of schemes target partial funding.

     Table 2.1 also reveals some countries where government workers have been fully or largely integrated
into both the PAYG and the funded part of the mandatory pension system. Such countries include Chile,
Denmark, Hungary, Iceland, Mexico, Poland and the Slovak Republic. With the exception of Denmark and
Iceland, these are all countries that reformed their public pension system structurally, replacing part of the
public pension with “carve-out” individual accounts.5 Chile led such reform in 1981, including public
sector workers in the new system (except the military, who maintained a special DB system financed
directly from the government’s budget). The inclusion of government workers in the mandatory private
pension system in Denmark and Iceland can be traced back to a long history of collective bargaining at the
industry level. The mandatory private pension system in Iceland dates from 1974.

2.3 Pension expenditure and pension liabilities

     Information regarding public expenditure on government workers’ pensions is readily available for
most OECD countries. However, international comparability is problematic because of the way the
information is reported. The OECD’s SOCX database, for example, reports pensions paid to former civil
servants through autonomous funds as a private spending item (Australia (partially), Canada, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom). All social benefits not provided by general government
are considered ‘private’. 6

     A recent study by Müller et al. (2009) has collected information for selected European countries. In
France and Germany, spending on pensions for public sector workers accounts for 17% of total public
spending on pensions while in Austria it is 27%. The highest ratio of government workers’ pension
expenditure to GDP is also found in these countries, as plans provide benefits that replace those of the
standard social security system.




5
    In all these cases, at least part of the social security contribution was transferred to the new fully-funded, DC system.
6
    This is in line with SNA (1993), para 8.63 states: “… Social insurance schemes organized by government units for
              their own employees, as opposed to the working population at large, are classified as private funded
              schemes or unfunded schemes as appropriate and are not classified as social security schemes. …” In
              practical terms, for pension payments to former civil servants to be classified as private, these payments
              have to go through autonomous private funds (e.g. separate pension and/or insurance companies), for
              which the government does not make up the deficit on a regular basis (e.g. in practice benefit schemes
              which are defined contribution plans). Non-autonomous pension schemes (including pension benefits paid
              directly from the government budget) remain institutionally in the government sector.


                                                              11
  Figure 2.2 Pension expenditure for government workers and social security compared (as % of GDP, 2006)




Source: Müller et al. (2009)


     Unlike that for private sector pension schemes (if sponsored by publicly-traded corporations), the
reporting of government workers’ pension liabilities is not yet standardized internationally, although there
is an ongoing initiative to do so by the OECD and the IMF via the so-called system on national accounts
(SNA). Some countries, like Australia and Canada, already require their governments (at all levels) to
report their pension liabilities for their employees as a liability on the government’s balance sheet (if there
are no associated plan assets, then these pension arrangements would in effect be transformed into book
reserves). By making these debts explicit, these governments would formally quantify and acknowledge
the future commitments that they are responsible for.

     Some of the more contentious issues regarding the valuation of public sector liabilities are the extent
to which benefits should incorporate future salary growth and the discount rate to be used. In the private
sector, such issues have been largely solved through the application of the International Accounting
Standard Board’s IAS19 standard for pension benefits in the EU and other countries, and similar standards
applied in Japan and the United States. The choice of discount rate for calculating public sector liabilities is
a particular controversial topic because of the huge impact small changes in discount rates can have on the
size of the liability.

     Much of the recent financial economics literature proposes that public pension should be computed
using some reasonable government paper rate. However, there is an ongoing debate regarding the
application of market-based discount rates, given that pensions are long-term liabilities, that there is no
market for such liabilities and that there is no a priori expectation that such liabilities will be sold by
governments or otherwise transferred to an insurance companies. Hence, to the extent that a government
bond yield is to be used to calculate public pension liabilities it may be preferable to use a long-term
average measure or an expectation of its future value, based on long-term trends in economic growth and


                                                      12
inflation. Actuaries have also traditionally adjusted such discount rates upwards to reflect the higher long-
term return that may be expected from pension fund investments in equity and other instruments.

     The next section of this paper examines some specific public sector pension plans in several countries
in an attempt to highlight in more detail some of the broad concerns identified above.

Section 3. Examination of Individual DB Public Sector Pension Plans

3.1 Introduction

      The prior section of this paper highlighted some high-level policy challenges that are facing public
sector pension schemes, namely the large size of the government as an employer in most countries, the
relative generosity of pension promises in public sector schemes relative to private sector schemes, and the
funding and disclosure of public sector pension obligations.

      This section looks in detail at specific pension schemes for public sector workers in a number of
countries in order to identify how the broad-level issues discussed above impact individual schemes. Table
3.1 lists the plans that have been examined in detail. The plans were selected on the basis of availability of
data and are not necessarily representative of the universe of public sector plans in the country. However,
for a few countries, the pension plans selected cover a large section of the public sector workforce and may
therefore be considered representative of the average public sector employee.

    Data on all these plans has been obtained from public sources, mainly web-sites, annual reports (either
2008 or 2009 depending on availability) and official statistics. We primarily selected OECD countries
where there are special DB arrangements for public sector workers, both funded and unfunded.

     Some countries such as Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom are characterised by a large
number of individual schemes from various employers in the public sector, whereas other countries such as
the Netherlands, the Nordic countries and France are characterised by large and harmonised centrally
administered schemes. In most of the countries we examined, countries have pension schemes for their
federal employees that are separate and distinct from the pension schemes of other public sector
employees, although in the Netherlands this is not the case.

     This report examines only a few public sector pension plans in each country. In the countries with the
large centralised public schemes (for example, the Netherlands, the Nordic countries and France), this
means that a large portion of the public sector has been covered. In the countries with many individual
plans (such as Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom), the report covers a smaller portion of the
public sector. Figure 3.1 below shows the portion of the public sector covered by the individual pension
schemes examined. This has been measured as the total number of active members in the individual
pension schemes examined in each country over the total number of each respective country’s public sector
employees.




                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


     The pension schemes examined in detail in this report are shown below; the examined schemes covering federal pensions have been highlighted in the
chart. (The pension schemes covering federal employees are the dark-shaded schemes.)

                                                                                     Table 3.1: Plans under consideration

                                                                                                                               Hong Kong,
                         Australia             Canada                Finland              France             Germany                              Netherlands             Norway                Sweden                   UK
                                                                                                                                 China
   Number of plans
                              5                     2                    2                    3                   1                  3                   2                    3                     2                     7
     examined
                        Australia - Public                                           France - Le Regime                       Hong Kong (China)
                             Sector        Canada - Pension        Finland VaEL /     des fonctionnaires    Germany Civil        Civil Service                                                                    UK Principle Civil
                                                                                                                                                                      Norway - SPK - for       Sweden - SPV
         1               Superannuation    Plan for the Public     StaPL (federal        de l'Etat, de     Servants Pension    Provident Fund     Netherlands ABP                                                  Service Pension
                                                                                                                                                                      federal employees     (federal employees)
                      Scheme (PSS) - for Service of Canada           employees)       magistrats et des          Plan          Scheme (a DC                                                                       Scheme ("Nuvos")
                       federal employees                                               militaires Notes                           scheme)
                        Australia - Public
                             Sector                                                  France - CNRACL
                                                                                                                                                                       Norway - Public
                         Superannuation                            Finland KuEL /   Caisse nationale de                       Hong Kong (China)                                               Sweden - local
                                                                                                                                                                            Sector
         2            Accumulation Plan       Canada OTP         KompPL (local govt retraites des agents                        New Pension       Netherlands PfZW                             government              UK NHS
                                                                                                                                                                     Pensjonskasser - for
                          (PSSAP) - for                              employees)       des collectivités                           Scheme                                                       employees
                                                                                                                                                                        local govt ee's
                     federal employees (a                                                   locales
                           DC scheme)
                         Australia - The
                         Commonwealth                                                  France - Retraite                      Hong Kong (China)
                                                                                                                                                                      Norway - KLP - for                             UK Teachers'
         3               Superannuation                                               Additionelle de la                        Old Pension
                                                                                                                                                                        local govt ee's                                Pension
                      Scheme (CSS) - for                                              Fonction Publique                           Scheme
                       federal employees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UK Local
                      Australia - State
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Government
         4           Super SAS Trustee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Merseyside pension
                        Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fund (1 of 99)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UK Local
                          Australia -                                                                                                                                                                              Government West
         5
                          ESSSuper                                                                                                                                                                                 Yorkshire pension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fund (1 of 99)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UK Local
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Government Greater
         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Manchester pension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fund (1 of 99)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UK Local
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Government West
         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Midlands pension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fund (1 of 99)




                                                                                                             14
                                                                                  DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


                                Figure 3.1: Size of examined pension plans



                              Estimated size of examined pension plans
                                  in relation to size of public sector
                        (number of active members / number of public sector employees)
100%

 90%

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%

 10%

  0%
       Netherlands   Sweden   Finland   Norway    France    United   Germany   Hong Kong,   Australia   Canada
                                                           Kingdom               China




     The total number of active members varies greatly for the plans examined. The greatest
number of actives employees is in the French schemes examined at approximately 4.4 million
members. The smallest number of active members is in the Hong Kong, China schemes
examined with approximately 157,000 active members. The total approximate active membership
of the schemes examined, grouped by country, is shown below:




                                                      15
                                                                                        DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


                                Figure 3.2: Active members in examined pension plans


                                    Approximate Number of Active Members
                                          in Examined Pension Plans
        5,000,000


        4,500,000


        4,000,000


        3,500,000


        3,000,000


        2,500,000


        2,000,000


        1,500,000


        1,000,000


         500,000


               ‐
                    France    United Netherlands Germany   Sweden   Finland   Norway   Australia   Canada   Hong Kong,
                             Kingdom                                                                          China




3.2 What is the Pension Promise?

      One of the policy challenges faced by public sector pension schemes is that they tend to offer
relatively generous DB pension promises, when compared to private sector arrangements. These
higher pension promises appear to have been made in a number of cases to make up for lower cash pay
in the public sector, relative to the private sector.

     The first question is what types of benefits are offered by the individual pension plans that have
been examined. The individual pension schemes that we examined are mainly DB. The plans in
France, Germany and Norway are final pay DB schemes. Canada’s OTP plan is final average pay,
whereas Canada’s plan for federal government workers is a highest average pay scheme. The schemes
examined in Finland and the Netherlands are career average schemes. The UK scheme for civil
servants is career average, whereas the other examined UK schemes are final average pay schemes,
although the government is considering replacing them by career-average plans.7 The plans examined
in Australia, and Sweden are a combination of DB and DC. There are three Hong Kong, China
scheme for federal employees: Those members that joined after 1 June 2000 are covered by a DC
scheme, whereas members who joined before then are covered by highest pay DB schemes.

     Members of the French pension schemes for public sector employees are not eligible for the state
social security pension scheme, so the public sector pension scheme must therefore cover any resulting
shortfall. Most German civil servants are also covered by schemes that replace the general social
    7
        The Interim Hutton report published in October 2010 recommended also later retirement ages and an
                increase in employee contributions in all but the armed forces pension plan.



                                                             16
                                                                               DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


security system. The pension schemes examined in Canada, Finland, and Norway are integrated with
the state social security pension scheme. The pension schemes examined in Hong Kong, China, the
Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom are distinct and complementary to the state social
security pension scheme, although in the United Kingdom, some public sector pension schemes are
contracted out of the state pension system and must make up the benefit shortfall.

     The second question is how do the individual schemes examined compare to pension schemes
offered in the private sector in the various countries. In Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Hong
Kong - China, Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, the schemes examined offer more generous
pension benefits than what is typical practice in the private sector. In Finland, the schemes give
similar benefits to those found in the private sector. In Norway, the level of benefits is similar to that
typically offered by large and mid-size employers. Small Norwegian employers, however, tend to
offer significantly less generous DC schemes due to the government-mandated minimum pension level
that was introduced in 2006. In Sweden, the schemes examined give slightly less generous DB
benefits than the scheme that covers most private white-collar workers; although the public sector
schemes are more generous than the DC scheme offered to most private sector blue collar workers and
younger white collar workers who also receive DC benefits.

     The question as to how the relatively more generous level of benefits in the public sector is offset
by lower levels of cash compensation has not been explored in this paper, but could be the subject of
further research (compare Disney et al. 2010 for a recent study for the UK).

3.3 Disclosure and Financing

     Most of the plans examined appear to have disclosed their full liabilities, either in the financial
statements of the employer or the state (for the plans covering federal employees). Full disclosure
seems to be provided for by the pension schemes examined in Australia, Canada, the Netherlands,
Norway and the United Kingdom as does the complementary pension scheme for public sector
workers in France and the Swedish plan for federal employees.

     Full disclosure of liabilities is typically practiced by plans that are book-reserved or funded. For
the plans examined in this paper this has been the case: full liabilities appear to have been disclosed
for the plans financed by book-reserving or funding, whereas the pay-as-you-go plans have had no
disclosure of liabilities. The one exception is the Swedish local government plans which practices
partial funding/book-reserving and partial pay-as-you-go funding. The portion of the liabilities for
these plans that is funded or book-reserved is disclosed on a net of assets basis only.

     The following chart shows the financing method used by each of the examined plans:




                                                      17
                                                                                                         DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


                                Table 3.2: Financing method of examined plans

                                                                         Partly Funded /          Partly Funded /
                          Funded                 Book-reserved            Partly Book-            Partly Pay-as-          Pay-as-you-Go
                                                                            reserved                  you-Go
                                                                        Australia PSS (federal
                                                                        ee's)
                 Australia CSS (federal ee's)
                 Australia StateSuper SAS
                 Trustee Corporation (pooled
   Australia     fund covers four closed
                 NSW public sector
                 superannuation schemes)
                 Australia ESSSuper
                 (emergency services ee's
                 and state ee's of Victoria)
                 Canada: Pension Plan for
                 the Public Service of
   Canada        Canada
                 Canada OTP
                                                                                                 Finland VaEL (federal
                                                                                                 ee's)
   Finland
                                                                                                 Finland KuEL (local
                                                                                                 govt ee's)
                                                                                                                         Pension scheme for
                                                                                                                         federal ee's,
                                                                                                                         magistrates and
                                                                                                                         military
                                                                                                                         CNRACL (local govt
                                                                                                                         ee's)
   France
                 France - Retraite
                 Additionelle de la Fonction
                 Publique (Complementary
                 pensionn scheme for federal
                 ee's, local govt ee's and
                 hospitals)
                                                                                                                         Hong Kong (China)
                                                                                                                         New Pension Scheme
  Hong Kong                                                                                                              Hong Kong (China)
                                                                                                                         Old Pension Scheme



                                                                                                                         Germany Civil
   Germany
                                                                                                                         Servants Pension Plan
                 ABP (all govt ee's and
 Netherlands     education sector)
                 PfZW (health care sector)
                                                                        Norway SPK (federal
                                                                        ee's)
                 Norway KLP (local govt
   Norway
                 ee's)
                 Norway Pensionskasser for
                 local gov't ee's)
                                                                                                 Sweden local gov't
   Sweden        Sweden SPV (federal ee's)
                                                                                                 ee's
                                                UK Principle Civil
                                                Service (new plan for
                                                federal ee's)
                                                UK NHS (hospital
                                                ee's)
                                                UK Teacher's Pension
United Kingdom   UK local govt Merseyside
                 pension fund
                 UK local govt west
                 Yorkshire pension fund
                 UK local govt Greater
                 Manchester pension fund
                 UK local govt West
                 Midlands pension fund




                                                                  18
                                                                                    DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1




     The total disclosed liabilities of the pension schemes examined in these countries, and in Finland
and Sweden where partial disclosure is practiced, is shown in figure 3.3 below. It should be noted that
these pension liabilities have been determined using the regulatory requirements in each respective
country, and are therefore not directly comparable. Therefore, the chart below is only intended to give
a very general and relative order of magnitude of the size of the liabilities for these schemes.

     The main schemes for French public sector workers and the German plan for civil servants are
financed on a pay-as-you-go basis and no liabilities are publicly disclosed.

     In Sweden, the liabilities for the SPV plan for federal employees appear to be fully disclosed in
the Swedish State’s financial statements8. For the plans covering Swedish local government
employees, the story is a bit more complicated. Pension obligations that relate to pension promises
accrued by employees after 1997 are accounted for on the balance sheet (either funded or book-
reserved), unless they have been insured away. According to Statistics Sweden, pension obligations,
net of assets, for the Swedish local government pension schemes amount to 60.6 BSEK as of 31
December 2009 (5.9 BEUR). However, the local governments can choose whether or not to disclose
pension obligations related to pension promises accrued prior to 1997 and most local governments do
not provision for these pre-1997 liabilities in their balance sheets. As of 31 December 2009, the value
of undisclosed pension liabilities for the Swedish local governments amounted to 344.1 BSEK (33.6
BEUR).9

     The Finnish plans, KuEL for local government employees and the VaEL for federal employees
are partly financed on a pay-as-you-go basis. The KuEL plan for local government employees is
financed on a pay-as-you-go basis, although a fund was set up in 1988 to cover annual costs on a
short-term basis. The VaEL plan for federal employees established a buffer fund in 1990. Annual
expenditures are paid for out of the national budget, and then 40% of those expenditures are
reimbursed by the buffer fund. Assets will continue to be accumulated in the buffer fund until 25% of
the total liabilities of the VaEL plan is pre-funded.




    8
        The liabilities that are financed on a pay-as-you-go basis in the Swedish local government pension plan
                 are not disclosed in the local government financial statements, but Statistics Sweden publishes
                 the associated liability figure each year.
    9
        Statistics Sweden, “Statement of accounts for the municipalities and county councils 2009. Preliminary
                  data from profit/loss statements and balance sheets”, 26 April 2010.



                                                         19
                                                                            DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


            Figure 3.3: Disclosed liabilities of examined pension schemes (in billion euros)



                       Disclosed Liabilities of Examined Pension Schemes
                                              in Billion Euros
600



500



400



300



200



100



  0
      United Kingdom   Netherlands   Canada         Australia    Sweden       Norway        France
                                                                                        Complementary
                                                                                           Scheme




                                                    20
                                                                               DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


Section 4. Funded public sector pension plans

4.1 Introduction

     This section presents evidence on financial aspects of a selection of funded defined benefit (DB)
plans in the public sector for a number of countries. (The selected plans are the same as those
examined in Section 3 of this paper, plus some new plans.) It is clear from the previous sections that
dominant variety of financing approaches are used for pension arrangements in the government sector
across countries. Discussion on plan reforms may stimulate the transition to funded plans in certain
countries (compare for example Maurer et al. 2009 for Germany and for the United Kingdom the
Public Sector Pensions Commission 2010).

    This section starts with a comparison of a number of funded DB plans on three different bases.
We find that funded plans generally tend to be underfunded and we discuss a number of arguments
why this may be the case. To put underfunding in perspective, we compare the size of underfunding in
funded plans with the financial obligations captured in unfunded plans of a number of countries.

4.2 Funding and methods of valuation of liabilities

     Participants in a traditional DB plan typically accrue pension rights based on years of service,
annual accrual rate and wage income over the career. The accrued rights give prospect on a stream of
annual pension payments as of retirement age. These payments may be indexed for some reference
variable, for example price inflation or wage growth. A pension fund accounts for the future pension
payments by reporting the size of the pension liabilities. The liability of a pension plan essentially is
the discounted value of this stream of future pension cash flows to the present.

      There has been a debate on which method of discounting is appropriate in valuing pension
liabilities (Exley et al. 1997, Bader and Gold 2003, Kortleve et al. 2006, Waring 2009). For a long
time, liabilities were valued using a fixed discount rate which may reflect the expected return on
assets, but since the nineties of the previous century the economic approach based on fair valuation
principles and a market discount rate has increasingly substituted for the actuarial method. The private
sector for the most part no longer utilizes the actuarial method for disclosure purposes as
internationally recognized accounting standards prescribe that companies have to report their pension
obligations in fair value terms based on economic principles.

     For public sector pension plans, there is a large variety in discounting practice. Both the fixed
discount rate method and the economic method are in use. The liabilities that the examined plans and
the discount rates used and whether the discount rates are fixed or market-related are discussed in the
following section.

4.3 Reported evidence on funding positions

     Table 4.1 informs about the financial position of a number of funded pension plans from different
countries as of end 2008 as reported by the plan sponsors of the schemes. All monetary terms are in
Euros. Assets are reported at their disclosed value. The value of the liabilities is determined by the
discounting method. The information about the discount method used in the table shows up a large
variety as to this aspect.

    The Netherlands has two public sector plans, APB for the sectors government and education, and
PfZW for the health care sector. Like all other pension funds in the Netherlands, the public sector
pension plans in the Netherlands have to report the fair value of their nominal liabilities. The nominal



                                                      21
                                                                                     DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


liabilities are the accrued pension rights without taking into account future indexation. The supervision
prescribes that the discount rates for the various terms have to be derived from the nominal swap rates
curve10. End 2008 the swap rate corresponding with the duration of the liabilities for the two plans is
3.56%.

      The United States is present in the table with the aggregate information on the value of assets and
liabilities of all public sector plans (derived from Novy-Marx and Rauh 2009). The plans in the United
States use the actuarial method as prescribed by the Government Accounting Standards Bounds
(GASB). GASB 25 states that the discount rate should be based on “an estimated long-term yield for
the plan, with consideration given to the nature and mix of current and planned investments…“
(citation adapted from Munnell et al. 2010). For most plans this expected yield turns out to be equal to
8% or close to 8% (Novy-Marx and Rauh 2008).

     The Australian plan also employs the actuarial method and applies a discount rate of 8%. The
Australian PSS scheme for federal employees is partially funded, partially book-reserved, with assets
at about 30% of liabilities.

     The Norwegian SPK plan for federal employees is accounted for using the Norwegian accounting
standard NRS 6 which is similar to the pension accounting standard required by US GAAP for
corporate plan sponsors. The SPK plan is partially funded, partially book-reserved with assets at
about 60% of liabilities. As of year-end 2009, the market-based discount rate was 5.70%

     The pension plan for federal employees of Sweden uses market-based discount rate that is net of
future indexation. As of year-end 2008, this discount rate was 1.90%.

      The United Kingdom public sector pension plans are partly unfunded and partly funded in nature.
Unfunded plans cover civil servants, national health sector and teachers. The 99 plans of the local
communities all are based on funding. The reported evidence in the table therefore only concerns these
local funded plans. The evidence is twofold. The first row for the UK plans is information for one
specific plan, the West Yorkshire. The second row is an approximation of the size of assets and
liabilities for all 99 plans. The reported value of liabilities is based on a discount rate of around 3% (=
6% denominator discount rate minus 3% inflation rate). Cash flows are projected with an expected rate
of inflation/indexation of 3% (approached by taking the difference between the yield on long term
gilts and the yield on inflation linked bonds). The denominator discount rate turns out to be equal to
around 6%, determined as the sum of the long term gilt return plus assumed outperformance of assets
over the gilt return, being 2% for assets relating to preretirement service and 1% for postretirement.
On average this corresponds with a denominator discount rate equal to around 6%.

     The French public service additional pension scheme (RAFP) has been created as a result of the
French pension reform law of August 21, 2003, and is operative since January 1, 2005. The scheme
manages the additional retirement benefit rights of French government and local authorities civil
servants and the staff of French public hospitals, through a fully funded scheme.

      With almost 4.6 million beneficiaries, 51,000 employers and contributions of more than 1.5
billion euros per annum, RAFP is one of the world’s largest public pension funds in terms of
members. The size of the plan assets and liabilities were relatively small at the end of 2008, at 6.1


     10
          The reason for the use of the swap curve instead of the yield curve of Dutch government bonds as proxy
                  for the riskfree rates interest is that the swap market is more developed (more trade terms and
                  many more participants) and so much less sensible for incidental market disturbances.



                                                           22
                                                                                                    DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


BEUR and 5.4 BEUR respectively, as the plan is quite young after four years of operations. The plan
assets and liabilities are expected to grow rapidly. The discount rate is 1.80%.

                          Table 4.1: Reported evidence by plans in consideration (end 2008)


                                                                                                  Funding    Funding Discount
     Country       Plan                                                 Assets      Liabilities   Residue      Ratio   Rate


                                                                            in euros end of 2008

     Canada        Public Service (31 March 2008)                            70.0         66.8         3.2   104.9%    6.00%
                   OTTPF (2008)                                              62.1         68.6        -6.5    90.5%    4.00%
     France        Public Service Addi t ional Pension Scheme                 6.1          5.4         0.7   112.5%    1.80%
     Netherlands   ABP (2008)                                               175.6        195.7       -20.1    89.8%    3.57%
                   PfZW (2008)                                               71.3         78.7        -7.3    90.7%    3.55%
     Sweden        federal (2008)                                            20.0         19.0         0.9   104.8%    1.90%
     Norway [1]    federal (2008)                                            18.9         28.2        -9.3    67.0%    5.80%
     UK [2]        WestYorkshire                                              4.4          5.5        -1.1    79.6%    6.00%
                   Approx. all local government plans                       317.8        542.1     -224.2     58.6%    6.00%
     US [3]        All state and local plans                            1374.3         2110.8       -736.5    65.1%    8.00%
     Australia     CSS Super (31 June 2008)                                   3.0         32.0       -29.0     9.3%    7.54%
                   ESS Super (31 Dec 2008)                                    8.5         13.8        -5.3    61.5%    8.00%


           [1]     Annual report states at value assets: "fictituos fund'
          [2]      UK has 99 local plans and approximation is based on the three biggest plans
          [3]      Data US derived from Novy-Marx and Rauh (2009)


4.4 Funding positions for different methods of valuation

     The previous section has clarified that funded public sector plans use different methods and
assumptions for valuing future pension benefit cash flows. Differences could include discount rates,
mortality tables, actuarial methods and disclosure practices. Such differences stem from historical
reasons and regulatory practices, but unfortunately, these differences in valuation and disclosure
hinder a comparison of the funding positions of public sector pension plans on comparable terms. In
order to make these liabilities truly comparable, they would need to be recalculated using the same
methods and assumptions.

     We do not attempt to fully recalculate the liabilities using the same methods and assumptions, but
in order to make the liabilities at least somewhat more comparable, they have been approximately
adjusted as if they were calculated using comparable discount rates across countries, using (i) market-
based discount rates based on the long-term nominal swap rates in each country and (ii) a fixed
discount rate related to the expected return on assets held by the pension funds. Please note that we
have made no adjustment for differences in other assumptions such as mortality tables, whether or not
future salary increases are included in the liabilities and potential differences in asset valuation, so our
revaluation can only be considered as a very rough approximation of a more “comparable” set of
funding levels.

4.4.1 Discounting methods

     There are different ways to arrive at a discount rate for pension fund liabilities. The choice of the
discount rate can be related to the expected return on assets in portfolio. The discount rate can also be



                                                                  23
                                                                                  DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


based on the characteristics of the pension liabilities. The former approach typically has been
advocated by actuaries and plan sponsors, whereas the latter approach in general is supported by
finance theory and financial economists (Bader & Gold 2003, Gold & Latter 2009). We make use of
both approaches in comparing the funding positions of public sector pension funds.

Liability-based discount rate

      Finance theory states that the appropriate discount rate should reflect the riskiness of the pension
liabilities (Novy-Marx & Rauh 2010). When it is highly likely that pension promises to public sector
employees will be incurred, then the appropriate discount rate would be the risk-free interest rate
which can be derived from government bonds or from the inter-bank market for interest-rate swap
contracts. Pension funds in the Netherlands for example have to value their liabilities using this inter-
bank swap curve. An advantage of using the swap curve above the government bond markets is that
the inter-bank swap markets are well-developed and is free from credit risk pricing.

     A main drawback of fair value accounting is that the volatility of interest markets results in a very
volatile value of pension fund liabilities even though the underlying benefit cashflows may not
change. An alternative for fair value approach might be the use of a fixed discount rate related to some
long-term average of the rate of interest on long government bonds or related to some assumed value
as a good proxy for the interest rate on government bonds. Such a rate should also be consistent with
long-term trends in economic growth, which ultimately determines the government’s capacity to
finance pensions.

Asset-based discount rate

     The asset-based discount rate approach typically relates the discount rate to the assumed rate of
return on the assets held in the pension fund. The motivation may be found in the long-term
orientation in funding pension promises. Pension funds invest for the long term so periods with below-
average returns can be averaged out with periods with higher returns. Private sector pension funds are
hindered in following this practice as their sponsors are exposed to market competition and related
discontinuity risk. This justifies market-based accounting to inform the fund’s stakeholders about the
funding position instead of an asset-based approach. The government as sponsor of government
pension funds however is by far less handicapped in following a long-term approach in funding
because of its power to tax and its ability to survive the ups and downs of the business cycle and the
stock market volatility. A fixed discount rate based on an assessment of long-term earning capacity of
assets held, adds to intergenerational equity as yearly contributions are determined on an equal base.
Such approach can also be justified if one considers that the benefit payouts are also volatile, as they
depend on parameters such as wage growth, job turnover, and longevity whose future evolution is
uncertain.

      What would be an appropriate level for the fixed discount rate? One may fall back on historical
performance as guidance for the expected future rates of return. Looking back over a long period
justifies the use of a relatively high discount rate (around 8% or even more) but restricting the period
implies much lower average returns11. The US state pension funds are allowed to use a rate of 8%. We

    11
         The US state pension funds earned over the period 1989-2009 on average 8.1%, however over the period
                1999-2009 just 3.9% (Lav&McNichol 2011). The Canadian Ontario Teachers pension fund
                reports over this period 1990-2009 an average return of 9.7% and over the period 2000-2009
                6.2% (website). The Dutch pension fund for the government ABP earned an average return over
                the years 1993-2010 of 7.1%, much lower than the North-America pension funds because of a
                more conservative asset mix (OECD 2009).



                                                        24
                                                                                         DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


base our calculation on a fixed discount rate of 6%, simply assuming that pension funds hold a 50%
equity and 50% fixed income positions, yielding respectively 7.5% and 4.5%.

4.4.2 Funding positions

   The revaluation of the liabilities makes use of the following formula (compare Biggs 2010 and
Novy-Marx&Rauh 2008 who also employ this revaluation rule):

                                                   Duration
                              1  rreported   
     L var iant  L reported                  
                              1  rvar iant   
                                              

     where rreported stands for the discount rate as reported by the plans and rvariant reflects the discount
rate of the alternative valuation method.

      The term duration in the expression measures the money-weighted average maturity of the benefit
cash flows. The duration also roughly corresponds to the elasticity of value of the liabilities with
respect to the rate of interest12. The term duration is sometimes also explained as the percentage
increase or decrease in a plan’s liabilities due to a 100 basis point decrease or increase in the discount
rate.

     The actual duration of the liabilities of a specific plan is determined by the composition of the
terms of plan liabilities, however we assume for all plans that the duration of the liabilities is 15 years.
Generally speaking this assumed duration of 15 years is a quite good approximation of the duration for
most funded DB plans, but indeed a duration of 15 year is too high for a very mature fund and too low
for a very young plan.

    Table 4.2 displays four panels where each panel is subdivided into three different methods of
valuation.

     The four panels are:

                 Panel A: Pension liabilities in billion Euros

                 Panel B: Pension liabilities as % GDP

                 Panel C: Funding ratios

                 Panel D: Pension fund residual as % of GDP




     12
          The change in the value of the liabilities L because of a change in the value or rate of interest r can be
                 approximated with the following expression, with D as duration: L   Dr
     Mismatch risk is the standard deviation of the growth rate of the funding ratio. The number of 10% reflects
              the thumb-of-rule knowledge of ALM professionals that a pension fund with a mix of 50%
              bonds and 50% equities, a duration of the liabilities of 15 years and a duration gap of 10 to 12
              years has a mismatch risk of around 10%.



                                                              25
                                                                                 DAF/AS/PEN/WD(2010)9/REV1


Each panel is subdivided to four different methods of valuation:

       1. Reported:
           Liabilities as reported by the individual schemes, based on local regulatory practice.

       2. Liability-based discount rate: inter-bank swap rate curve
           The “fair value” liabilities are our very rough approximation as to the liabilities of the
           individual schemes, determined using a market-based discount rate. This valuation
           method is inspired by the Netherlands13. As the market for government bonds in the
           Netherlands is quite limited in size and trading rates, the supervisor prescribes fair
           valuation has to be based on the nominal swap curve. We use the 30-years nominal swap
           rate as the market discount rate for nominal liabilities as the duration of a 30-years swap
           rate is about 15 years.
           Table 4.3 informs on the 30-years nominal swap rates end 2008 for the different
           countries.

       3   Liability-based discount rate equal to 4.5%
           This method bases the valuation on an assumed nominal interest rate on government. This
           rate is assumed to be 4.5%, being the sum of 2.5% real interest rate and 2% expected
           inflation. This rate is also consistent with long-term GDP growth rates in OECD
           countries, which reflects the growth in the tax base of the government which is the
           financing source for public pensions.
       4. Asset-based discount rate equal to 6%
           The valuing of the liabilities is based on an assumed discount rate of 6% as proxy for the
           assumed rate of return on assets. We base our calculation on a fixed discount rate of 6%,
           simply assuming that pension funds hold a 50% equity and 50% fixed income positions,
           yielding respectively 7.5% and 4.5%.




13
     One may ask why the Netherlands do not use real discount rates as they aim at full indexation of accrued
           nominal benefits. The actual granting of indexation depends on whether there is overfunding
           above the nominal value of pension liabilities. As indexation is uncertain and dependent on the
           funding position, Dutch pension funds therefore need not to account for the indexation ambition
           explicitly and can make use of nominal swap rates and not real rates. .



                                                      26
                                                                                                                                       2010)9/REV1



  Table 4.2: Funding position of funded public sector pension plans as reported by plan sponsors, using a market-based discount rate, using an
                   assumed long-term government interest rate of 4.5% and using a an assumed rate of return on assets of 6%

Panel A                   Liabilities in EUROS                        Panel C                      Funding ratios

Country    Plan        Reported     Swap    Rb 4.5%    ER 6%          Country    Plan        Reported       Swap    Rb 4.5%   ER 6%
Canada     Public Serv     66.8      94.5       86.7     66.8         Canada     Public Serv 104.9%        74.0%      80.8%   104.9%
           OTTPF           68.6      73.0       57.8     51.5                    OTTPF         90.5%       85.1%     107.5%   120.5%
Netherland ABP            195.7     195.7     153.6     138.2         Netherland ABP           89.8%       89.8%     114.3%   127.1%
           PfZW            78.7      84.8       62.2     55.4                    PfZW          90.7%       84.1%     114.7%   128.8%
Sweden     federal         19.0      16.4       13.7     10.5         Sweden     federal      104.8%      121.8%     145.9%   189.8%
UK         WestYorks        5.5       8.1        5.5      5.5         UK         WestYorks     79.6%       54.2%      80.8%    79.6%
           Approx. all    542.1     795.9     393.6     542.1                    Approx. all   58.6%       39.9%      80.8%    58.6%
US         All plans     2110.8    4444.3    2252.7    2793.9         US         All plans     65.1%       30.9%      61.0%    49.2%
Australia CSS Super        32.0      60.7        4.6     39.7         Australia CSS Super       9.3%        4.9%      65.0%     7.5%
           ESS Super       13.8      27.9       13.9     18.2                    ESS Super     61.5%       30.4%      61.0%    46.4%
Norway     federal         28.2      34.0       22.8     27.4         Norway     federal       67.0%       55.6%      83.1%    68.9%
France     Additional       5.4       4.2        4.1      2.9         France     Additional   113.0%      146.3%     148.1%   207.2%


Panel B                    Liabilities as %GDP                        Panel D                           (Residu) as %GDP

Country    Plan        Reported     Swap    Rb 4.5%    ER 6%          Country    Plan        Reported       Swap    Rb 4.5%   ER 6%
Canada     Public Serv    6.7%      9.5%       8.7%     6.7%          Canada     Public Serv    0.3%       -2.5%      -1.7%     0.3%
           OTTPF         16.4%     17.5%      13.9%    12.4%                     OTTPF         -1.6%       -2.6%       1.0%     2.5%
Netherland ABP           32.1%     32.1%      25.2%    22.6%          Netherland ABP           -3.3%       -3.3%       3.6%     6.1%
           PfZW          12.9%     13.9%      10.2%     9.1%                     PfZW          -1.2%       -2.2%       1.5%     2.6%
Sweden     federal        5.6%      4.8%       4.0%     3.1%          Sweden     federal        0.3%        1.0%       1.8%     2.8%
UK         WestYorks      0.3%      0.4%       0.3%     0.3%          UK         WestYorks     -0.1%       -0.2%      -0.1%    -0.1%
           Approx. all   28.9%     42.4%      21.0%    28.9%                     Approx. all  -11.9%      -25.5%      -4.0%   -11.9%
US         All plans     20.9%     44.1%      22.4%    27.7%          US         All plans     -7.3%      -30.5%      -8.7%   -14.1%
Australia CSS Super       4.4%      8.4%       0.6%     5.5%          Australia CSS Super      -4.0%       -8.0%      -0.2%    -5.1%
           ESS Super      1.9%      3.9%       1.9%     2.5%                     ESS Super     -0.7%       -2.7%      -0.8%    -1.4%
Norway     federal        8.8%     10.6%       7.1%     8.5%          Norway     federal       -2.9%       -4.7%      -1.2%    -2.7%
France     Additional     0.3%      0.2%       0.2%     0.1%          France     Additional    0.03%       0.09%       0.1%    0.15%




                                                                      27
                                                   Table 4.3: 30-year swap rates

                                         Country              30yr swap rate end 2008


                                         Canada                        3.35%
                                         Finland                       3.57%
                                       Netherlands                     3.57%
                                         France                        3.57%
                                         Sweden                        2.91%
                                         Norway                        4.49%
                                           UK                          3.32%
                                          US [1]                       2.77%
                                         Australia                     3.05%



                               [1] Swap rate US reached low at end 2008.
                               Swap rate US end 2009 was 4.56% and end june 2010 3.71%


     Panel A of table 4.2 reports the absolute value of liabilities in euros which is strongly related to the
size of the country.

     Panel B expresses the liabilities as percentage of GDP. The highest values can be found in the
Netherlands with fair value liabilities around 45% of GDP (sum of ABP and PfZW), the US with 44% and
the UK 42%.

     Panel C informs on the funding ratios for the three different valuation models14. For the valuation
method based on an expected rate of return of 8%, the plans in Canada, the Netherlands, Sweden show up
high funding ratios far above 100%. Even with this favorable discounting method, plans in the UK and the
US are severely underfunded. The level of funding is much lower for the alternative, fair value valuation
method. Most plans turn up in severe underfunding. The best funded plan is in Sweden with a funding ratio
of 121%, whereas Australia and US have funding ratios with indexed liabilities around 30%.

      Panel D finally expresses the pension fund residue (the difference between assets and liabilities) as
percentage of GDP. These results can be interpreted as the implicit government debt comparable with the
implicit debt position of unfunded plans. Underfunding implies that accrued pension rights are not matched
in full by adequate funding so that future tax payers may have to step in by additional tax payments to fund
the part of pension promises that are yet unfunded.

     The panels C and D of table 4.2 may suggest that underfunding in public sector pension funds is
common. This is the case irrespective of the method used to value the pension liabilities, although the
underfunding situation is clearly aggravated when the fair value approach is used. However, it has to be
recognized that these funding ratios are derived from values during or just after the financial crisis. It might
be possible that public sector pension funds are financially sound and healthy in less extreme periods, for
example for those funds in the Netherlands, Canada and Sweden.




14
     Funding ratio is defined as assets over liabilities: funding ratio = assets/liabilities. Funding residue is the balance
            between assets and liabilities; funding residue = assets - liabilities.


                                                                 28
Section 5. Public sector pension plans not backed by pension plan assets

     The liabilities of public sector plans not backed by pension plan assets (either pay-as-you-go or book
reserve) can be perceived as a kind of implicit government debt (Holzmann et al. 2004). The costs of
pension promises are not borne by the generation that has granted them but have to be paid by later
generations of taxpayers when they lead to actual pension payments. This section provides an estimation of
the size of this implicit debt position for the plans in consideration in this paper. It is important to note,
however, that government sponsorship of these plans and the relative guarantee that this may imply
compared to the private sector may also be considered an implicit asset.

Pay-as-you-go plans

     Some public sector pension schemes are financed on a pay-as-you-go basis. For these plans, no
provision is made in the plan sponsors financial statements for any liability and benefits that come due are
payable out of the plan sponsor’s general budget.

     The implicit debt position in pay-as-you-go financed plans actually is equal to the present value of
future benefits based on the pension rights acquired in the past service years of plan participants, so the
debt position may be perceived as the Accrued Benefit Obligation (ABO) of an pay-as-you-go financed
plan when this plan would be interpreted as a fictitious funded DB plan. In the following table, panel A, we
have very roughly estimated the fictitious ABO of the pay-as-you-go financed plans15. For reason of
comparing with the funded and book-reserved plans, the value of liabilities is calculated on a fair value
basis (swap rate) and using a fixed discount rate of 4.5%.

Book-Reserved Public Sector Pension Schemes16

     Some public sector pension schemes finance their obligations using the book-reserve method. This
means that the plan sponsor holds a provision in their balance sheet for the liabilities of the plan, but there
are no assets that have been set aside in a pension fund to cover these obligations. Rather, as benefits
become due, payments are made out of the plan sponsors general budget. Of the plans that we examined,
the UK schemes for civil servants, the NHS and teachers are financed via the book reserve method.

     As was done for the plans with pension fund assets in the previous section, following are the liabilities
of the book-reserved plans on the reported basis, the fair value basis (using a market discount rate), and
using a fixed discount rate of 4.5%:




15
     This estimation has been done using the annual benefit payments of the plans in recent years as reported by the
             plans themselves. For an accurate determination of the ABO, we also need to have knowledge first of the
             future cash flows based on accrued rights from past years of service, and secondly knowledge of the
             actuarial principles (e.g. mortality tables, career parameters) and the current composition of the scheme
             members regarding age and gender as these aspects determine the present value factors needed to
             “translate” benefit cash flows into the Benefit Obligations. As we have no knowledge of future benefit cash
             flows nor of present value factors, we have to fall back on rules of thumb that can be derived from the
             practice of real-life public sector pension funds offering benefits of the same kind.
16
     The Australian PSS scheme is partially funded, partially book-reserved, with assets at about 30% of liabilities. The
            Norwegian SPK plan is partially funded, partially book-reserved with assets at about 60% of liabilities.
            These partially funded schemes have been discussed in section 4 on funded public sector pension plans.


                                                            29
                              Table 5.1 Liabilities in pay-as-you-go and book-reserved plans


 Panel A                                                          Reported                   Fair value            Liabilities
                                                       Benefits      value     Discount      liabilities           fixed 4.5%
           PAY-AS-YOU-GO PLANS                          2008       liabilities    rate  in BEUR      as % GDP in BEUR as % GDP


France     Fonct.de l'Etat, de magistrats et des mil     45.5        n.a.      n.a.    1456        72%       777       38%
           Collectivités locales                         12.4        n.a.      n.a.    397         19%       212       19%
           Sum                                           57.9                          1853        91%       989       48%

Germany Civil Servants                                   28.7        n.a.      n.a.    918         35%       490       19%
        Other                                            18.3        n.a.      n.a.     586        23%       313       12%
        Sum                                              47.0                          1504        58%       803       31%

Sweden     Local governments                             n.a.        31        n.a.     27         7%

Finland    Local (KuEL) and Federal (VaEL) (a)           6.2         n.a.      n.a.     148        77%       79        41%
           (a) net of funded part



Panel B                                                           Reported                   Fair value            Liabilities
                                                       Benefits      value     Discount      liabilities           fixed 4.5%
           BOOK-RESERVED PLANS                          2008       liabilities    rate  in BEUR      as % GDP in BEUR as % GDP


UK         Civil Servants                                3.9         119     5.25%      157         8%       107        6%
           National Health Service                       5.0         218     4.60%      262        14%       162        9%
           Teachers                                      4.4         172     6.50%      270        14%       219       12%
           Sum                                           13.3        508                689        37%       777       38%




                                                                  30
Section 6. Net unfunded liabilities across countries

     Funded pension schemes, in principle, accumulate assets to cover the future payments of promises
when those promises become payable. However, underfunding in funded plans could also be interpreted as
implicit debt for future generations of tax payers. Underfunding implies that accrued pension rights are not
matched in full by adequate funding now so future tax payers may have to step in to cover financial
shortfalls. The residue position as percentage of GDP as reported in table 4.3, panel D can be interpreted as
the implicit debt of future tax payers in funded plans. Table 4.5 in principle is the implicit debt position of
the book-reserved scheme.

     Figure 6.1 ties all information together of all the examined plans per country in order to get some
perspective on the net unfunded liabilities on a fair value basis. Now we can compare the different
examined plans, grouped by country, as to the fiscal burden for future tax payers in one dimension. In
principle this fiscal burden, this implicit pension debt, can be replaced by explicit government debt, when
the governments would turn to the capital market and borrow the money to back all unfunded pension
promises made in the past up to now to public sector workers. However, to the extent that prefunding of
government pension promises leads to investment in domestic government bonds, a circularity in
government funding could be created.

     The examined plans in France, Finland, the United Kingdom and Germany rank the highest in terms
of net unfunded liability, with the French level reaching over 90% of GDP and the Finnish one over 75%
of GDP. The net unfunded liabilities in Sweden, the Netherlands (ABP and PfZW together), Canada (only
public servants) are low due to the relatively high funding levels in the examined funded plans. The
examined plans in the United States (all state and local plans) and Norway fall in the middle.

      The reported evidence reflects the actual size of the net unfunded liabilities best for France, Finland,
United States, Norway, Sweden and the Netherlands as the examined plans in these countries cover more
than 90% or even 100% of the active public sector employees (compare figure 3.1). For the United
Kingdom, there is underreporting of the total net unfunded liabilities position as the considered plans cover
less than 60% of the active workers in the public sector. This is also the case for Germany and even more
so for Canada, as the reported Canadian plans represent about 10% of the total public sector workforce.




                                                      31
     Figure 6.1: Net unfunded liabilities of the examined public sector plans on fair value base as % GDP (end of
                                                         2008)


          100%

           90%

           80%

           70%

           60%

           50%

           40%

           30%

           20%

           10%

            0%
                  France    Finland     UK        Germany         US       Norway     Sweden    Netherlands   Canada

                                         Pay-as-you-go and book-reserved plans   Funded plans



Section 7 Public sector plans and creditworthiness of countries

     The credit crisis has made manifest that countries may default on meeting payment obligations of
their explicit government debt. The reported net unfunded liabilities of public sector plans in Figure 6.1
can be interpreted as implicit government debt. The market would be expected to take also this implicit
debt in consideration when evaluating the creditworthiness of a country. The market assessment of
countries’ creditworthiness can be derived from the market for credit default risk. Table 7.1 below reports
for the countries under study the premium for the sovereign risk derived from the credit default swap
(CDS) market, the explicit government debt position end 2009 for these countries, the net unfunded public
sector liabilities (implicit pension debt) and the sum of the two debt positions. We are aware of the small
number of countries in this sample, but nevertheless we have calculated the correlation between the CDS-
premia and the debt positions.

     The correlations between the premiums and, respectively, the implicit17, the explicit and the total debt
positions are 0.58, 0.76 and 0.68. So there is strong positive correlations between CDS premia and the
implicit pension debt, but the correlation with the explicit debt is a bit higher, and so with the total debt.
While the correlation between the implicit pension debt and the CDS premia may be driven by the explicit
debt-CDS link, Table 7.1 also serves to highlight that some of the countries with the larger debt to GDP
ratios also carry large unfunded pension liabilities for public sector workers.




17
  The reported implicit debt positions in table 7.1 do not cover all public sector workers (compare figure 3.1). The
correlations are calculated for a crude estimation of the total implicit debt by adjusting the reported implicit debt with
an appropriate multiplier.


                                                             32
                                    Table 7.1: Credit swap rates and government debt

                                             CDS             2008           2009
                                             (bpt)       Implicit debt Explicit debt   Total debt
                           France             123              91            61            152
                           Finland            44               77            38            115
                           UK                  84              63            75            138
                           Germany            74               58            44            102
                           US                  59              31            53             84
                           Norway             33               19            26             45
                           Sweden             44                8            38             46
                           Netherlands        74               5             50            55
                           Canada*)             -              5             36             41

                           Correlation
                           with CDS                          0.58           0.76          0.69
                           *) No CDS premium available


Source: Datastream, authors’ calculations


     The impact of pension promises of government finances will also increase in the coming decades as
demographic ageing continues, leading to increases in the ratio of retirees to workers. As shown in Figure
7.1, all the countries reviewed, with the exception of the United States, are expected to have old-age
dependency ratios (the number of persons 65 years and older per one hundred persons 15 to 64 years)
greater than 40.

     Such demographic trends will compound the fiscal pressures exerted not only by pension
arrangements for government workers but more generally by unfunded, social security arrangements for
private sector workers. As shown in Figure 7.2, public expenditure on pensions is expected to grow
substantially in some of the countries considered in this report (between 2 and 4 percentage points of
GDP), such as Finland, Germany, the Netherlands and Norway. However, of these four countries, only
Finland and Germany also display a large implicit pension debt for public sector workers.




                                                                33
                            Figure 7.1: Old age-dependency ratio and implicit pension debt



  100
   90
   80
   70
   60
   50
   40
   30
   20
   10
    0
          France      Finland      UK      Germany       US        Norw ay     Sw eden    Netherlands   Canada


                                         old age dependency ratio 2050   implicit debt 2008


                   Figure 7.2: Increase in public expenditure on pensions as a % of GDP, 2010-50




Source: OECD Pensions at a Glance 2011


Section 8. Concluding Remarks

     Pension promises for government workers are a major policy challenge for four main reasons. Firstly,
the state is usually the largest employer in the country and hence it usually faces large commitments to


                                                              34
provide pensions for its employees. Secondly, these pension promises, often in the form of defined benefit
plans, tend to be relatively generous, especially when compared to private sector arrangements. In some
cases higher pension promises appear to have been made to make up for lower cash pay in the public sector
relative to the private sector. Thirdly, these pension plans are in some countries underfunded or paid out
directly from government revenues (the pay-as-you-go financing mechanism). Fourthly, there is as yet no
internationally standardized method of reporting public sector pension liabilities, as there is for exchange-
listed private sector companies in most countries. The valuation and disclosure of these promises is all too
often less than transparent, which may be hiding potentially huge fiscal liabilities that are being passed on
to future generations of workers.

      The aim of this paper is to gather more evidence on public sector pension plans regarding the types of
pension promises as well as a rough estimate of the future tax burden related to these pension promises for
a select number of public pension schemes. Most OECD countries have special pension arrangements for
public sector employees. On average 15% of the labour force in OECD countries is covered by government
sector pension plans. The plans differ as to their financing base (funding or pay-as-you-go or some kind of
book reserving), the nature of the promise (predominantly defined benefit plans, although some defined
contribution plans also exist in some countries), and whether the plans are a complement to or a substitute
for the country-wide public pension plans (the former is most common). We also find that government
workers plans tend to be more generous than private sector plans, however Scandinavian plans offer
similar benefits (and Swedish plans are actually less generous than the plans offered to a large portion of
the private sector). The countries differ also considerably in the discounting method to value future pension
liabilities. Methods range from a fixed discount rate based on the expected rate of return to fair value
principles.

     The paper did not attempt to explain these striking differences across countries. This asks for a broad
socioeconomic analysis embracing country-specific historical, cultural, and institutional aspects. Instead,
the research effort was directed at obtaining internationally comparable information on the funding level of
on a selection of DB plans in different OECD countries.

      A fair comparison between countries regarding the fiscal burden of their DB public sector pension
plans is hindered by the country-specific use of valuation and reporting methods. In order to arrive at such
a fair comparison, we have estimated for a number of plans the size of the net unfunded liabilities using a
market discount rate (“fair value” approach) and using a common fixed discount rate, both as of end 2008.

     This fiscal burden due to underfunding can also be interpreted as the implicit pension debt for a
government as future generations of tax-payers may have to pay for these underfunded accrued pension
promises. It should be noted, though, that the government sponsorship of these public sector DB plans
could also be considered an implicit pension asset due to the relatively longer time horizon of the
government plan sponsor and its potentially stronger level of creditworthiness as compared to plan
sponsors in the private sector.

     The limitations of the study should be considered. Not all pension plans for public sector workers
were examined in each country. In France, Finland, Netherlands, Norway and Sweden, the plans analysed
cover most (over 85%) of public sector employees, so the plans can be considered representative of the
public sector. On the other hand, for Canada, the implicit liabilities calculated only refer to plans covering
10% of the public sector, while the equivalent figure for Germany and the United Kingdom is about 50%.

      Furthermore, in estimating the liabilities on a fair value basis, we made a series of assumptions (such
as their duration) as detailed actuarial information on the plans surveyed is not available. Irrespective of the
valuation method used (actuarial or fair value), calculations of funding ratios, and the net unfunded
liabilities are also subject to the potential criticism that they are based on a given set of assumptions that


                                                      35
may not represent accurately the long-term financial challenge faced by governments in meeting their
pension commitments on an ongoing basis. For instance, the use of market discount rates, as in the fair
value approach, incorporates the erratic and not always rational behaviour of capital markets in the
calculation of long-term pension commitments.

      One key policy message from this study is that better disclosure and transparency is needed over the
commitments made by governments to their public sector employees. While general social security
systems are under increased scrutiny, information on public sector arrangements is often partial or not
readily available. An international debate should also be opened on how to compare these commitments
internationally, in order to assist the understanding of their fiscal impact. This paper has attempted to make
a first attempt to providing such internationally comparable data.




                                                     36
                                             REFERENCES



Angelo, P., Brainard, K., Drazilov, M. and Zorn, P. (2010), Analysis of Joshua Rauh’s Paper “Are State
     Public Pensions Sustainable?”, available at http://nasra.org/resources/RauhResponse.pdf

Bader, L. N., and J. Gold (2003): Reinventing Pension Actuarial Science. Pension Forum 14(2): 1–13.

Biggs A.G. (2010); An Options Pricing Method for Calculating the Market Price of Public Sector Pension
      Liabilities, American Enterprise Institute #164, February 2010.

Brackman, A, Grutz, J, Haug, T (2008); Civil servant pensions in National Accounts – Methodology and
     preliminary results (draft); Paper Prepared for the 30th General Conference of the International
     Association for Research in Income and Wealth; Portoroz, Slovenia, August 24-30, 2008.

British North-American Committee (2009): The Need for Transparency in Public Sector Pensions, A
       Comparative Study of Occupational Public Sector Pension Schemes in US, UK & Canada, June
       2009, BN49, British North-American Committee.

Cui J., F. de Jong and E.H.M Ponds (2011): Intergenerational risk sharing within funded pension schemes,
       in: Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10, 1-29.

D’Arcy, Dulebohn, J., and Oh, P. Optimal Funding of State Employees Pension Systems, Journal of Risk
     and Insurance, September 1999.

Disney R., C. Emmerson and G. Tetlow: What is a public sector pension worth?, The Economic Journal,
      119 (November), 517-533.

Exley, C. J., S. J. B. Mehta, and A. D. Smith. 1997. The Financial Theory of Defined Benefit Pension
      Schemes. British Actuarial Journal 3: Part IV.

Gold J. and G. Latter (2009): The Case for Marking Public Plan Liabilities to Market, in: Mitchell O.S. and
      G.Anderson (eds.) The Future of Public Employee Retirement Systems, Oxford University Press.

Hoevenaars R. & Ponds E.H.M. (2008): Valuation of intergenerational transfers in collective funded
     pension schemes, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, vol. 42/2, pp. 578-593.

Holzmann R., Palacios R. and Zviniene A. (2004), Implicit Pension Debt: Issues, Measurement and Scope
     in International Perspective, working paper, The World Bank.

Kortleve N., & Ponds E.H.M. (2006), Pension Deals and Value-based ALM, Chapter 10 in: KortleveN.,
      Nijman T. & Ponds E.H.M. (eds.): Fair Value and Pension Fund Management, Elsevier,
      Amsterdam, June 2006.

Kortleve N., Nijman T. & Ponds E.H.M. (eds.): Fair Value and Pension Fund Management, Elsevier,
      Amsterdam, June 2006.


                                                    37
Lav, I. and McNichol, E. (2001), “Misunderstandings regarding state debt, pensions, and retiree health
       costs create unnecessary alarm. Misconceptions Also Divert Attention from Needed Structural
       Reforms”, Centre on Budget and Policy Priorities, January 20, 2011

Maurer R., O.S. Mitchell, and R. Rogalla (2009): Reforming the German Civil Servant Pension Plan, in
     Mitchell O.S. and G. Anderson, The Future of Public Employee Retirement Systems, Oxford
     University Press.

Müller C., B. Raffelhüschen, and O. Weddige 2009, Pension obligations of government employer pension
      schemes and social security pension schemes estabilished in EU countries, by order of the European
      Central Bank, Final Report, Research Center for Generational Contracts, Freiburg.

Munnell A.H., R.W. Kopcke, J-P. Aubry & L. Quinby (2010): Valuing Liabilities in State and Local Plans,
    Center for Retirement Research, Boston College, nr 11, June 2010.

Novy-Marx R. and J.D. Rauh (2008) The Intergenerational Transfer of Public Pension Promises, Research
     Paper no. 08-14 Chicago GSB.

Novy-Marx R. and J.D. Rauh (2009): The liabilities and risks of state-sponsored pension plans, The
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, fall 2009, vol. 23(4), 191-210.

OECD (2007), "Public Sector Pensions and the Challenge of an Ageing Public Service", OECD Working
    Papers on Public Governance, 2007/2, OECD Publishing. doi:10.1787/285530706017

OECD (2009): Pensions at a Glance 2009 Retirement-income systems in OECD countries, OECD
       Publising

Palacios R. and E. Whitehouse (2006): Civil-service pension schemes around the world, the World Bank,
      SP Discussion paper, no. 0602.

Peskin M. (2001): Asset/Liability Management in the Public Sector, in: Mitchell O.S. & E.C. Hustead
      (eds.) Pensions in the Public Sector, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.

Pinheiro V.C. (2004): Pension funds for government workers in OECD countries, mimeo, OECD.

Public Sector Pension Commission (2010): Reforming Public Sector Pensions, Solutions to a Growing
      Challenge, Report, July 2010, United Kingdom.

Pugh, C. and J. Yermo (2008), Funding Regulations and Risk Sharing, OECD Working Papers on
      Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 17, OECD Publishing. doi:10.1787/241841441002

Scott, I (2003); Organizations in the Public Sector in Hong Kong: Core Government, Quasi-Government
       and Private Bodies with Public Functions; Public Organization Review: A Global Journal 3: 247–
       267 (2003); Kluwer Academic Publishers, the Netherlands.

Waring, B.M. (2009): A Pension Rosetta Stone: Reconciling Actuarial Science and Pension Accounting
     with Economic Values, working paper, Public Pension Finance Symposium May 2009.




                                                    38
