NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION:
EVIDENCE FROM A FAILED POLICY EXPERIMENT
Philip DeCicca
Justin D. Smith
Working Paper 17085
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17085

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2011

We thank Oscar Bedard, Elizabeth Dhuey, Steve Pischke, Fabian Waldinger, and seminar participants
at the University of Manitoba, the University of Winnipeg, and the Society of Labour Economists
for valuable comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Philip DeCicca and Justin D. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Long-Run Impacts of Early Childhood Education: Evidence From a Failed Policy Experiment
Philip DeCicca and Justin D. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 17085
May 2011
JEL No. I21,I28,J24
ABSTRACT
We investigate short and long-term effects of early childhood education using variation created by
a unique policy experiment in British Columbia, Canada. Our findings imply starting Kindergarten
one year late substantially reduces the probability of repeating the third grade, and meaningfully increases
in tenth grade math and reading scores. Effects are highest for low income students and males. Estimates
suggest that entering kindergarten early may have a detrimental effect on future outcomes.

Philip DeCicca
Department of Economics
422 Kenneth Taylor Hall
McMaster University
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4
CANADA
and NBER
decicca@mcmaster.ca
Justin D. Smith
Department of Economics
648 Fletcher Argue Building
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB R3T 5V5
CANADA
smith44@cc.umanitoba.ca

The Long-Run Impacts of Early Childhood Education:
Evidence from a Failed Policy Experiment∗
Philip DeCicca
Department of Economics
McMaster University
Justin Smith
Department of Economics
University of Manitoba
May 2011

Abstract
We investigate short and long-term effects of early childhood education using variation
created by a unique policy experiment in British Columbia, Canada. Our findings imply
starting Kindergarten one year late substantially reduces the probability of repeating the third
grade, and meaningfully increases in tenth grade math and reading scores. Effects are highest
for low income students and males. Estimates suggest that entering kindergarten early may
have a detrimental effect on future outcomes.

1

Introduction

Early childhood programs are an important part of intellectual development, as they allow children
to build a solid learning base, accumulate human capital at a higher rate in the future, and therefore
perform better in school and in the labor market. The benefits may be especially important for
disadvantaged children, since the early skill gap between them and their more advantaged peers
can appear early and persist through time [Cunha et al., 2006]. Using early childhood programs to
close early skill gaps will help to prevent future skill gaps from forming. There are many empirical
analyses of small scale early interventions like the Perry Pre-School experiment, and larger ones like
∗

We thank Oscar Bedard, Elizabeth Dhuey, Steve Pischke, Fabian Waldinger, two anonymous referees, seminar
participants at the University of Manitoba, the University of Winnipeg, and the Society of Labour Economists
(SOLE) for valuable comments. All errors are our own.

1

Head Start, that support these ideas by showing positive impacts on a variety of short and long term
outcomes. On the other hand, fewer researchers have examined the effect of universal programs
like Kindergarten or pre-Kindergarten (pre-k). Kindergarten is arguably the most widespread early
childhood education program, and is continuing to expand. For example, in the U.S. the availability
of Kindergarten expanded rapidly across the country in the 1960s and 1970s. More recently, several
states have launched universal pre-k programs. In Canada, Ontario and British Columbia (BC)
moved from half day to full day Kindergarten in 2010, while similar expansions are being considered
in other provinces.
This paper examines the effects of a unique natural experiment in BC that altered students’
early education experience. In the 1990-1991 school year, BC mandated a program called “dual
entry,” where students entered school at two different points in the school year, rather than the
traditional single entry system used prior to that date. More specifically, students turning five
years old between May and October 1990 were allowed to enter Kindergarten in September 1990,
but students born between November 1990 and April 1991 were allowed to start 4 months later in
January 1991. The program was abruptly terminated in May, 1991, leaving January entrants in
abeyance after completing only 6 months of Kindergarten. To unwind the program, the government
provided $ 7 million in financial support for November-December born children to move to first
grade at the start of the next school year, but no support was given for January-April students.
Consequently, November-December students were kept in Kindergarten for as little as 6 months, and
January-April students were kept for as many as 16 months. Based on this variation, we can think
of November-December children as having started Kindergarten 4 months late, and January-April
students as having started 6 months early.
We estimate the impact of the policy on the probability of grade repetition at age nine and
fifteen, and on tenth grade math and reading scores, using a difference in differences estimator. The
estimator compares outcomes of treated groups - students born between November and April - to
control groups within a policy year to similar differences in a year when the policy did not exist.
We find that starting Kindergarten one year late reduces the probability of repeating a grade by
up to 3.2 percentage points by age nine, and by up to 4.3 percentage points by age fifteen. We
also find that starting Kindergarten one year late improves tenth grade math scores by up to 0.089
2

standard deviations, and tenth grade reading scores by up to 0.144 standard deviations. The size
of the estimated effects is largest for students in the lowest income quartiles, and for males.
Taken at face value, the estimates imply that spending less time in Kindergarten improves
student performance. The variation created by this policy is, however, more complex. While
starting school later reduces time spent in Kindergarten, it may also improve school readiness by
increasing the age, and therefore physical and emotional maturity, at which students first enter
formal schooling. One explanation for our result is that the positive impact of increased maturity
outweighs the effect of reductions in Kindergarten, all the way to tenth grade. Another important
factor is the counterfactual to spending one extra year in Kindergarten. In the absence of extra
Kindergarten some children would stay at home, and others would enroll in day care. If these
alternative uses of time provide a benefit to students compared to Kindergarten, this supports the
effect we observe. Viewed in this way, our results are consistent with some studies in the child care
literature, which show that preschool care can negatively impact on a variety of child outcomes.1
Finally it is unknown whether students remaining in Kindergarten for more than 10 months were
challenged at a more advanced level by their teacher, and whether students who moved ahead to
grade 1 after 6 months in Kindergarten were accommodated in some way. Because such students
were mixed together in classrooms with students progressing regularly through school, this reduces
the likelihood that teachers were able to make special arrangements.
Keeping issues of interpretation in mind, the results are generated from a fairly specific policy
experiment that did not originally intend to alter exposure to Kindergarten. Still, they can be
interpreted in at least two useful ways. First, they approximate the potential impact of introducing
a pre-k program where one did not previously exist. Introducing such a program would increase
time spent in school, which comes at the expense of time spent at home, and would also lower
a student’s entry age and readiness. For both grade repetition and tenth grade test scores, the
estimates imply poorer outcomes for children who participate in such a program. The estimates
are also useful as an interesting case study. In unwinding the dual entry policy, the government
likely did not fully anticipate the impact their actions would have on students who were held back
or moved ahead. The results show a long term effect of the government action on the affected
1

See Baker et al. [2008], Lefebvre et al. [2011], Herbst and Tekin [2010], and Magnuson et al. [2007] for examples.

3

students.

2

Existing Literature

Most of the available evidence on the introduction of Kindergarten or pre-k shows positive effects
on student outcomes. In Tulsa, Oklahoma, a comparison of students of a similar age who are just
about to start pre-k to students who just finished shows that pre-k finishers had improved test scores
by 0.24 to 0.39 standard deviations (σ) [Gormley and Gayer, 2005]. The introduction of universal
pre-k in Georgia increased student test scores by 0.12σ, and increased probability of being on-grade
for age for students in the program who are disadvantaged or who live in low-density areas of the
state [Fitzpatrick, 2008]. On a larger geographic scale, the introduction of Kindergarten programs
in the U.S. in the 1960’s and 70’s lowers the probability that white students aged 5 drop out of
high school by 2.5%, and lowers the probability of being institutionalized by 20% [Cascio, 2009].
Furthermore, increased Kindergarten enrollment as a result of this expansion is associated with
a decline in the probability of failing a grade for male, non-white, disadvantaged students, and a
positive effect on attainment and wages for non-white males [Dhuey, Forthcoming].
A related literature shows the effect of moving from full- to half-day kindergarten. The main
findings are that students in the full-time program perform better [Walston and West, 2004], but
that the effects can dissipate quickly over the subsequent few grades of school, especially for minority
students [Cannon et al., 2006; Cooper et al., 2010; DeCicca, 2007].
Counter to the results above, increased child care utilization resulting from the province of
Quebec’s universal $5 per day child care policy results in worse student outcomes [Baker et al.,
2008]. More specifically, while the subsidized day care increased utilization by 14% among 0-4 year
olds, there are associated negative effects on measures of anxiety, physical aggression, hyperactivity,
and various health outcomes for children under 4. The effect on test scores as measured by the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) at age 4 are statistically insignificant. In more recent
research, the same policy is shown to negatively affect the PPVT scores of 5 year olds by up to 0.25
standard deviations, with negative effects being larger among children of low-educated mothers
[Lefebvre et al., 2011]. Additional evidence from the United States suggests that preschool care
4

can have a negative impact on students’ early cognitive achievement [Herbst and Tekin, 2010], and
behavioural outcomes [Magnuson et al., 2007].
A related strand of literature looks specifically at more targeted early educational interventions
on student outcomes. In a comprehensive literature survey, Currie [2001] shows that there are likely
short and medium term benefits to early interventions on a small-scale (such as the Perry Preschool
Experiment) and a larger scale (such as Head Start). Research on Head Start is particularly
important as it serves a large number of people, and its effects can be compared to a Kindergarten
program much more easily than a smaller-scale intervention. Comparing the outcomes of siblings,
Currie and Thomas [1995] show that overall Head Start improves student test scores by about 6
percentiles, and reduces the probability of repeating a grade by 47 percent. Interestingly, the Head
Start effect declines over time for black students, but not for whites. Looking specifically at Hispanic
children, Currie and Thomas [1999] show that Head Start leads to significant benefits in terms of
test scores and grade repetition. Using longer-term outcomes, Garces et al. [2002] show that for
white students participating in Head Start lowers the probability of dropping out of high school
by 20 percentage points, increases the likelihood of attending university by 18 percentage points,
and may increase earnings. Finally, Ludwig and Miller [2008] estimates that Head Start lowers
mortality rates among 5-9 year olds by up to 50%, and some evidence of an increase in educational
attainment.

3

Background on Schooling in British Columbia

With minor exceptions, the public school system in BC is very similar to other jurisdictions across
Canada and the United States. Education is a provincial responsibility in Canada, so all legislation
and regulation governing the school system are decided at the provincial level. The province is
separated into 60 school districts whose boundaries correspond to city boundaries in the populated
areas in the southwest, but encompass much larger areas in the less-populated north. A separate,
province-wide district exists for French-speaking (Francophone) schools.2 The provincial Ministry of
Education sets general rules for the operation of schools, such as the curriculum, while the districts
2

Student enrollment in this district accounts for less than 1% of total enrollment

5

are responsible for the actual implementation of education.
The Ministry of Education allocates funding directly to districts using a per-student formula,
where each “full-time equivalent” is allocated just under $7,000.3 Additional funds are provided for
Aboriginal education, English as a Second Language (ESL), Special Education (SpEd), and other
factors. The districts in turn decide how to distribute the money to schools, though this process is
not transparent. Unlike the American system, school districts do not raise their own funds through
property taxes in BC.
About 10% of students attend private schools. While these schools are relatively free to choose
the perspective through which they deliver education, in practice most private schools have a
religious focus. What is unique about BC’s private schools is that they are partially funded by the
government depending on their adherence to the curriculum and other administrative requirements.
Schools can receive at most 50% funding, but may receive 35% or none at all. Currently, the vast
majority receive 50% funding.
Prior to 2003, students attending public schools were required to attend their neighborhood
school. The province has since introduced legislation allowing parents to choose any public school,
but this has not really been successful in creating public school choice. The realistic forms of school
choice are between public and private education, or between French Immersion and non-French
Immersion public schools. What differentiates French Immersion schools from other schools is that
the first four years of instruction are conducted mostly in French. In large school districts such as
the Vancouver School Board, French Immersion and non-French Immersion schools have their own
catchment areas, allowing parents the choice of both in a local area. Elsewhere, a French immersion
school could be a fair distance away from a student’s home. In practice, it is often difficult to enroll
in French Immersion schools due to high demand.
The first compulsory grade in BC is Kindergarten, which children are supposed to start in the
calendar year they turn five. Parents are allowed to delay entry into Kindergarten for one year,
but in practice only about 3% of parents exercise this option. For most districts, students attend
3

A full-time equivalent stands for a student who attends school full-time. All students in first through seventh
grades are equal to one full-time equivalent. Since students in Kindergarten attend for half a day, they are considered
half of a full-time equivalent. Students in high school are between half and one full-time equivalent depending on
the number of courses taken.

6

elementary schools until seventh grade, then transfer to a high school until twelfth grade. In a
small number of districts, students transfer from an elementary school to a middle school after fifth
grade, then to a high school after eighth grade. School is compulsory until age sixteen.
Prior to school year 1999-2000, standardized tests were conducted on different subjects each
year for students in fourth, seventh, and tenth grades. Students in twelfth grade wrote Provincial
Exams at the end of core courses such as English, Math, and Science if they had enrolled in those
classes. In 1999-2000, the province instituted the Foundation Skills Assessment, testing all fourth,
seventh, and tenth grade students yearly in reading, writing, and math. Since 2003-2004, tenth
grade students are no longer tested as part of the Foundation Skills Assessment, but are instead
tested as part of the Provincial Exams along with eleventh and twelfth grade students. The tenth
grade Foundation Skills Assessment tests serve as our outcomes of interest.

4

Empirical Framework

4.1

BC’s Dual Entry Experiment

Variation in Kindergarten entry comes from a unique policy implemented in BC in the 1990-1991
school year. Just prior to the start of that school year, the BC Ministry of Education mandated a
school entry structure called “dual entry,” in which children turning 5 years old between May 1 and
October 31, 1990 started school in September 1990, and students born between November 1, 1990
and April 30, 1991 started a few months later in January, 1991. Before that time, students turning
five years old in any given calendar year all began school together in September.4 For what follows,
it is useful to recast the school entry system as a relationship between birth dates and school entry.
Under the dual entry structure, students born between May 1 and October 31, 1985 started school
in September 1990, and students born between November 1, 1985 and April 30, 1986 started school
in January 1991.
Dual entry was repealed in May, 1991 and replaced with the single entry system that existed pre4

Dual entry was piloted in the 1989-1990 school year for a select number of districts on a voluntary basis. In
theory this would provide us with a nice experiment with which to identify the effect of the dual entry policy. In
practice, we unfortunately have no information on which districts allowed dual entrants, nor do we have information
on student entry ages for 1989.

7

viously. As part of the plan to unwind the program, the government offered extra funding for school
boards to accommodate November-December born children into grade 1 classrooms in September,
1991, but did not offer funding for January-April born children.5 November-December children
could therefore move on to grade 1 after completing as little as 6 months of Kindergarten, while
January-April were kept in Kindergarten for as many as 16 months total. The policy thus creates
variation in student school start age and simultaneously the amount of time spent in Kindergarten.
It is useful to think of the November-December students as starting Kindergarten 4 months late
relative to a normal single-entry cohort, and the January-April students starting 6 months early
relative to a normal single entry cohort. This variation in late and early Kindergarten entry is the
policy we evaluate in this study.
Figure 1 illustrates the variation in school entry age by plotting average student entry age
against month of birth separately for students born in 1985, 1986, and 1987. The policy raised
entry age for November-December students in 1985, and lowered it for January-April students in
1986. The policy was fully unwound in 1987, so that line represents normal entry age under a single
entry structure. Because of the way students were sorted into classrooms after the repeal of the
policy, compliant November-December students experienced as little as 6 months of Kindergarten,
January-April students experienced up to 16 months, and others experienced 10.6
The description above and the associated graphs represent the effect of the policy on compliant
students. Non-compliance did occur among BC students, mainly because parents have the option
to delay entry. Such non-compliance means that student entry age is not fully exogenous. On
the other hand, expected entry age, which we define as the entry age for students who comply
completely with the rules, is arguably exogenous because it depends only on student birth date.
We therefore correct for the effects of delayed entry by using expected entry age as an instrument
for observed entry age. One potential threat to the exogeneity of expected entry age is that parents
could in theory plan dates of birth by timing conception or choosing specific birth dates through
c-sections and induced births. In practice such manipulation would not have been possible because
5

At the time, Kindergarten was half-day, but grade 1 was full-day. Extra funding was necessary to pay for the
extra resources needed to teach children for a full day.
6
Note that the line for 1985-born students is missing the first 4 data points due to a sample exclusion, explained
below

8

this policy was implemented years after all affected students were born.
A related issue is that not all students who comply with the entry date rules follow into Kindergarten or grade 1 in the expected way. In September, 1991, schools allowed some NovemberDecember children to remain in Kindergarten, and allowed some January entrants to move ahead
to grade 1. This implies that, for the average student, increases in entry age are not completely
offset by reductions in time spent in Kindergarten. While this does not affect the internal validity
of our estimator, it does affect the interpretation depending on how many students failed to follow the expected structure. To understand the extent of this issue, Table 2 reports counts of the
number of students observed at entry for several subgroups of students. Panel A displays the year
and grade of the first observation for each student born in 1985, and separately, 1987. Because
data is collected once per year in October since 1990, November-December students who follow the
above structure should first be observed in grade 1 in 1991. Out of 7,188 students total, 3,512 are
observed in grade 1 in 1991. Of the remaining students, 2,124 are observed in Kindergarten in 1990,
four months earlier than expected. The final 1,552 are observed in Kindergarten in 1991, meaning
they delayed entry or entered the previous January but stayed in Kindergarten. If all 1,552 entered
Kindergarten in January, this implies that 5,064 students began in January, and 3,512 (69%) stayed
in Kindergarten for six months. The true fraction, however, is likely much higher since at least
some of the 1,552 students are delayed entrants. Entry year and grade for the 1987 cohort, who
are not affected by the policy, is also presented for comparison. In this cohort, roughly 7% of the
students delay entry, and others start on time.
In Panel B we perform the same comparison for January-April births. Students born in 1986
who are first observed in Kindergarten in 1991 are either on time students or delayed entrants.
Students observed in grade 1 began Kindergarten in January, and moved ahead to grade 1. While
we cannot separate the January-entrants from the delayed entrants among students observed in
Kindergarten in 1991, data from the 1987 birth cohort suggests that very few students delay entry.
This comparison may not be completely accurate, since the policy may have induced an abovenormal number of parents to delay their child’s entry. It is unlikely, however, that a very large
number of those students delayed, given the pattern among the November-December entrants (i.e.
at most 31% delayed entry).
9

In sum, the evidence from Table 2 suggests that the majority of students who entered Kindergarten in January, 1991 experienced variations in the amount of time in Kindergarten suggested
above.7 Thus, for the average student, an increase in entry age of one year implies close to a one
year reduction in time spent in Kindergarten, so we maintain the interpretation of our variation in
entry age as being equal to starting Kindergarten 4 months late for November-December students,
and 6 months early for January-April students.
Finally, we note that while the main effect of the policy was to alter Kindergarten entry, there
may have been other side-effects. January entrants were not placed into separate classes upon entry;
rather they joined their peers who had already been in school for 4 months, and this appears to
have been done without increasing the number of classrooms or teachers.8 This may have created
a difficult problem for teachers that had to teach two groups of students in different parts of the
learning process. If age-related peer effects exist, they could be responsible for part of the effect
we see. Relatedly, the addition of a group of younger children to an existing classroom would
have altered the relative age structure of the classroom. Prior to students entering in January
1991, October-born students who entered in September, 1990 were the youngest in the class. Once
November-April born students entered in January 1991, the October-born were in the middle of
the age distribution. Furthermore, in single-entry cohorts, April-born students are among the older
group at entry, whereas under dual entry they are the youngest. To the extent that relative age
matters, this could also impact the estimates. Evidence suggests that relative age, however, is not
an important determinant of student outcomes [Cascio and Schanzenbach, 2007].
7

One last possibility is that January-April born students remained in Kindergarten until January, 1992, then
moved to grade 1, and to grade 2 in September, 1992. An article from the Vancouver Sun dated January 1992
suggests that this might have been allowed in some jurisdictions. The data, however, do not support that this was
widespread in BC. In the data this would look as though a student “skipped” grade 1, since data would not have
been collected while the student was in grade 1. While we do not observe an abnormal amount of skipping grade 1,
roughly 1,770 January-April students skip grade 3. We treat this as a ballpark estimate of the number of students
who stayed in Kindergarten for only 10 months.
8
Details discussed in McTavish [1990] indicate that the province had no plan initially to increase the number
of teachers or classrooms. Had the program proceeded further, this may have been necessary depending on how
many students proceeded as scheduled in the dual entry program. Since the program was cancelled, this likely never
became an issue. In fact, such logistical problems was one of the major reasons for the cancellation of the program.

10

4.2

Measurement Approach

Using the policy described above, we sort students into treatment and control groups based on their
month and year of birth and summarize this allocation in Table 1. Students born in November to
December, 1985 are defined as a treated group because they began Kindergarten 4 months late.
Students born between January and April, 1986 are another treated group because they began
Kindergarten 6 months early. Students born outside those time periods are in the control group
because they began Kindergarten at the normal time. We then use a difference in differences
approach to identify the effects of the policy on student outcomes. Intuitively, this estimator
compares the outcomes of treated and non-treated groups in a policy year, using the difference
between the same two groups in a non-policy year as the counterfactual.
The difference in differences estimates are obtained from the following empirical model:

(1)

Oi = β0 + β1 AEi + β2 d85 + β3 d86 + β4 dJA + β5 dN D + β6 bdi + x0i β7 + ν1i

(2)

AEi = α0 + α1 AEie + α2 d85 + α3 d86 + α4 dJA + α5 dN D + α6 bdi + x0i α7 + ν2it
Oi is a student outcome; AEi is actual Kindergarten entry age; AEie is the expected Kindergarten

entry age based on school start rules; d85 and d86 are year of birth dummies; dJA and dN D are
dummies indicating whether the student is born in January to April (JA) or November to December
(ND); bdi is day of birth within the year; xi is a collection of control variables; ν1it and ν2it are error
terms.
The coefficient of interest is β1 , which gives the difference in differences estimate, and is interpreted as the effect of entering Kindergarten one year late on the outcome. AEi is akin to
the interaction term in regular difference-in-differences regressions (the “policy” variable), but in
our case its value adjusts estimates for the treatment intensity and direction: students born in
November-December have a higher entry age by roughly 4 months, and January-April students
have a lower entry age by 6 months. We instrument AEi with AEie in a first stage because of the
compliance issue discussed in the previous subsection. f (bdi ) controls for any underlying relationship between Oit , AEie and date of birth. The structural parameters are estimated by Two-Stage
Least Squares (2SLS), and we also present the first stage and reduced form estimates. As discussed
11

below, we cannot identify precise school start ages for some treated students, so some readers might
prefer the reduced form. We interpret β1 as a Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) because
we expect that there are heterogeneous treatment effects. Our estimates therefore apply to those
students whose Kindergarten entry age was manipulated by the policy.

5

Data

5.1

Data and Sample Description

The primary data are administrative student records from the Ministry of Education in BC. On a
yearly basis since 1990, the Ministry collects data on all public and private school students in the
BC school system. The data contain information on the school each student attends, their grade
level, special education status, English as a second language (ESL) status, a small set of personal
characteristics, date of birth, and home postal code (for all records after 1996).9 No parent income
or education information is available in the data. We proxy for these factors by linking aggregated
census data to students via their school’s postal code.

10

Students are tracked over time and across

schools through an encrypted student identifier as long as they remain in the BC school system; no
information is available for students who leave the system.
Administrative records are linked to test scores on the Foundation Skills Assessment (FSA),
BC’s mandatory annual standardized test for students in fourth, seventh, and tenth grade. At
the end of each school year since 1999, students are tested in the areas of math, reading, and
writing. From both the student and teacher perspective, the FSA is low-stakes, as the results do
not count towards students’ final grades nor do they determine the pay of any individual teacher.
9

The Canadian postal code is a 6-digit code made up of alternating (L)etters and (N)umbers in the following
format: LNL NLN. The first three digits are called the Forward Sortation Area, and define a relatively large space.
The full 6-digit code, however, can identify an area as small as one side of a neighborhood block in urban areas. The
Forward Sortation area is similar to the U.S. Zip code, where as the 6-digit postal code is something like the Zip +4.
10
Specifically we include average household income, fraction with a highest level of schooling of university, fraction
with a highest level of schooling of ninth grade, the unemployment rate, and the fraction visible minority. We use
the Enumeration Area (EA) and Dissemination Area (DA) levels of the Census. Both EA and DA are meant to
represent the area that an individual Census enumerator would travel when enumerating the population, roughly
400-700 people. EA is the name of the area in 1996 and before; Statistics Canada changed the name to DA for the
2001 and future censuses. They are roughly the same areas, but do not overlap perfectly. We match EAs to DAs by
taking the shortest distance between the centroids of each area. We attach census data from 1996 to all records on
or before 1998, and 2001 census data to all records after 1998.

12

From the administrator perspective, the tests are more important, as they are used to assess how
individual students, schools, and districts are performing compared to other students, schools, or
districts within each year and over time. The data contain information on students’ raw test scores
(i.e. their percentage scores) on each test. For those students who did not write the test, a variable
indicates whether they were “excused”; though the test is mandatory, typically about 5% of students
are excused.
The sample universe consists of 120,108 students born between May 1985 and December 1987
who are observed at entry; this group of students turns five years old around the time when dual
entry was initiated in BC. Restricting the sample to those students observed at entry is key, as the
identifying variation in schooling arises due to students’ exposure to the dual entry program, and
exposure to the program is only known for those observed in their first year. In principle, we could
also use data from January 1984 to May 1985, but we exclude them for two reasons. First, we
cannot identify entry dates for any students born in 1984 because they entered school before BC
began collecting data on students. Second, dual entry was piloted in some districts and schools in
school year 1989-1990, but because those districts are unknown to us, we cannot specify expected
entry age precisely for those students.11
We examine four separate outcomes: grade repetition before age nine, grade repetition before age
fifteen, and scores on a math and reading test written in grade 10. Out of the total 120,108 students
in the sample universe, 112, 676 (93%) are observed at age nine, 108,191 (90%) are observed at age
fifteen, and 87,320 (72%) are observed writing both the grade 10 math and reading test. Students
are lost from the sample over time mainly to normal mobility that is observed in any school system,
and in the case of the test scores because the test was discontinued at the end of the 2002 school
year. To ensure that attrition is not selective among the treatment or control groups in our study,
we later estimate a model similar to Equation 2 to quantify the degree of differential attrition in
the data.
11

We assess the robustness to including those students in the model and setting their expected entry dates equal
to what would be observed in a single entry system. We find that the main results are robust to the inclusion of this
sample

13

5.2

Variable Construction

Our main outcome is a binary variable equal to one if a student has repeated any grade, except
Kindergarten, prior to age nine or fifteen, respectively.12 We compute this variable by looking at
each student’s history and noting if they appear in the same grade twice before they reach the
relevant age. We also analyze math and reading scores on the tenth grade FSA test. Because the
main analysis sample is the set of students born from May 1985 through 1987, and because test
scores are available starting in 1999, the only scores we observe for these students are from the
tenth grade tests. Both scores are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation one
by grade, year, and skill among all students writing the test.
We compute exact entry age using each student’s age on September 1 or January 1 (whichever is
appropriate under the entry laws) in the year students were first observed in Kindergarten. Because
data are collected only once each October, we are unable to obtain a precise entry age for students
who were expected to start in January, 1991 and appear in the data in Kindergarten in October,
1991. A student who is observed in Kindergarten in October 1991 may have delayed entry to
September, 1991, or may have actually began school in January but stayed in Kindergarten in
September. Using the numbers provided in Table 2, we are able to identify an actual entry age for
78% of November-December 1985 born children, but only 6% of January-April 1986 born children.
For students without precise observed entry ages, we assign them the average entry age based
on all students in the universe who have the same expected entry age and whose actual entry age is
observed. We use these imputed entry ages in the 2SLS regressions. Because the 2SLS results are
based partially on imputed information, we also present reduced-form estimates whenever possible,
which may be preferred choice for readers not comfortable with imputing data.

5.3

Summary Statistics

Figure 2 plots grade repetition rates against month of birth separately for students born in 1985,
1986, and 1987. It is clear that students born later in the year are more likely to repeat. The upper
panel of the Figure shows that nine year old students born between January and April, 1986 have
12

The policy itself forced January-April, 1986 born children to repeat Kindergarten. Thus, we focus on grade 1
and later to avoid counting those students.

14

a distinctively higher grade repetition rate than students born during those same months in 1987.
There does not appear to be a noticeable difference for students born in November-December, 1985
compared to students born at the same time in other years. The lower panel of that Figure shows a
very similar pattern among fifteen year old students. Figure 3 repeats the same exercise, but with
numeracy scores in the upper panel, and reading scores in the lower. Though there is more noise
in these figures, students born in the first four months of 1986 perform worse, especially in reading,
than the comparable group born in 1987.
Table 3 shows averages of the main variables within each of the treatment and control groups
defined in Table 1.13 Looking first at Panel A, 6.08% of November-December 1985 students have
repeated before age 9, but the same is true for only 2.47% of the untreated May-October 1985
students. The difference of 3.61 percentage points is smaller than the 4.06 percentage point difference
between the same groups in 1987, but larger than the 3.21 percentage point difference in 1986. The
implied difference in differences effect of starting school four months late for this group is therefore
roughly zero.
Still in Panel A, 3.08% of the January-April group in 1986 repeated by age nine, compared to
2.25% of the May-Oct group, a difference of 0.83 percentage points. In 1987, however, the difference
between January-April and May-October is -1.10 percentage points. The implied difference in differences suggests that starting Kindergarten six months early increases the probability of repeating
by 1.93 percentage points. Similar results with higher magnitudes are observed among 15 year olds
in Panel B.
In Panel C we examine the subsample of tenth grade test takers. In 1985, November-December
students score roughly the same on the math test as May-October students. In 1987, however,
November-December students score 0.069 standard deviations worse on the math test. A difference
in differences estimate (0 - (-0.069)) then implies that starting Kindergarten late improves test
scores by roughly 0.069 standard deviations. The implied difference in differences estimate for
reading based on this group is 0.022 standard deviations. A difference in differences estimate of
starting Kindergarten late based on comparing the January-April students to the May-October
students is 0.021 for math, and 0.052 for reading.
13

Averages of the full set of variables included in the regressions is in Table A1.

15

Based on this summary data, starting Kindergarten later has a beneficial effect on grade progression and on future cognitive performance. In one sense, this is reassuring because the intention
of the policy was partly to improve the performance of the students who would have been young
in a single entry system (the November-December children). Unfortunately, the policy forced the
larger January-April group to start earlier than normal, which has a detrimental effect on their
outcomes. These estimates also imply that spending less time in Kindergarten improves future
performance, results that are echoed in the formal regression analysis below. We proceed now to
the regression estimates, and discuss potential explanations for this effect following the presentation
of those results.

6

Results

6.1

Grade Repetition

Table 4 presents the results of the reduced form and first stage from the main specification. Column
1 estimates the overall effect entering Kindergarten one year late. Starting Kindergarten one year
late reduces the probability of repeating a grade by 2.7 percentage points. Across all students
born in 1987, the grade repetition rate is roughly 3.21%, so the effect of the policy increases grade
repetition by 83%. Symmetrically, this implies that entering Kindergarten one year early would
increase grade repetition by the same amount. Column 2 generalizes the specification by interacting
the birth date control with the indicators for year of birth, and treatment or control group. This
allows the slope of the relationship between repetition and date of birth to vary across treatment and
control groups. Estimates are slightly lower, but are generally robust to the change in specification.
Columns 3 and 4 allow the policy effect to differ across the two treatment groups by interacting
the group dummies with the expected entry age variable (but excluding uninteracted expected entry
age). The effect is mainly driven by the January-April group; for November-December students,
the point estimate is somewhat imprecise, and drops in magnitude when a more flexible birth date
control is included.
Columns 5-8 repeat the same exercise for fifteen year old students. Estimates follow a similar

16

pattern, but magnitudes are higher reflecting the fact that more students will have repeated by
age fifteen. Entering Kindergarten one year late reduces the probability of repeating by 3.2 to 3.7
percentage points, with most of the effect attributable to the January-April group.
Panel B reports the first stage relationship between expected entry age and actual entry age at
age nine and fifteen. In columns 1-2 and 5-6, there is a very strong positive relationship overall,
which suggests a high level of compliance with the rules. Note that the first stage is also a difference
in differences estimator, so the results are interpreted as the difference in the relationship in the
policy year and non-policy year (in the non-policy year the relationship is roughly zero when we
control for date of birth). When the relationship is estimated separately for each treatment group it
is clear that the relationship is strongest among the January-April group. The effect for NovemberDecember children is weaker because many students began school early, and likely many delayed
entry. The Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic testing the null of weak instruments is very high in all cases,
meaning we reject soundly the null that our instrument is weak.
Table 5 reports the 2SLS results. The estimates mirror the pattern for the reduced form, but
the magnitudes are slightly higher reflecting non-compliance. Starting Kindergarten one year late
reduces the average nine year old’s probability of repetition by between 2.8 and 3.2 percentage
points, and reduces a fifteen year old’s probability of repetition by between 4.1 and 4.3 percentage
points. Columns 3-4 and 5-6 show that the effect is driven mainly by the January-April treatment
group.
The results show that starting Kindergarten late improves student outcomes by lowering the
likelihood of repeating a grade. As we discussed briefly above, this is expected in some sense because
one of the goals of the policy was to improve the performance of the youngest students in the class
by having them start school later to increase maturity and therefore readiness. At the same time,
however, the policy reduced entry age for all January-April students, making them less mature at
entry. On the other hand, absent a maturity effect, the estimates imply the counterintuitive result
that less time in Kindergarten lowers the likelihood of grade repetition. One explanation for this
finding is that both a maturity and Kindergarten effect exist, but the effect of improved maturity
outweighs any negative impact of spending less time in Kindergarten. Because these two variables
move together, there is no way to separate them in the analysis. We note, however, that this
17

explanation is consistent with a large body of evidence showing that later entry has a positive effect
on outcomes.14 We note in particular that our results are qualitatively similar to those Bedard and
Dhuey [2009], who show that moving school entry cutoffs backward (from January to November,
for example) increases wages in the future. For directly affected students (i.e. those who enter in
a later year because of the change), backing up the cutoff increases absolute, relative, and average
cohort age in a similar way to the November-December students in our study. Our results are
therefore in line with theirs, though it should be noted that there is no concomitant change in years
of kindergarten in their variation.
Also contributing to the observed positive effect of late entry is how students spend their time
outside of formal schooling. Late starters presumably spent time at home or in formal daycare
as they waited to enter the BC school system. If this type of care has a positive effect on their
outcomes, or if Kindergarten is of low quality compared to alternative uses of time, then this would
contribute to the effects we observe, and would be consistent with the results from studies such as
Baker et al. [2008], Lefebvre et al. [2011] , Herbst and Tekin [2010], and to some extent Magnuson et
al. [2007] who show negative effects of child care or preschool programs on behavioural and cognitive
outcomes. As we explain later, the strongest effect we observe is among low-income students, which
implies that alternative uses of time must be relatively much better for these students compared to
higher income students. While not implausible, it seems more likely that higher income students
would be enrolled in high quality day care, and that they would benefit the most from that compared
to formal Kindergarten. Thus, perhaps the maturity explanation is accurate.
Because our estimates are generated from a unique policy experiment, and because our estimates
are LATEs, there is some question about external validity. On one hand, the policy simply extends
or shortens time spent in a Kindergarten program, and so it is not quite like estimating the effect
of implementing Kindergarten. Furthermore, the policy took what would have been a cohesive
entry cohort and split them up in an unusual way that changed potentially important variables like
14

Estimates for BC in particular are in Smith [2009]; for other jurisdictions, see Bedard and Dhuey [2006], Elder and
Lubotsky [2009], and McEwan and Shapiro [2008]. The interpretation of our estimates is fundamentally different
from this literature. Entry age is identically linked to schooling and “test age” through the following equation:
AT = AE + S. Most entry age studies use variation in entry age either within a single-entry cohort or across the
boundary at the cutoff point. This type of variation implicitly holds schooling (S) constant, so entry age (AE) is
perfectly collinear with variation in test age (AT). Our variation, on the other hand, holds test age constant and
varies entry age and schooling at the same time.

18

peer composition and the relative age structure in addition to time spent in school. Finally, there
was non-compliance (especially among November-December students), so if there are heterogeneous
treatment effects, we might be identifying from a select subgroup of students. On the other hand,
the results are more generalizable than targeted programs such as Head Start, and the overall
population in BC is comparable to other jurisdictions in Canada and the United States. Thus,
the variation we use does have some benefits and some drawbacks; overall, we feel that our results
are useful in predicting the potential effects of introducing or extending pre-k and Kindergarten
programs.

6.2

Test Scores

In this section we use tenth grade test scores as the outcome. Results in this section must be
interpreted cautiously because they could depend on prior outcomes of the policy. We have seen
previously that entering Kindergarten one year late reduces the probability of grade repetition. If
repetition has an effect on test scores, the regressions below will pick up partly the effect of the
policy on test scores, and partly the effect of grade repetition. These main results might therefore
be interpreted as net of the effect of grade repetition. In the next section of the paper, we discuss
estimates separated by student income quartile, which partially circumvents the grade repetition
effect because students in the upper quartile show a lower effect of the policy on repetition. We
return to these estimates below.
Table 6 shows the reduced form and first stage effect with math and reading scores as outcomes.
Similar to the previous section, we present the overall effect on the policy, and then separate by
treatment group. Even numbered columns present results where the birth date control is interacted
with the group and birth year dummies, while odd numbered columns do not perform this interaction. In Panel A, Column 1 reports the results from Equations 1 and 2. Results show that entering
Kindergarten 1 year late improves test scores by 0.038 standard deviations in math, and column
5 shows a positive effect on reading of 0.076 percentage points. When we specify a more flexible
control for birth date in columns 2 and 6, the effect sizes rise to 0.068 and 0.110, respectively.
Estimating separately for each treatment group, we see that the effect is similar in both math and

19

reading, though the December-November estimates are less precise, especially for math. Panel B
shows a strong first stage, and F-statistics on the excluded instruments that are very high. Note
that the first stages in math and reading are identical.
In Table 7 we report the 2SLS estimates of the effect of the policy on math and reading scores.
Estimates echo the reduced form coefficients reported in the previous table, but at a slightly higher
magnitude, reflecting the non-compliance with the policy. Entering Kindergarten on year late
improves math scores by 0.045-0.089 standard deviations in math, an 0.090 and 0.144 standard
deviations in reading.
The effect of the policy on cognitive achievement supports the grade repetition results: entering
one year late improves cognitive performance significantly at the end of high school. The implication
is that the policy has long lasting effects on students, and may affect outcomes beyond high school
into university or perhaps the labour force, though we do not test those hypotheses in this paper.
Our explanation for this result is identical to the one provided for the grade repetition results. The
caveat is that the effect of the policy might be partly operating through grade repetition. More
specifically, we know that entering school later reduces the probability of repetition, and if lower
grade repetition improves test scores, our estimates in test score regressions might be too high.

6.3

Subgroup Analysis

In this section we break the sample up into groups defined by the income quartile of the neighbourhood where a student resides, and separately by gender. We choose to break the estimates up
by income and gender because estimates across these subgroups address important questions. Policy makers might be particularly interested in the effects on lower income students. Furthermore,
gender differences in educational outcomes are receiving an increasing amount of press, especially
concerning troubles faced by boys; we therefore find it important to present separate estimates by
gender.15
Table 8 presents the reduced form and 2SLS estimates with grade repetition as the outcome.
Column 1 of Panel A shows that entering Kindergarten late reduces the probability of repetition
15

A series in the national Canadian newspaper The Globe and Mail provides a good summary of the issue. See
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/time-to-lead/failing-boys

20

by 3.2 percentage points for students in the lowest income quartile. The magnitude of the effect
declines across the income quartiles to 1.3 percentage points for students in the highest income
quartile. A similar pattern is observed in Panel B, which presents the reduced form for fifteen year
olds, and in the 2SLS estimates in Panels C and D.
For the sample of nine year olds, the reduced form effect of entering Kindergarten late is a
reduction of 3.3 percentage points for males, and 2.0 percentage points for females. By age fifteen,
however, the effects are roughly equal at 3.7 percentage points. Again, the 2SLS estimates in Panels
C and D show the same pattern with higher magnitudes.
Table 9 shows the subgroup estimates for test scores. Panel A shows that across-quartile effects
for math are all imprecisely estimated and do not show a distinctive pattern. Panel B shows
that for reading the effect is strongest and most precisely estimated for students in the lowest
income quartile. For this group, entering Kindergarten late improves cognitive performance by
0.095 standard deviations. 2SLS estimates in panels C and D are similar to the reduced form.16
Arguably the most important group are the low income students because they are the most at
risk for poor outcomes in the future. The results above suggest that entering kindergarten late is
more beneficial for them compared to higher income students in terms of both grade repetition and
reading scores. This result is consistent with Lefebvre et al. [2011], who shows a strong negative
effect of Quebec’s child care policy on low educated mothers. This could mean that spending time at
home is more important for these students, but such an explanation seems unlikely. An alternative
explanation is that lower income students benefit from starting later because they are more ready
simply through the ageing process, whereas ageing would not be as beneficial to higher income
students who have other ways to prepare them for school - like quality child care - available to
them.
Recall that the test score estimates presented in Table 7 had to be interpreted cautiously because
the policy effect might be confounded by grade repetition. The results in Table 9 lend some
support to that theory. The policy effect on grade repetition and test scores is strongest among
16

Note that there is no evidence that compliance with the entry laws differs appreciably across income quartiles.
Using 1987 data only, we estimate that 1.79% of income quartile 1 students, 1.96% of quartile 2 students, 1.44% of
quartile 3 students, and 1.72% of quartile 4 students do not comply with the rules. On the other hand, 2.14% of
males and 1.29% of females fail to comply

21

low income students, and at least for reading, weakest among the highest income students. Thus
the confounding effect of grade repetition is smallest among the high income students, and for that
group entering Kindergarten late improves reading test scores 0.086 standard deviations, and math
scores by up to 0.05 standard deviations. We might then think of these estimates as the cleanest
estimates of the potential effect of the policy, and they are negative but at smaller magnitudes. The
problem, however, is that neither the math nor reading coefficient is precisely estimated. Of course,
it is entirely possible that none of the results are confounded and the main effect we estimated is
indeed an accurate effect of the policy.17

6.4

Attrition

Our analysis is contingent on following a set of Kindergarten entrants over time until they reach age
nine and fifteen, and when they write a tenth grade standardized test. Over time it is natural for
some students to exit the school system because they leave the province, and we would not expect
this to affect our results. It is possible, however, that some non-random group of students exit the
province because of the policy itself. This latter form of attrition is problematic and could bias our
results because treatment and control groups would then not be comparable.
We check for selective attrition with the following specification

(3)

ISi = γ0 + γ1 d85 + γ2 d86 + γ3 dJA + γ4 dN D + γ5 (d85 × dN D ) + γ6 (d86 × dJA ) + γ7 bdi + ξi

where the analysis sample is all 120,108 students observed at entry, and ISit is equal to 1 if
the student is in the sample at age nine, fifteen, or at test time. All other variables are defined as
before. The coefficient γ5 tells us if there is any differential likelihood of being in the sample for the
November-December group (relative to May-October) in 1985 versus other years, and γ6 does the
same for the January-April group. This specification is similar to Equation 2, but we do not use the
17

We also estimated quantile regressions for the reduced form specification for test scores at the 0.1, 0.5 and 0.9
quantiles. For math, the effects were 0.026 at the 0.1 quantile, -0.002 at the 0.5 quantile, and 0.063 at the 0.9
quantile. For reading the effects were 0.042 at the 0.1 quantile, 0.065 at the 0.5 quantile, and 0.087 at the 0.9
quantile. These estimates suggest an increasing effect of the policy as we move up the test score distribution. The
effects, however, are quantitatively in the same general range as the income estimates. Note that quantile regressions
are not estimated for the grade repetition outcome because of convergence problems

22

entry age variable directly because we are only interested in the raw differences in the probability
of being in the sample.
The coefficients on the interaction terms in columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 show some small
differences in the probability of being in the sample at age nine.Students in each of the treatment
groups are actually slightly more likely to be in the sample, so if anything there is a differential
drop in attrition among the treated students. The point estimates, though precise, are small and
below 1.5 percentage points. In columns 3 and 4, there is not much difference at age fifteen, and in
fact treated students are even more likely to be in the sample relative to the controls. As additional
evidence that attrition is not problematic for these groups, Figure 4 plots the probability of being
in the sample for students born on each day during the sample period. There is no distinguishable
pattern that could be caused by attrition.
In terms of the likelihood of taking the grade 10 tests, the story is different. The most notable
difference is that treated November-December students are 5.2 percentage points more likely to take
the test versus May-October students. This large difference arises entirely because the NovemberDecember 1987 students are the final entry cohort to be eligible to take the test (because it was
discontinued in 2002). Thus, only on-time students born in 1987 take the test, and since NovemberDecember students are much less likely to be on time in any year, this creates a large drop in the
probability of taking the test for this group. This pattern is summarized in Figure 4, which plots
the probability of taking the grade 10 test against date of birth. Note the large drop in the fraction
of students taking the test in November-December, 1987. On the other hand, there is no evidence
from this figure that in 1985 alone November-December children are significantly more or less likely
to take the test.
Based on these results, we do not see attrition as a significant issue. In particular the loss of
many likely weak students at the end of 1987 is not concerning because the test score results are
driven mostly by the January-April born students, who are not affected by attrition as much.

23

6.5

Robustness

Our first robustness check, interacting the birth date control with the group variables, has already
been reported and we noted that results are generally robust to this change in specification. We
also check the robustness of our results by including the sample of students born in 1984 and early
1985 and reestimating the reduced-form version of our main results. For this exercise we code
expected entry age to be equal to what we would observe in a single entry system. This is not
entirely correct because dual entry was piloted in the year 1984 students began Kindergarten, but
since the program was optional and only offered in a few districts, it is likely that takeup was low.
Therefore, assuming entry dates under a single entry system is a reasonable approximation to the
true expected entry dates. Table 11 shows that regardless of the dependent variable used, adding
these students to our sample does not change the main results appreciably, except to lower standard
errors on the estimates.
In results available upon request, we also reestimate our main results with a set of school fixed
effects. This would control for school-level differences that might be related to the policy itself,
since schools did have some discretion in the way in which they dealt with dual entry students.
Adding these extra controls has no meaningful impact on the results.

7

Conclusion

Early childhood education is important for the development of human capital, and Kindergarten
is arguably the most widespread early childhood program. Early learning can establish a base
upon which children will build as they age, and the more solid the base the easier it will be to
accumulate human capital in the future. In this paper, we examined a unique policy experiment
that simultaneously altered students’ school start ages and the amount of time they spent in early
education. We found that students entering Kindergarten later lowered their likelihood of repeating
future grades, and improved their performance on standardized tests in the tenth grade. The larger
effects are observed for lower income students and males.
Our results are somewhat counterintuitive because they imply that spending less time in Kindergarten improves future outcomes. Nevertheless, they are consistent with some parts of the literature,
24

in particular Bedard and Dhuey [2009] who examine the effect of rolling back school entry dates,
which is similar in many ways to the policy we examine here. In our study, we examine variation
that is a combination of two fundamentally inseparable effects: an entry age or maturity effect, and
a time in school effect. The most likely explanation for our results is that the effect of increased
school readiness from starting one year later dominates the time in school effect. Alternatively, part
of the effect can be explained by what children do with their time when they are not in Kindergarten. If they are enrolled in quality day care or if time spent at home is more beneficial to their
learning, then this will improve the performance of late starters.

25

References
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2008) ‘Universal child care, maternal labor
supply, and family well-being.’ The Journal of Political Economy 116(4), 709–745
Balcom, Susan (October 5, 1992) ‘Dual-entry passed over as parents concerned.’ In ‘The Vancouver
Sun’
Bedard, Kelly, and Elizabeth Dhuey (2006) ‘The persistence of early childhood maturity: International evidence of long-run age effects.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4), 1437–1472
(2009) ‘School entry policies and skill accumulation across directly and indirectly affected men.’
Mimeo
Bula, Frances (July 24, 1991b) ‘January starters a dilemma.’ In ‘The Vancouver Sun’
(May 31, 1991a) ‘Hagen kills dual entry: Mixed reacion to end of twice-a-year admittance.’ In
‘The Vancouver Sun’
Cannon, Jill S., Alison Jacknowitz, and Gary Painter (2006) ‘Is full better than half? examining the longitudinal effects of full-day kindergarten attendance.’ Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 25(2), 299–321
Cascio, Elizabeth, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2007) ‘First in the class? age and the
education production function.’ Working Paper 13663, National Bureau of Economic Research,
December
Cascio, Elizabeth U. (2009) ‘Do investments in universal early education pay off? long-term effects of introducing kindergartens into public schools.’ Working Paper 14951, National Bureau of
Economic Research, May
Cooper, Harris, Ashley Batts Allen, Erika A. Patall, and Amy L. Dent (2010) ‘Effects of full-day
kindergarten on academic achievement and social development.’ Review of Educational Research
80(1), 34–70
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Lance Lochner (2006) ‘Interpreting the evidence on life cycle
skill formation.’ In Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. Erik Hanushek and F. Welch,
vol. 1 (Elsevier) chapter 12, pp. 697–812
Currie, Janet (2001) ‘Early childhood education programs.’ Journal of Economic Perspectives
15(2), 213–238
Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas (1995) ‘Does head start make a difference?’ American Economic
Review 85(3), 341–64
(1999) ‘Does head start help hispanic children?’ Journal of Public Economics 74(2), 235–262
DeCicca, Philip (2007) ‘Does full-day kindergarten matter? evidence from the first two years of
schooling.’ Economics of Education Review 26(1), 67–82
Dhuey, Elizabeth (Forthcoming) ‘Who benefits from kindergarten? evidence from the introduction
of state subsidization.’ Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
26

Dubois, Wendy (January 11, 1992) ‘No limbo for dual-entry students.’ In ‘The Vancouver Sun’
Editorial (July 25, 1991) ‘Children’s interests must come first.’ In ‘The Vancouver Sun’
Elder, Todd E., and Darren H. Lubotsky (2009) ‘Kindergarten entrance age and childrenâTM s
achievement: Impacts of state policies, family background, and peers.’ Journal of Human Resources
Fitzpatrick, Maria D (2008) ‘Starting school at four: The effect of universal pre-kindergarten on
children’s academic achievement.’ The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2002) ‘Longer-term effects of head start.’ American Economic Review 92(4), 999–1012
Gormley, William T., and Ted Gayer (2005) ‘Promoting school readiness in oklahoma: An evaluation
of tulsa’s pre-k program.’ The Journal of Human Resources 40(3), 533–558
Gray-Grant, Jennifer (August 31, 1991) ‘The problem of portables: When half a million kids get
back to school, there won’t be much elbow room.’ In ‘The Vancouver Sun’
(January 3, 1992) ‘End of dual entry leaves parents, children searching for right direction.’ In
‘The Vancouver Sun’
Herbst, Chris M., and Erdal Tekin (2010) ‘The impact of child care subsidies on child well-being:
Evidence from geographic variation in the distance to social service agencies.’ NBER Working
Papers 16250, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, August
Lefebvre, Pierre, Philip Merrigan, and Francis Roy-Desrosiers (2011) ‘Quebec’s childcare universl
low fees policy 10 years after: Effects, costs, and benefits.’ Working Paper 11-01, Centre Interuniversitaire sur le Risque, les Politiques Economiques et l’Emploi, January
Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L. Miller (2008) ‘Does head start improve children’s life chances? evidence from a regression discontinuity design.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 159–
208
Magnuson, Katherine A., Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2007) ‘Does prekindergarten
improve school preparation and performance?’ Economics of Education Review 26(1), 33 – 51
McEwan, Patrick J., and Joseph S. Shapiro (2008) ‘The benefits of delayed primary school enrollment: Discontinuity estimates using exact birth dates.’ Journal of Human Resources
McTavish, Marianne (1990) ‘Dual entry in b.c. kindergartens.’ Prime Areas
Rees, Ann (May 31, 1991) ‘Dual entry scrapped: Parents applaud victoria flip-flop.’ In ‘The
Province’
Smith, Justin (2009) ‘Can regression discontinuity help answer an age-old question in education?
the effect of age on elementary and secondary school achievement.’ The B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy
Walston, Jill, and Jerry West (2004) ‘Full-day and half-day kindergarten in the united states:
Findings from the early childhood longitudinal study, kindergarten class of 1998-1999.’ Technical
Report, U.S. Department of Education, National Centre for Education Statistics
27

Birth Month
Jan-Apr
May-Oct
Nov-Dec

Table 1: Assignment to Treatment and Control Groups
Birth Year
1985
1986
Not in Sample
Treatment
Control
Control
Treatment
Control

1987
Control
Control
Control

Table 2: Counts of Students by Year and Grade of Entry
Panel A: November-December Births
1985 Birth Cohort
1987 Birth Cohort
Year of First Observation
Grade of First Observation
1990
1991
1992
1993
K
2124
1552
6406
503
1
0
3512
0
0
Panel B: January-April Births
1986 Birth Cohort
1987 Birth Cohort
Year of First Observation
Grade of First Observation
1991
1992
1992
1993
K
13347
small
14600
small
1
797
0
0
0
Notes: Cells represent counts of students observed at entry. In Panel B, “small” refers to a low
student count; the actual number of students is suppressed to protect confidentiality.

28

Table 3: Average Student Characteristics
1985
1986
MayNovJanMayNovJanOct
Dec
Apr
Oct
Dec
Apr

1987
MayOct

NovDec

Panel A: Age 9
Repeat
Exp Entry Age
Actual Entry Age

2.466
5.093
5.119

6.076
5.088
5.136

3.079
4.836
4.837

2.248
5.093
5.100

5.458
4.753
4.844

1.126
5.503
5.502

2.221
5.098
5.106

6.283
4.755
4.826

Panel B: Age 15
Repeat
Exp Entry Age
Actual Entry Age

8.058
5.093
5.118

12.376
5.088
5.135

8.814
4.836
4.837

7.869
5.093
5.100

11.686
4.753
4.843

6.024
5.502
5.502

7.806
5.098
5.106

12.498
4.756
4.826

Panel C: Test Score
Math Score
-0.048
-0.045
-0.011
-0.034
-0.063
0.018
-0.026
-0.043
Reading Score
0.059
0.044
0.090
0.060
0.014
0.140
0.059
0.021
Exp Entry Age
5.092
5.088
4.836
5.094
4.753
5.502
5.099
4.758
Actual Entry Age
5.113
5.118
4.835
5.100
4.838
5.500
5.099
4.763
Notes: Repeat is the fraction repeating. Exp entry age is entry age according to the school entry
rules, which may differ from actual entry age. Test scores are reported as z-scores, standardized
across all students writing the math and reading test in a give year, respectively.

29

30
66009
112676

Weak Instrument F-Stat
N

23867
112676

0.719

0.793***
(0.009)

0.017

-0.022***
(0.006)

1691
112676

0.690

0.832***
(0.010)
0.345***
(0.017)

0.016

-0.025***
(0.003)
-0.020*
(0.012)

1880
112676

0.723

0.878***
(0.008)
0.423***
(0.018)

0.017

-0.026***
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.016)

63933
108191

0.712

0.850***
(0.008)

0.037

-0.037***
(0.005)

25110
108191

0.721

0.795***
(0.009)

0.038

-0.032***
(0.009)

1642
108191

0.692

0.832***
(0.010)
0.350***
(0.017)

0.037

-0.032***
(0.005)
-0.018
(0.018)

(7)

1801
108191

0.725

0.880***
(0.008)
0.425***
(0.017)

0.038

-0.044***
(0.009)
0.019
(0.025)

(8)

Day of Birth Control
Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Grade repetition refers to repeating any grade except Kindergarten before age nine or
fifteen. Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born during January and April; Nov-Dec is a dummy for being born in November or
December. The Weak Instrument F-Stat is the Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic for the test that the excluded instrument equals
zero. Standard errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline controls include a dummy for male, Aboriginal status, whether the
student speaks a language other than English at home, average neighbourhood household income, fraction of neighbourhood with
a university education, fraction with below grade 9 education, fraction unemployed, and fraction visible minority. Uninteracted
day of birth means it enters the specification linearly; interacted means it is interacted with the group and birth year dummies.

0.709

0.850***
(0.008)

0.016

-0.027***
(0.004)

R2

Exp Entry Age*Nov-Dec

Exp Entry Age*Jan-Apr

Panel B - First Stage
Exp Entry Age

R2

Exp Entry Age*Nov-Dec

Exp Entry Age*Jan-Apr

Panel A - Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age

Table 4: Reduced Form and First Stage Estimates - Grade Repetition
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Age 9
Age 15

31
112676

-0.032***
(0.004)

112676

112676

112676

108191

(7)

108191

108191

Age 15
-0.041***
(0.011)
-0.034***
(0.006)
-0.037
(0.037)

(6)

108191

-0.049***
(0.010)
0.039
(0.050)

(8)

Day of Birth Control
Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Grade repetition refers to repeating any grade except Kindergarten before age nine
or fifteen. Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born during January and April; Nov-Dec is a dummy for being born in November or
December. Actual entry age is observed entry age, imputed when necessary. Standard errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline
controls include a dummy for male, Aboriginal status, whether the student speaks a language other than English at home, average
neighbourhood household income, fraction of neighbourhood with a university education, fraction with below grade 9 education,
fraction unemployed, and fraction visible minority. Uninteracted day of birth means it enters the specification linearly; interacted
means it is interacted with the group and birth year dummies.

N

Actual Entry Age*Nov-Dec

Actual Entry Age* Jan-Apr

Actual Entry Age

(1)

Table 5: 2SLS Estimates - Grade Repetition
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age 9
-0.028***
-0.043***
(0.007)
(0.006)
-0.027***
-0.029***
(0.004)
(0.007)
-0.043*
-0.010
(0.025)
(0.031)

32
88146
87320

Weak Instrument F-Stat
N

21978
87320

0.719

0.764***
(0.006)

0.065

0.068**
(0.032)

1768
87320

0.692

0.757***
(0.006)
0.770***
(0.017)

0.065

0.011
(0.022)
0.054
(0.056)

1773
87320

0.719

0.737***
(0.006)
0.859***
(0.017)

0.065

0.070**
(0.036)
0.059
(0.091)

88146
87320

0.795

0.841***
(0.004)

0.072

0.076***
(0.022)

21978
87320

0.806

0.764***
(0.006)

0.072

(7)

1768
87320

0.769

0.757***
(0.006)
0.770***
(0.017)

0.072

0.053**
(0.022)
0.064
(0.051)

Reading
0.110***
(0.034)

(6)

1773
87320

0.808

0.737***
(0.006)
0.859***
(0.017)

0.072

0.112***
(0.037)
0.101
(0.085)

(8)

Day of Birth Control
Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Math and reading scores are standardized to mean zero, standard deviation 1 in the
population of students writing the test in any given year. Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born during January and April; Nov-Dec
is a dummy for being born in November or December. The Weak Instrument F-Stat is the Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic for the
test that the excluded instrument equals zero. Standard errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline controls include a dummy
for male, Aboriginal status, whether the student speaks a language other than English at home, average neighbourhood household
income, fraction of neighbourhood with a university education, fraction with below grade 9 education, fraction unemployed, and
fraction visible minority. Uninteracted day of birth means it enters the specification linearly; interacted means it is interacted with
the group and birth year dummies.

0.717

0.841***
(0.004)

0.065

0.038*
(0.022)

R2

Exp Entry Age* Nov-Dec

Exp Entry Age*Jan-Apr

Panel B - First Stage
Exp Entry Age

R2

Exp Entry Age*Nov-Dec

Exp Entry Age*Jan-Apr

Panel A - Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age

(1)

Table 6: Reduced Form Estimates - Test Scores
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Math

33
87320

0.045*
(0.026)

87320

87320

87320

0.093**
(0.045)
0.062
(0.097)

- Test Scores
(4)

87320

0.090***
(0.026)

(5)

87320

87320

(7)
Reading
0.144***
(0.044)
0.063**
(0.027)
0.071
(0.057)

(6)

87320

0.148***
(0.046)
0.107
(0.090)

(8)

Day of Birth Control
Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Math and reading scores are standardized to mean zero, standard deviation 1 in the
population of students writing the test in any given year. Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born during January and April; Nov-Dec
is a dummy for being born in November or December. Actual entry age is observed entry age, imputed when necessary. Standard
errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline controls include a dummy for male, Aboriginal status, whether the student speaks
a language other than English at home, average neighbourhood household income, fraction of neighbourhood with a university
education, fraction with below grade 9 education, fraction unemployed, and fraction visible minority. Uninteracted day of birth
means it enters the specification linearly; interacted means it is interacted with the group and birth year dummies.

N

Actual Entry Age*Nov-Dec

Actual Entry Age*Jan-Apr

Actual Entry Age

(1)

Table 7: 2SLS Estimates
(2)
(3)
Math
0.089**
(0.043)
0.012
(0.027)
0.060
(0.062)

Table 8: 2SLS and Reduced Form Estimates - Grade Repetition, by Income Quartile and Gender
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Male
Female
Panel A: Age 9 Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age
-0.032*** -0.027*** -0.037*** -0.013** -0.033*** -0.020***
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.004)
R2
N

0.016
28139

0.015
28232

0.016
28128

0.014
28177

0.018
57547

0.009
55129

-0.038***
(0.012)

-0.027**
(0.010)

-0.026***
(0.010)

-0.037***
(0.009)

-0.036***
(0.007)

0.042
27412

0.039
27318

0.027
26666

0.030
26795

0.040
55401

0.035
52790

-0.037***
(0.008)

-0.031***
(0.008)

-0.043***
(0.008)

-0.016**
(0.007)

-0.039***
(0.007)

-0.024***
(0.005)

17603
28139

15282
28232

17375
28128

16159
28177

30141
57547

36459
55129

-0.065***
(0.015)

-0.044***
(0.014)

-0.031**
(0.012)

-0.031***
(0.012)

-0.044***
(0.010)

-0.042***
(0.008)

Panel B: Age 15 Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age
-0.056***
(0.013)
R2
N
Panel C: Age 9 2SLS
Actual Entry Age

Weak Instrument F-Stat
N
Panel D: Age 15 2SLS
Actual Entry Age

Weak Instrument F-Stat
585
512
378
238
29307
37635
N
27412
27318
26666
26795
55401
52790
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.Grade repetition refers to repeating any grade except
Kindergarten before age nine or fifteen. Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born during January and
April; Nov-Dec is a dummy for being born in November or December. The Weak Instrument
F-Stat is the Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic for the test that the excluded instrument equals zero.
Q1-Q4 refers to income quartiles 1 to 4. Standard errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline
controls include a dummy for male, Aboriginal status, whether the student speaks a language
other than English at home, average neighbourhood household income, fraction of neighbourhood
with a university education, fraction with below grade 9 education, fraction unemployed, and
fraction visible minority. Day of birth is uninteracted in all regressions.

34

Table 9: 2SLS and Reduced Form Estimates - Test Scores, by Income Quartile and Gender
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Male
Female
Panel A: MathReduced Form
Exp Entry Age
0.013
0.070
0.004
0.041
0.042
0.029
(0.043)
(0.047)
(0.047)
(0.045)
(0.032)
(0.031)
R2
N

0.001
21976

0.001
21667

0.001
21700

0.001
43880

0.001
43440

Panel B: Reading Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age
0.095**
(0.046)

0.088*
(0.050)

0.031
(0.044)

0.071
(0.045)

0.099***
(0.032)

0.054*
(0.031)

R2
N

0.002
21977

0.002
21976

0.001
21667

0.002
21700

0.001
43880

0.003
43440

0.015
(0.049)

0.083
(0.057)

0.005
(0.057)

0.050
(0.055)

0.049
(0.037)

0.035
(0.038)

22183
21977

23229
21976

22484
21667

20921
21700

41636
43880

47703
43440

0.108**
(0.052)

0.105*
(0.060)

0.038
(0.054)

0.086
(0.055)

0.115***
(0.037)

0.066*
(0.037)

Panel C: Math 2SLS
Actual Entry Age

Weak Instrument F-Stat
N
Panel B: Reading 2SLS
Actual Age

0.001
21977

Weak Instrument F-Stat
22183
23229
22484
20921
41636
47703
N
21977
21976
21667
21700
43880
43440
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Math and reading scores are standardized to mean zero,
standard deviation 1 in the population of students writing the test in any given year. Jan-Apr
is a dummy for being born during January and April; Nov-Dec is a dummy for being born in
November or December. The Weak Instrument F-Stat is the Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic for
the test that the excluded instrument equals zero. Q1-Q4 refers to income quartiles 1 to 4.
Standard errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline controls include a dummy for male,
Aboriginal status, whether the student speaks a language other than English at home, average
neighbourhood household income, fraction of neighbourhood with a university education, fraction
with below grade 9 education, fraction unemployed, and fraction visible minority. Day of birth
is uninteracted in all regressions.

35

Table 10: Probability of Students Remaining in The Sample
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Age 9
Age 15
Grade 10 Test
Born 1986*Jan-Apr
0.006*
0.001
0.006
0.000
-0.025***
0.015
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.011)
Born 1985*Nov-Dec
0.010**
0.015**
0.015***
0.017**
0.052***
0.030***
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.011)
Born 1985
-0.004
0.009
-0.008***
-0.000
0.021***
-0.043***
(0.002)
(0.009)
(0.003)
(0.011)
(0.004)
(0.016)
Born 1986
-0.000
0.006
-0.000
0.007
0.054***
-0.000
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.004)
(0.013)
Nov-Dec
-0.001
-0.045
-0.001
-0.046
-0.032***
0.157**
(0.003)
(0.033)
(0.004)
(0.041)
(0.007)
(0.065)
Jan-Apr
-0.004
-0.004
0.001
-0.000
0.016**
-0.026**
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.012)
R2
N

0.002
120108

0.002
120108

0.001
120108

0.002
120108

0.029
120108

0.030
120108

Day of Birth
Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Born 1985/1986 is a dummy for being born in 1985/1986.
Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born between January and April; Nov-Dec is a dummy for being
born in November or December. Standard errors on coefficients are clustered on birth date.

36

37
0.062
132558

0.062
132558

0.021
(0.019)
0.050
(0.051)

0.014
169694

0.062
132558

0.049
(0.031)
0.115
(0.073)

0.015
169694

0.071
132558

0.046**
(0.019)

0.039
162971

0.071
132558

0.067**
(0.027)

0.039
162971

0.071
132558

0.023
(0.018)
0.065
(0.047)

0.038
162971

0.071
132558

0.073**
(0.032)
0.047
(0.067)

0.039
162971

-0.043***
(0.008)
0.022
(0.020)

(8)

Day of Birth
Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted Uninteracted Interacted
Notes: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Math and reading scores are standardized to mean zero, standard deviation 1 in the
population of students writing the test in any given year. Jan-Apr is a dummy for being born during January and April; NovDec is a dummy for being born in November or December. Standard errors are clustered on day of birth. Baseline controls
include a dummy for male, Aboriginal status, whether the student speaks a language other than English at home, average
neighbourhood household income, fraction of neighbourhood with a university education, fraction with below grade 9 education,
fraction unemployed, and fraction visible minority.

R2
N
0.062
132558

0.066**
(0.026)

Panel B - Test Score Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age
0.038**
(0.019)
Exp Entry Age*Jan-Apr

Exp Entry Age*Nov-Dec

0.015
169694

0.014
169694

R2
N

Table 11: Reduced Form Estimates - with 1984 Students in Sample
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Math
Reading
Panel A - Grade Repetition Reduced Form
Exp Entry Age
-0.022***
-0.019***
-0.031***
-0.027***
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.007)
Exp Entry Age*Jan-Apr
-0.020***
-0.029***
-0.023***
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Exp Entry Age*Nov-Dec
-0.009
0.013
-0.018
(0.012)
(0.014)
(0.016)

School Entry Age
5.6

Age 9 by Birth Year

4.8

5

Entry Age
5.2

5.4

Byr = 1985
Byr = 1986
Byr = 1987

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Month

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 1: Predicted Entry Student Entry Ages in BC, Students Born 1985-1987

38

Probability of Grade Repetition
.08

Age 9 by Birth Year

0

Probability of Grade Repetition
.02
.04
.06

Byr = 1985
Byr = 1986
Byr = 1987

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Month

8

9

10

11

12

10

11

12

Probability of Grade Repetition
.14

Age 15 by Birth Year

.06

Probability of Grade Repetition
.08
.1
.12

Byr = 1985
Byr = 1986
Byr = 1987

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Month

8

9

Figure 2: Probability of Grade Repetition in BC, Students Born 1985-1987
39

Numeracy z−score
.05

by Birth Year

−.1

Numeracy Score in Grade 10
−.05
0

Byr = 1985
Byr = 1986
Byr = 1987

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Month

8

9

10

11

12

Reading z−score
.15

by Birth Year

0

Reading Score in Grade 10
.05
.1

Byr = 1985
Byr = 1986
Byr = 1987

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
Month

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 3: Grade 10 Math and Reading Test Scores, Students Born 1985-1987
40

Attrition From Sample

.85

Pr(Observed)
.9
.95

1

at age 9

01jul1985

01jan1986

01jul1986

01jan1987

01jul1987

01jan1988

01jul1987

01jan1988

Birth Date

Attrition From Sample

.5

.6

Pr(Observed)
.7

.8

.9

for Grade 10 Test

01jul1985

01jan1986

01jul1986

01jan1987

Birth Date

Figure 4: Likelihood of Remaining in Sample, Students Born 1985-1987
41

Appendix

42

Table A1: Full Set of Average Student Characteristics
1985
1986
MayNovJanMayNovJanOct
Dec
Apr
Oct
Dec
Apr

1987
MayOct

NovDec

Panel A: Age 9
Repeat
Exp Entry Age
Actual Entry Age
Male
Aboriginal
Non-English
Household Income
% University
% Dropout
% Unemployed
% Visible Minority

2.466
5.093
5.119
50.62
9.66
11.06
56618
22.94
7.32
8.55
15.12

6.076
5.088
5.136
51.31
9.96
12.44
56282
23.00
7.47
8.60
15.88

3.079
4.836
4.837
51.66
9.64
10.97
57101
23.20
7.40
8.73
15.35

2.248
5.093
5.100
50.46
9.90
10.91
57295
23.06
7.49
8.72
15.37

5.458
4.753
4.844
51.75
10.24
12.25
57517
23.12
7.54
8.76
15.99

1.126
5.503
5.502
51.42
10.09
11.81
57373
23.01
7.47
8.66
15.56

2.221
5.098
5.106
50.82
10.25
11.88
57622
23.23
7.44
8.71
15.26

6.283
4.755
4.826
52.25
10.96
13.17
57413
23.22
7.70
8.76
16.21

Panel B: Age 15
Repeat
Exp Entry Age
Actual Entry Age
Male
Aboriginal
Non-English
Household Income
% University
% Dropout
% Unemployed
% Visible Minority

8.058
5.093
5.118
51.09
9.70
8.50
58858
24.64
7.12
7.74
18.35

12.376
5.088
5.135
52.10
10.26
9.62
58512
24.61
7.23
7.69
18.99

8.814
4.836
4.837
51.55
9.69
8.85
58481
24.50
7.05
7.69
18.33

7.869
5.093
5.100
50.51
9.85
8.92
59252
24.59
7.00
7.69
18.30

11.686
4.753
4.843
51.89
10.32
9.56
58807
24.48
7.21
7.71
18.75

6.024
5.502
5.502
51.41
10.20
9.58
58654
24.32
7.23
7.88
18.19

7.806
5.098
5.106
50.80
10.29
9.88
58639
24.58
7.16
7.76
18.46

12.498
4.756
4.826
52.42
10.97
11.41
58521
24.38
7.20
7.94
18.64

Panel C: Test Score
Math Score
-0.048
-0.045
-0.011
-0.034
-0.063
0.018
-0.026
-0.043
Reading Score
0.059
0.044
0.090
0.060
0.014
0.140
0.059
0.021
Exp Entry Age
5.092
5.088
4.836
5.094
4.753
5.502
5.099
4.758
Actual Entry Age
5.113
5.118
4.835
5.100
4.838
5.500
5.099
4.763
Male
50.511 51.282 51.039 49.716 50.991 50.461 49.662 48.893
Aboriginal
6.993
7.262
6.889
7.091
7.488
7.066
6.914
7.336
Non-English
9.320
10.649 9.732
9.915
10.491 10.799 11.081 13.711
Household Income
59816
59499
59660
60410
59692
59928
60098
59945
% University
25.031 25.210 24.906 25.092 25.082 24.905 25.243 25.036
% Dropout
7.081
7.096
6.953
6.926
7.134
7.104
7.013
7.083
% Unemployed
7.570
7.455
7.461
7.480
7.522
7.653
7.508
7.647
% Visible Minority 18.789 19.550 18.799 18.955 19.323 19.019 19.325 20.186
Notes: Repeat is the fraction repeating. Exp entry age is entry age according to the school entry
rules, which may differ from actual entry age. Test scores are reported as z-scores, standardized
across all students writing the math and reading test in a give year, respectively.
43

