                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   OPTIMAL POLICY INSTRUMENTS FOR EXTERNALITY-PRODUCING DURABLE
                   GOODS UNDER TIME INCONSISTENCY

                                            Garth Heutel

                                        Working Paper 17083
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17083


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




I thank Stephen Holland, Chris Ruhm, Jason Shogren, Ken Snowden, Nathan Wozny, and seminar
participants for comments, and David Cornejo, Derek Mobley and Alex Smith for valuable research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Garth Heutel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable Goods Under Time Inconsistency
Garth Heutel
NBER Working Paper No. 17083
May 2011
JEL No. D03,Q48,Q58

                                                 ABSTRACT

When consumers exhibit present bias and are time-inconsistent, the standard solution to market failures
caused by externalities—Pigouvian pricing—is suboptimal. I investigate policies aimed at externalities
for time-inconsistent consumers. Welfare-maximizing policy in this case includes an instrument to
correct the externality and an instrument to correct the present bias. Either instrument can be an incentive-based
policy or a command-and-control policy. Calibrated to the US automobile market, simulation results
from a model with time-inconsistent consumers suggest that the second-best gasoline tax is 18%–30%
higher than marginal external damages. These simulations also suggest that social welfare is maximized
with a gasoline tax set about equal to marginal external damages and a fuel economy tax that increases
the price of an average non-hybrid car by about $750–$2200 relative to the price of an average hybrid
car.


Garth Heutel
Bryan 466, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P. O. Box 26170
Greensboro, NC 27402
and NBER
gaheutel@uncg.edu
                                                           2


         A growing body of evidence suggests that consumers regularly and predictably depart
from acting in accordance with rational choice theory. In particular, they appear to act with
time-inconsistent preferences, or with a present bias: they "underweight" future periods in the
present period. This affects decisions over purchases of durable goods with variable operating
costs; present bias makes a consumer less likely to spend money upfront to reduce a durable's
future operating costs. Many durable goods are energy-intensive and create externalities with
consumption, like cars consuming gasoline or appliances consuming electricity. The standard
incentive-based solution to the market failure caused by externalities is Pigouvian pricing, but
the efficiency of this solution assumes time-consistent preferences.
         If consumers are time-inconsistent, does Pigouvian pricing of externalities still lead to a
socially optimal outcome? If not, what policy maximizes social welfare? Must it include
command-and-control policies instead of or in addition to incentive-based policies? The purpose
of this paper is to answer these questions by developing a model of demand for externality-
producing durable goods in the presence of time-inconsistent preferences. I use a time-consistent
social welfare function, one that aggregates all individuals' utility levels defined without present
bias. I refer to the policies that maximize this social welfare function as "optimal" or "first-best"
policies. Surprisingly, very little economic research has yet been undertaken to examine policy
design in the presence of behavioral anomalies like time inconsistency, and no paper has
answered the questions posed here. Then, I apply the model to the automobile market through
simulation and solve for the policy that maximizes social welfare.
         The question addressed here is policy-relevant for two reasons. First, empirical support
for the existence of behavioral anomalies, especially time-inconsistent preferences, is growing.1
Consumers seem to discount the far future more heavily than the near future, behavior that can
be modeled by hyperbolic or quasi-hyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997). This has been
observed in laboratory experiments (Thaler 1981), in individuals' decisions over exercising
(Dellavigna and Malmendier 2006) and doing homework assignments (Ariely and Wertenbroch
2002).2 It also may be relevant to decisions over energy-efficiency of durable goods. Alcott and


1
  For recent evidence, see Mastrobuoni and Weinberg (2009), Fang and Silverman (2009), Brown et. al. (2009), or
Viscusi et. al. (2008).
2
  The field evidence for this and other types of behavioral anomalies is reviewed in DellaVigna (2009). Andreoni
and Sprenger (2010) cite laboratory evidence that fails to find any present bias in preferences, but they suggest that
no such bias is expected in laboratory experiments involving money rather than consumption utility. Hastings and
                                                        3


Wozny (2010) find that consumers underweight future fuel costs of automobiles at the time of
purchase. The well-established "energy paradox" or "energy efficiency gap" finds that
households seem to apply very high discount rates in their decisions over energy-intensive
durable goods like air-conditioners (Hausman 1979). Gillingham et. al. (2009) summarize the
literature and find implicit discount rates ranging from 25% to 100%.3 This paradox may be
explained by present bias.
        A second reason the question addressed in this paper is relevant is that environmental and
energy policy seems to be moving in a direction towards incentive-based policies, especially
tradable permits, and away from command-and-control policies.4 This transition has been fueled
by arguments from economists that incentive-based policies achieve substantial cost savings
compared to command-and-control policies; some empirical evidence has verified this for some
policies (Carlson, et al. 2000). If Pigouvian pricing is inefficient under time inconsistency, and if
consumers are time-inconsistent, then this push towards these policies may reduce efficiency.
More so, if time inconsistency causes some command-and-control policies to increase social
welfare compared to Pigouvian pricing, then the push away from command-and-control policies
may also reduce efficiency (Shogren and Taylor 2008).
        This paper's results are likely to be relevant beyond the domain of environmental policy.
Evidence for time-inconsistent preferences appears in a number of consumer decisions, including
retirement savings (Laibson, Repetto and Tobachman 1998) and eating (Ruhm 2010). Policies
addressing consumer behavior in these areas will not achieve a first-best outcome if they do not
account for the consumers' time inconsistency. This paper develops such a framework for policy
design for the case of externalities in the presence of time inconsistency; this may serve as a
springboard for the analysis of other market failures or policy instruments under time
inconsistency. For example, in the case of obesity policy, how does a calorie tax compare to a
trans-fat ban?
        The theoretical results provide some insight into policy design. First, I show that a
Pigouvian tax that only accounts for externalities does not bring about the first-best outcome

Mitchell (2011) combine experimental evidence with data on Chilean households' savings decisions and find that
present bias does a better job predicting financial behavior than does financial literacy.
3
  See also Table 1 in Sanstad et. al. (2006). By contrast, Greene's (2010) reading of the econometric literature
estimating consumers' valuations of fuel economy finds mixed results, with some studies finding under-valuing and
some finding over-valuing of improvements in fuel economy (see his Table 2). Busse et. al. (2009) find that
gasoline prices affect the new car market more so that the used car market.
4
  Command-and-control policies are sometimes referred to as "direct regulatory instruments."
                                                          4


under time inconsistency. A Pigouvian tax leads to cars that are not fuel-efficient enough and
are driven too few miles, compared to the first best. In general, gasoline consumption under time
inconsistency can either exceed or fall below the first-best level. Second, the first-best outcome
can be attained through a Pigouvian tax and a command-and-control mandate in the initial
decision period. This bolsters intuition provided in earlier papers that, for example, fuel
economy standards for cars increased efficiency relative to gasoline taxes (Greene 1998). Third,
however, I show that the first best can be achieved with an incentive-based policy in the initial
decision period rather than a command-and-control policy. Time inconsistency means that
future costs are not fully realized by the consumer, but they can be introduced through a price
instrument, e.g. a tax on fuel (in)economy. Thus, the common argument that behavioral
anomalies give credence to command-and-control mandates over incentive-based mandates is
not true in this case; either type of policy can achieve the first best.5 Fourth, in contrast to
policies that address market failures caused by externalities, under consumer heterogeneity
incentive-based policies do not necessarily result in a higher value of social welfare than
command-and-control policies. When consumers are time-consistent but heterogeneous in their
preferences, a uniform Pigouvian tax on an externality induces the first-best outcome, and a
uniform performance standard does not. For time-inconsistent preferences, under heterogeneity,
neither a uniform tax nor a uniform performance standard induces the first best. This holds even
when consumers are homogeneous with respect to their degree of present bias.
           The simulation results suggest that, for the automobile market, the welfare gains from
policies that address time inconsistency are substantial, and policies that ignore time
inconsistency are substantially different from the optimal policies. The deadweight loss of a
policy that addresses externalities from gasoline consumption but does not address time
inconsistency ranges from $160 to $225 per new vehicle sale, which amounts to an economy-
wide deadweight loss of $1.44 billion to $2.01 billion annually. The policy that minimizes
deadweight loss includes a tax that reduces the price differential between the average hybrid car
and the average non-hybrid car by $750 to $2200. The tax rate on gasoline that minimizes
deadweight loss is 18% to 30% higher than marginal external damages.
           How do the findings of behavioral economics affect optimal energy policy? It is often
suggested that behavioral anomalies justify command-and-control policies. Gillingham et. al.

5
    See also the discussion of "behavioral feebates" for automobile fuel economy in Alcott and Wozny (2010).
                                                  5


(2009) offer as potential policy instruments for behavioral anomalies education, information, and
product standards. Allcott and Mullainathan (2010) examine how non-price behavioral
interventions ("nudges") affect consumer choices on energy use, and they argue that there are
potentially many low-cost instruments available to reduce consumption. For example, simply
giving households information in their monthly bills about their relative electricity consumption
tends to reduce consumption. Fischer et. al. (2007) argue that strengthening fuel economy
standards will be welfare-increasing only if consumers are myopic with short horizons. Yet, no
study looks for optimal energy or environmental policy design in the presence of time-
inconsistent preferences.
       One reason for the lack of much research in optimal policy design under behavioral
anomalies is the difficulty of conducting welfare analysis with such anomalies. Standard welfare
analysis is based on revealed preference, in which consumers' choices among available bundles
gives information about preferences. Under behavioral anomalies, though, choices can be
inconsistent (e.g. a consumer prefers A over B in some instance and B over A in another), and
thus it is difficult to map them into utility or welfare functions. Several criteria for welfare
analysis in the presence of time-inconsistent preferences have been suggested. This paper is
agnostic about which welfare criterion to employ in the following sense: I use a particular
welfare criterion (the "long-run" criterion, described below) to analyze policy design, then I
investigate how robust these results are to two alternate welfare criteria, including those
proposed by Bernheim and Rangel (2009).
       Some other studies have examined optimal policy in the presence of time-inconsistent
preferences. O'Donoghue and Rabin (2006) and Gruber and Koszegi (2001) solve for optimal
"sin" taxes on goods that cause future damages (e.g. to health) that are underweighted when
consumed because of present bias. The two papers most similar in scope to this paper consider
Pigouvian taxation of externalities when individuals exhibit behavioral anomalies. Johannson
(1997) considers Pigouvian taxation when individuals exhibit altruism. Intuitively, one might
think that when individuals care about the welfare of others, the efficient tax rate on an
externality is lower than when individuals are purely self-interested, since their altruism causes
them to account for the external damages of others. Johannson (1997) finds that this is not
necessarily so. The optimal tax may be higher with altruism than without it because the socially
efficient level of the externality may be lower with altruism than without it.
                                                   6


          Lofgren (2003) considers Pigouvian taxation when individuals exhibit addiction. She
finds that the first-best is achieved with the standard Pigouvian tax: addiction does not affect
optimal policy. However, she considers some extensions, including time-inconsistency. Though
her focus is on addiction, some of her results are relevant to the question at hand in this paper.
For instance, she finds that under myopic (time-inconsistent) preferences, the optimal tax differs
from the Pigouvian tax, a result replicated here in a more complex model of time inconsistency
without addiction.
          Neither of these two papers, and no paper to my knowledge, directly answers the question
of how to design policies to address the market failure caused by externalities in an economy
where consumers are time-inconsistent.
          The next section below presents the base case representative agent model. Section 2
extends the model to multiple heterogeneous agents. Section 3 considers alternate welfare
criteria. Section 4 presents simulation results.


I. Representative Agent Model
          Consider a representative consumer making a decision over a durable good lasting T
periods. The good is purchased in the initial period (t = 0). In each subsequent period (t = 1
through t = T), the consumer chooses the operating intensity of the good. For example, if the
good is an automobile, the consumer chooses its fuel economy in the first period (miles per
gallon) and chooses how many miles to drive in each subsequent period.
          Rational choice theory predicts that a consumer trades off costs and benefits in a time-
consistent way. The relative utility weighting of two consecutive time periods will not change
over time. Exponential discounting (with a constant discount factor) achieves time consistency.
However, consumers exhibit time inconsistency if using quasi-hyperbolic discounting instead of
a constant discount factor. Under quasi-hyperbolic discounting, the discount factor applied in
the present between any two consecutive future periods is δ, while the discount factor used
between the current period and the following period is βδ, where β < 1. The parameter β
represents a "present-bias" in preferences, and δ is sometimes called the "long-run" discount
factor.
          Quasi-hyperbolic discounting leads to time inconsistency. A consumer at time t will
make different future decisions than she will at another time period, even without any changes in
information or realizations of uncertainty. Time inconsistency is a specific instance of a
                                                        7


behavioral anomaly, an act deviating from predictions of rational choice theory.6 Mullainathan
and Thaler (2001) classify behavioral anomalies into three classes; time inconsistency falls under
the class "bounded willpower."
        To work with a concrete example, let the durable good be an automobile, where the
intensity of use is the number of miles driven each period. Consider first the consumer's choice
of miles conditional on a particular vehicle with a given fuel efficiency. Let gpm be the fuel
economy in gallons of gasoline per mile. Let mt be the number of miles driven in period t, so
that the total fuel consumption for the consumer in period t is gpm·mt. The consumer gets
utility (in dollar equivalents) from driving described by a utility function U(mt), where U' > 0
and U'' < 0. The cost (in dollars) to the consumer per gallon of fuel is gast + τt, where gast is
an exogenous gasoline price and τt is a tax set by the government.
        The consumer's surplus in period t is U(mt) – (gast + τt)·gpm·mt. The privately chosen
number of miles driven in period t conditional on prices and fuel economy is mt*, given by the
first-order condition U'(mt*) = (gast + τt)·gpm.7 This implies that mt* is a function of the price
of driving one mile: mt* = m*(gpm· (gast + τt)).
        Next consider the consumer's problem in period 0, that is, her decision over the fuel
economy of the car (gpm) to maximize total discounted utility. Suppose that the car is not
driven in period 0 so that period 0 utility is just the negative of the cost of the car, c. A car
with fuel economy gpm costs c(gpm). Assume that c' < 0, so that less fuel efficient cars
(those with higher gpm) are less expensive, and that c'' > 0. The consumer's full problem is
thus

                     max                                                           ·       ·
                     ,

The consumer employs quasi-hyperbolic discounting when β < 1.8 With no uncertainty in gas
prices, the consumer can choose mt for each period at time t = 0. Since each choice of mt is a
static problem conditional on gas prices and gpm, the solution to each of those T static




6
  Behavioral anomalies are termed "behavioral failures" in Shogren and Taylor (2008).
7
  Ensure an interior solution by assuming that U'(m) → ∞ as m → 0.
8
  See Laibson (1997). Quasi-hyperbolic discounting is also called (β, δ) discounting or quasi-geometric
discounting. I focus on the case of β < 1 (present bias), although symmetric results arise from β > 1.
                                                          8


problems for mt can be substituted into the consumer's problem, so that the consumer's problem
can be expressed as a choice over just fuel economy: 9
            max


                                                                                                  ·

                               ·
         Continuity and differentiability of c yield a first-order condition. After simplifying
through an envelope condition from the consumer's static problem, this becomes

                      ′
                                                                ·                                 0

The first term including the negative sign is positive, and it represents the current-period benefit
of a marginal increase in gpm: it is cheaper. The summation is negative, and it represents the
discounted cost of a marginal increase in gpm: each future period's utility is lower because the
cost of driving is higher. Call the solution to the consumer's problem gpm* and mt*.
         Consider next the social planner's problem, which differs from the consumer's problem in
two respects. First, suppose that there is an externality associated with the use of fuel.10 The
social planner considers the externality in its social welfare function. The total number of
gallons of gasoline used in period t is mt·gpm; let the external damages from gasoline be
d(mt·gpm), where d(0) = 0, d' > 0, and d'' ≥ 0.
         The consumer's preferences are time inconsistent since β < 1. The social planner thus
encounters a dilemma over deciding what to maximize, since different "selves" of the consumer
at different periods have different utility functions. One approach is for the planner to maximize
the utility function used by the period-zero self (Krusell, Kuruscu and Smith 2002); this
approach might seem unappealing in that it underweights future selves' utilities. An alternate
welfare criterion is to maximize a function identical to the initial period consumer's utility
function but omitting the present bias, i.e. setting β = 1. This approach, because it has the


9
  Here where the purchase decision over the durable good occurs in just the first period, this is equivalent to a
multiple-self Nash equilibrium, as in Laibson et. al. (1998).
10
   Though this is a representative agent framework, the externality can be accommodated by supposing that the
consumer does not account for its cost in her decision. (The generalization is that there is a continuum of
consumers, all of whom just barely value the miniscule contribution their gasoline use makes to the aggregate
externality.)
                                                   9


planner applying only the long-run discount factor and not the present bias term, is sometimes
called the long-run criterion. One interpretation of this criterion is that it represents the
preferences of the consumer if she were to decide what to do in the period before she had to
purchase the car (Gruber and Koszegi 2001). Another interpretation is that the consumer is, in a
welfare-relevant way, making a mistake when she applies the present bias term β. That is, the
consumer's "decision utility" includes a β      1 while her "true utility" does not. The social
welfare function maximizes her true utility. (True utility is sometimes also called "hedonic
utility" or "experienced utility.")
        Papers using the long-run criterion to conduct welfare analysis include Carroll et. al.
(2009), O'Donoghue and Rabin (2006), and Gruber and Koszegi (2001). A justification for the
social planner using a discount rate that differs from the market discount rate is found in Caplin
and Leahy (2004). Robson and Samuelson (forthcoming) develop a model based on biological
evolution to explain the existence of the discrepancy between decision and true utilities. The
long-run criterion, though, requires the paternalistic assumptions that individuals' decisions are
not indicative of their true, welfare-maximizing preferences. Gruber and Koszegi (2001), for
instance, argue that time-inconsistent preferences demonstrate that people do not act in their best
interests. Alternative welfare criteria, including those presented by Bernheim and Rangel (2009)
attempt to be less paternalistic. In order to be agnostic about what welfare criterion to employ, I
adopt the following strategy. I solve for optimal policy under the long-run criterion, and then I
investigate how robust those policy solutions are to alternate welfare criteria. Later, in section 3,
I show conditions under which a first-best solution defined according to the long-run criterion is
also considered welfare-improving under the alternate criteria.
        Under the long-run criterion and accounting for the externality from pollution d, the
social planner's problem is

               max                                            ·      ·             ·
                ,

As with the consumer's problem, each choice of mt is made in a static setting conditional on
gpm. It can be written as a function of gast and gpm; let this be mtopt = mtopt(gast, gpm).
Then, the social planner's problem can be similarly rewritten:
                                                         10


        max


                                                     ,                    ·          ·             ,

                                            ,        ·
A first-order condition for the social planner's problem is

        ′                               ′
                                                               ,    ·            ·             ,            0

Call the solution to the planner's problem gpmopt and mtopt; I will refer to these as the "optimal"
or "first-best" solutions. By comparing the first-order conditions of the consumer and the
planner, it is apparent that when β = 1 the first-best outcome will be chosen by the consumer
when τt = d'(mtopt·gpmopt) for all t   [1,…, T]. This is the Pigouvian tax rate on gasoline; call it
τtpig. Because there is no deviation between the consumer's decision utility and true utility when
β = 1, she fully accounts for the future variable costs of driving the car when she makes her
decision in period zero over fuel economy. If the externality from future driving is internalized
through a Pigouvian tax, then her decision is optimal in every period. That is, mt* = mtopt for all
t   [1,…, T] and gpm* = gpmopt.
       The main results concern the case where β < 1: the consumer discounts quasi-
hyperbolically, but the social planner does not. The first proposition states that no set of gasoline
taxes exist, not even the Pigouvian taxes, that lead to the first-best outcome gpmopt and mtopt,
and it describes the direction of the error when using the Pigouvian taxes. Proofs are presented
in the Appendix.
Proposition 1: If β < 1, then there does not exist any set of tax rates {τt} for all t                 [1,…, T]
                                            opt               opt
that lead to the first-best outcome gpm           and mt . If τt =      τtpig   for all t   [1,…, T], then
gpm* > gpmopt and mt* < mtopt for all t           [1,…, T].
       Since no gasoline tax exists that will achieve the first best, clearly the Pigouvian tax will
not achieve the first best. If τtpig is levied, what outcome does it lead to? Intuitively, since the
consumer is underweighting the future operating costs of the car, she will pay too little for fuel
efficiency in period zero and buy a car with a gpm that is too high. But once that inefficient car
is bought, the consumer faces a higher per-mile price of driving compared to the optimal fuel
efficiency. So the number of miles driven is fewer than optimal in each period.
                                                 11


       Thus, it is not clear how total gasoline consumption (the product of fuel economy and
mileage) under the Pigouvian tax compares to the optimal level of gasoline consumption. The
present bias in preferences could cause total gasoline consumption and emissions to be greater
than or less than the optimal level of gasoline consumption and emissions. Suppose that utility

over mileage is iso-elastic with a coefficient of relative risk aversion , so that u(m) =        .

The price elasticity of demand for miles driven is –1/ (this is also equal to the price elasticity
of demand for gasoline). Under this functional form, present bias (β < 1) leads to an over-
consumption of gasoline if and only if  > 1, that is, the absolute value of the price elasticity is
less than 1. Your car has too low of a fuel economy because of present bias. If your demand for
mileage is price-inelastic, then the decrease in miles driven because of the low fuel economy is
small and is not enough to offset the lower fuel economy, and total gasoline consumption
increases. Contrariwise, if you are price-elastic, then the decrease in miles driven is large and
more than offsets the decreased fuel economy, and total gasoline consumption decreases.
       Not just the Pigouvian gasoline tax rates, but no set of gasoline tax rates produces the
first-best outcome when β < 1. Within any single period t > 0 the consumer makes no
behavioral anomalies, since her decision variable mt only affects her period-t utility. Given the
optimal fuel economy, the optimal miles driven in period t can be achieved only through τt =
τtpig. But this set of tax rates does not achieve the optimal fuel economy choice in period zero
because of the consumer's present bias distorting her period zero decision. If the planner can
only tax gasoline consumption in periods t > 0, then the optimal decision in period t = 0 can
never be achieved.
       Though no set of gasoline taxes can induce the first best, regulators may be constrained
and only have gasoline taxes at their disposal. Given that constraint, what gasoline tax
maximizes social welfare according to the long-run criterion; that is, what is the "second-best"
gasoline tax? Intuitively, one might think that in each period, the second-best τt is higher than
the Pigouvian tax rate τtpig to attempt to overcome the present bias. However, this intuition is
not true in general. As discussed above, present bias could cause gasoline consumption to either
increase or decrease. It follows that the second-best gasoline tax may exceed the Pigouvian tax
or may fall below the Pigouvian tax. Under present bias, the consumer is underweighting future
costs of gasoline consumption, according to the long-run criterion. The consumer is also
                                                        12


underweighting future benefits of gasoline consumption, that is, the utility from driving. If the
underweighting of the future benefits dominates the underweighting of the future costs, then the
consumer will consume too little gasoline relative to the optimal level, and the second-best
gasoline tax will be lower than the Pigouvian gasoline tax. 11 In this model, a present bias in
preferences does not necessarily increase pollution, and therefore a second-best gasoline tax is
not necessarily higher than the Pigouvian tax.12
        Thus, the regulator needs another policy instrument to achieve the first best. One such
instrument is a fuel economy standard.
Proposition 2: If β < 1, then the first best is achieved by setting τt = τtpig in each period t > 0
and setting a fuel economy standard that mandates a maximum gpm of gpmopt.
        Proposition 2 is relevant since the U.S. has gasoline taxes in conjunction with corporate
average fuel economy (CAFE) standards for new passenger automobiles. CAFE standards have
been in place since the 1978 model year, when they were 18.0 miles per gallon for passenger
cars. The 2011 model year standard is 30.2 miles per gallon. The federal gasoline tax is 18.4
cents/gallon and the average state tax rate is 27.2 cents per gallon, as of 2009 Q1. Later in the
simulation section, I will compare these values to the values that induce the first best.
        With two policy instruments to use, the planner can achieve the first-best outcome. The
second instrument, however, need not be a command-and-control standard. Instead, the
regulator can set a tax to be paid in period zero based on the car's fuel economy. Call this tax
τgpm.
Proposition 3: If β <1, then the first best is achieved by setting τt = τtpig in each period t > 0
and setting τgpm = (1–β)·∑             ·                   ·      .

        The summation in τgpm, ∑                ·                     ·    , is the full discounted benefit of
a marginal decrease in gpm. The consumer only accounts for a fraction β of the full benefit,
and so the remaining (1 – β) is in the tax, bringing about the first-best. The intuition behind the
tax on fuel economy τgpm is analogous to the intuition behind the tax on the externality τtpig.
With an externality, there is a cost that is not faced by the agent, and a tax that forces the agent to

11
   Suppose that utility is iso-elastic, c(gpm) = gpm–γ with γ > 1, and d(x) = xκ with κ > 1, and T = 1. This allows
the consumer's decisions mt* and gpm* to be solved analytically as a function of gast and τt as well as the
functional parameters. Under this parameterization, the Pigouvian tax and the second-best tax can be found. When
 > 1, then the second-best tax exceeds the Pigouvian tax; the opposite holds when  < 1.
12
   When mileage in each period m is fixed rather than a choice variable (perfectly inelastic demand), then present
bias always increases gasoline consumption and the second-best gasoline tax always exceeds the Pigouvian tax.
                                                           13


face that cost (a Pigouvian tax) yields the first best. With present bias here characterized as an
"internality," there is another cost that is not faced by the agent: part of the future cost of lower
fuel economy. This cost is not faced by the agent in period zero because of her present bias. The
optimal fuel economy tax τgpm forces her to face the full cost.
         Behavioral anomalies are often invoked as justification for command-and-control policies
over incentive-based policies (Greene 1998).13 But just like with externalities, behavioral
anomalies can be internalized through price-based incentives. Empirical evidence suggests that
consumers do in fact respond to price when making decisions on energy-efficiency investments
(Hassett and Metcalf 1995). In this representative agent model, there is no difference between
the command-and-control standard and the gpm tax. With heterogeneous agents, though, there is
reason to suspect that incentive-based policies are cost-effective relative to command-and-
control policies. This will be investigated in the following section.14
         Proposition 3 may provide some rationale for the "gas guzzler" tax, a tax paid by the
manufacturer on each car that fails to meet a minimum fuel economy threshold. The tax level is
based on the car's fuel economy; it ranges from $1000 for a car with an mpg between 21.5 and
22.5 to $7700 for a car with an mpg less than 12.5 mpg. However, minivans, pickup trucks and
SUVs are not subject to the tax, and thus it only affects low-fuel-economy cars, mainly sports
cars. This is a small fraction of total new car sales.
         Two market failures require two instruments. Proposition 1 showed that no set of
gasoline taxes, without a policy on gpm, can achieve the first best. Similarly, no policy on
gpm, without a policy on gasoline consumption, can achieve the first best.
Proposition 4: If β < 0, when τt = 0 for all t > 0 then no policy on gpm, whether a tax τgpm
or an efficiency standard gpmmax, can achieve the first best.
To achieve the first best, one needs a policy period t > 0 to correct the market failure from the
gasoline externality and a policy in period zero to correct the market failure from the behavioral
anomaly.



13
   See also Gillingham et. al. (2009). Their Table 1 (p. 604) lists as potential policy options for behavioral failures
relevant to energy efficiency only education, information, and product standards. Pricing is listed as a policy
instrument only for market failure, like externalities.
14
   This result is similar to Proposition 3 from Lofgren (2003), where the optimal tax for an addictive, myopic
consumer is equal to the Pigouvian tax in the second period but larger than the Pigouvian tax in the initial period.
Alcott and Wozny (2010) also consider a tax on automobile fuel economy and label it a "behavioral feebate."
                                                      14


II. Model with Heterogeneous Agents
        In the representative agent model, either a performance standard (e.g. a minimum miles-
per-gallon requirement) or an incentive-based policy (e.g. a tax on fuel economy) brings about
the first-best outcome. One may suspect that under consumer heterogeneity, the incentive-based
policy dominates the command-and-control policy; this result is well-known in policies that
address externalities. An incentive-based policy for an externality with uniform external costs is
cost-effective. A uniform command-and-control mandate does not provide the flexibility for
individuals with different preferences or different abatement costs.
        However, this reasoning does not apply to policies that address time-inconsistent
preferences. With heterogeneous agents, neither a uniform tax on fuel economy nor a uniform
performance standard necessarily brings about the first best outcome. By "uniform" I mean one
that does not vary by individual. For heterogeneity in present bias, this result seems obvious.
For example, if some consumers exhibit present bias and other do not, then a uniform policy to
address time-inconsistent preferences seems like it cannot be optimal. However, the results
below do not assume heterogeneity in present bias; all consumers have the same β. Rather,
consumers vary only by their instantaneous utility over mileage, U. It is not so obvious that a
uniform tax does not induce the first best under this specification of heterogeneity. 15
        Consider a model with two consumers, indexed by i = 1, 2. The two consumers differ
from each other only in their utility function over miles driven; the first consumer's is U1, and
the second consumer's is U2. Both consumers have the same value for the present bias in
preferences, β. The social planner maximizes the sum of both true utilities:

                                                ·          ,            ·      ·       ,


Damages from emissions are again given by d(Et), where Et = ∑                      ,       ·   is the sum of
both consumers' emissions. The first best is given by the solution to the planner's first-order
conditions for gpmi and mt,i.

                                  ,                 2·              ·              0




15
  Many other sources of heterogeneity are possible, including the time horizon of the automobile T. O'Donoghue
and Rabin (2006) consider heterogeneity in β.
                                                    15



                                            ·            2·              ·    ,     0

The optimal level of emissions each period Etopt is given by the optimal fuel economy and miles
drive of each consumer. The damages from emissions in each first-order condition are
multiplied by the number of consumers (2).
        Each consumer maximizes the decision utility function that incorporates quasi-hyperbolic
discounting:                  ∑        ·        ,           ·       ·    ,   . The consumer may also
face a tax on emissions in each period τt, a tax on fuel economy τgpm, or a restriction on fuel
economy gpmmax. It can be shown that in the standard case when β = 1, a uniform tax rate in
each period τt = 2 ·            induces the first best; this is the Pigouvian tax τtpig.
Proposition 5: In the model with two heterogeneous consumers with U1 ≠ U2, if β < 1, no
combination of a uniform τgpm and a uniform set of τt will necessarily induce the first-best
outcome.
        Why, with heterogeneous agents, do a uniform emissions tax and a uniform fuel economy
tax not achieve the first-best outcome? The externality in this model is a pure public bad; for a
given level of emissions, an additional unit of emissions causes the same marginal external
damage regardless of who produces it. So, optimal policy has everyone facing the same
marginal cost (tax). On the other hand, the marginal cost of the market failure from time-
inconsistent preferences is not identical across consumers. It is, in fact, equal to the expression
for τgpm in the proof of Proposition 5. The cost that consumer i fails to face in her decision
utility function is a part of her future periods' utility. But, this cost differs between the two
consumers since the heterogeneity in utility functions leads to heterogeneity in optimal mileage
mt,i. The non-uniformity of the optimal tax is analogous to a non-uniform optimal Pigouvian
externality tax in a case where damages from emissions are not independent across sources. For
instance, if emissions from power plants located close to densely populated areas cause more
damage than emissions from power plants far away from populated areas, then the Pigouvian
emissions tax rate on the closer power plants is higher than the tax rate on the other plants
(Mauzerall, et al. 2005).
        Thus, the argument for the dominance of incentive-based policies over command-and-
control policies does not apply to policies aimed at addressing the market failure caused by time-
inconsistent preferences. Neither policy will attain the first best, although one may induce a
                                                  16


second-best outcome with a higher level of social welfare than the other. The ranking of the two
policies is unclear in general.
       Just as no uniform tax on fuel economy can efficiently address the behavioral market
failure, neither can a uniform command-and-control policy.
Proposition 6: In the model with two heterogeneous consumers with U1 ≠ U2, if β < 1, no
combination of a uniform efficiency standard gpmmax and a uniform set of τt will necessarily
induce the first-best outcome.


III. Alternative Welfare Criteria
       These results are based on the long-run criterion. This criterion is intuitive: present bias
creates an "internality" that is analogous to an externality. Optimal policy involves getting the
prices right: forcing the present consumer to pay for the externality and for the internality. The
long-run criterion is used frequently in the literature (Carroll, et al. 2009). However, it is
controversial, since it abandons the tenet that welfare analysis be guided by revealed preference.
The criterion asserts that an individual is not acting in his own best interests and his actions do
not maximize his welfare. There is thus a role for paternalistic government intervention.
       Because of the strong assumptions behind the long-run criterion, in this section I explore
how robust the above results are to two other welfare criteria. The first alternate welfare
criterion models the decision of the individual over time as an intrapersonal game, where each
"self" at a period of time is a distinct player. Welfare analysis considers Pareto optima or Pareto
improvements among the various selves of the game (Bhattacharya and Lakdawalla 2004). The
second criterion is based on the recent work by Bernheim and Rangel (2009). Under both
alternative criteria, I present conditions under which the optimal allocation, as defined under the
long-run criterion, is also welfare-improving under the alternate criteria compared to the
standard, Pigouvian solution that ignores present bias.


Multiself Pareto Optima
       Consider an intrapersonal game between the different selves. Employ a Nash
equilibrium; every self takes the strategies of all other selves as given and chooses a best
response. In the representative agent model above, the solution that I find is identical to a Nash
equilibrium of an intrapersonal game. Each self t > 0 responds only to the fuel economy of the
                                                  17


car that it inherits. Self t = 0 chooses gpm to maximize its utility, given that each future self
will optimize over mt in each future period.
        Welfare analysis for intrapersonal games can be done by evaluating multiself Pareto
improvements. If an outcome can be altered by a planner such that each self is at least as well
off and at least one self is better off, then this is an unambiguous welfare improvement,
according to this criterion.
        Is the optimal policy outcome under the long-run criterion a multiself Pareto optimum?
Yes, because the planner is maximizing a weighted sum of the individual selves' utilities.
Likewise, the solution to the individual's maximization problem is also a multiself Pareto
optimum, because the period zero self is also maximizing a weighted sum of the individual
selves' utilities. Given that the individual's solution is a Pareto optimum, it does not appear that a
welfare enhancing social policy, i.e. a Pareto improvement, is possible.
        However, the representative agent model does not explicitly model the return of revenue
from the emissions tax collection. Revenues are returned lump-sum. With only one
representative agent, the tax payments just equal the lump-sum return, so there is no change in
utility from the tax payments per se. But, the tax on gasoline consumption induces lower
mileage, increasing the consumer's welfare because of the reduction in the externality. The tax is
therefore welfare-increasing. Likewise, with a tax in period zero on gpm, the tax payments are
returned to the period zero self.
        More generally, though, the planner may be able to achieve a multiself Pareto
improvement by reallocating tax revenues across time. Because the gpm policy may lower the
period zero self's utility to increase all of the other selves' utilities, some of the tax revenues from
periods t = 1,… T could be returned to the period zero self to make him at least as well off.
        In particular, is it possible for a planner to reallocate from the Pigouvian policy to an
alternate policy and create a Pareto improvement? Define the "Pigouvian policy" to be the
policy that sets the Pigouvian tax rate in each period t > 0 and no tax on gpm in period zero,
and that returns all tax revenue in each period lump sum. That is, defining st to be the lump
sum payment to the individual in period t, st = τt·gpm·mt for all t > 0. Define the outcomes
under the Pigouvian policy as gpm0 and mt0 for t > 0. Define the "optimal policy" as the
Pigouvian tax combined with an optimal tax on gpm, τgpm , as defined in Proposition 5. The
optimal policy also includes subsidies st that need not be returned in full in each period. Rather,
                                                 18


the subsidies can be reallocated across time so long as an overall budget constraint is met:
∑                   ·        ∑              ·       ·       . The left-hand-side of this budget
constraint is total lump sum payments over the T + 1 periods, and the right-hand-side is the total
tax revenues (the gpm tax in the zero period and the Pigouvian tax in each remaining period).
Define the outcomes under the optimal policy as gpmopt and mtopt for t > 0. Because they are
lump sum payments, the st values do not affect these outcomes.
       Given this structure, the following proposition presents a condition under which the
optimal policy represents a multiself Pareto improvement over the Pigouvian policy.
Proposition 7: The optimal policy is a multiself Pareto improvement over the Pigouvian policy

as long as the following condition is met: ∑                                        ·

           ·                  ·        ·                ·                                         .

       If that condition holds, then the planner can increase social welfare relative to the
Pigouvian solution by implementing the optimal gpm tax and a set of intertemporal transfers.
The optimal gpm tax alone increases the planner's maximand (the "true utility") but may
decrease the period zero self's maximand (the "decision utility"). However, the lump sum
payments transfer resources from future selves to the period zero self and end up increasing the
period zero self's maximand.
       Does the condition in Proposition 7 hold? It depends on functional forms and parameter
values. In the calibrated simulation results presented in the next section, the inequality holds.
Thus, the first-best results found for that market under the long-run criterion can also attain a
multiself Pareto optimum.


Bernheim and Rangel Criteria
       A second alternative welfare criterion is introduced in Bernheim and Rangel (2009)
(hereafter BR). They develop a choice-based welfare economics that accommodates
nonstandard behavioral models. In particular, consumers can exhibit choice behavior that
violates the standard model of well-defined choices. In some situation, an individual can choose
x over y, and in other situations the individual, facing the same budget constraint, chooses y
over x. The only difference between the two situations consists of features that we do not think
ought to be relevant to a social planner; these features are called ancillary conditions. Examples
                                                            19


of ancillary conditions include the order in which options are presented, or the assignation of a
default option. In the case of time-inconsistent preferences, the ancillary condition of interest is
the point of time in which the decision is made.
         Under such a framework, BR define weak and strict revealed preference relations
analogously to those relations defined in the standard model (without ancillary conditions). So,
if a bundle x is strictly unambiguously chosen over y, that means that y is never chosen in any
budget-ancillary condition combination (termed a generalized choice set) where x is available.
If some bundle x in a generalized choice set has no bundles that are strictly unambiguously
chosen over it, then it is said to be an individual welfare optimum. This criterion thus respects
the choices that individuals make, regardless of the presence of ancillary conditions rendering
such choices seemingly inconsistent under the standard model. A welfare improvement is
moving from one bundle to another where the second bundle is strictly unambiguously chosen
over the first, that is, under no ancillary conditions will it not be chosen.
         The BR framework allows for analysis of behavioral anomalies broader than just time-
inconsistent preferences. However, they directly apply their framework to the case of β-δ
preferences and present a theorem to describe when one bundle will be strictly unambiguously
chosen over another bundle given such preferences. Let a bundle x be defined by a vector of
consumption scalars xt from t = 1 to T, and likewise for bundle y. Their Theorem 4 states that
x is strictly unambiguously chosen over y if and only if ∑
     ∑                . The right-hand-side of this inequality is the first period's decision utility from
bundle y. The left-hand-side is the utility that would be received from bundle x under a time-
consistent discount factor βδ.
         Asking the analogous question from the above subsection on multiself Pareto optima: Is
the optimal policy strictly unambiguously chosen over the Pigouvian policy? As when
considering a multiself Pareto optimum, the answer is no: the optimal policy by definition must
make the first period decision utility lower, since the Pigouvian policy maximizes the first period
decision utility.16 But, as before, we can consider a system of intertemporal intrapersonal
transfers that could make the inequality hold. Define the transfer to the individual in period t as

16
  That is, the first-period decision utility under x is greater than the first-period decision utility under y is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for the inequality in the text to hold (see BR, p. 70). This result, and in fact all
of their Theorem 4, depends on the assumption that utility in each period is non-negative. The model here can be
accommodated to that assumption with a suitable constant additive term in each period's utility.
                                                  20


st; the government's budget constraint is identical to that in the previous subsection. Suppose
also that the Pigouvian policy includes no intertemporal transfers; each period's tax revenue is
immediately returned to the consumer. Then, the BR inequality describing when the optimal
policy is strictly unambiguously chosen over the Pigouvian policy is:
                                 ·


                             ·                              ·            ·                   ·


                                          ·        ·                 ·       ·                    ·

If a sequence of transfers st that satisfies the intertemporal budget constraint can be devised that
satisfies this inequality, then such a sequence of transfers, combined with the optimal policy,
would be strictly unambiguously chosen over the Pigouvian policy.
        As with the inequality in Proposition 7, whether or not this inequality holds depends on
functional forms and parameters of the model. Thus whether or not the optimal policy under the
long-run criterion is robust to these alternate welfare criteria is indeterminate in general. In the
simulations that I describe in the following section, both of these inequalities are satisfied.
Therefore, the optimal policy results for this particular application are robust to these alternate
criteria.


IV. Numerical Simulation
        I now turn to a model to be solved computationally, in an attempt to find the magnitude
of the effects described in the analytical models above. The model is calibrated to consider
consumer decisions over automobile purchases and gasoline consumption. The numerical model
adds a number of elements that are absent from the analytic model. In particular, it allows more
broadly for heterogeneity among agents (there need not be just one or two types of agents). It
also allows a scrapping decision and thus makes endogenous the lifetime of a car, T.


Calibration

        The consumer's utility over miles driven in a single period is u(m) =           , where 1/

is the price elasticity of demand for miles driven (also equal to the price elasticity of demand for
                                                         21


gasoline) and C is a constant. This is the short-run price elasticity, since it is the response in
miles traveled to a change in price holding constant the fuel economy of the car. This price
elasticity has been estimated; values vary but it is generally found to be significantly less than
one (Hughes, Knittel and Sperling 2008), (Espey 1998), (Espey 1996). I use the preferred value
of –0.34, from a meta-analysis (Brons, et al. 2008) of short-run gasoline demand elasticities.
This implies  = 2.941. Later in the simulation results, I explore what this value of the short-run
elasticity implies about the long-run elasticity.
         To calibrate the scale parameter in utility C, I use data on mileage of passenger cars
among US households from the 2001 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS).17 The form of
the utility function predicts that a household's optimal mileage, m*, is a function of the total
                                                                         /
price of a mile driven in the following way:                                 . The total price of a mile driven

is the price of a gallon of gasoline time the car's fuel economy in gallons per mile.
         Heterogeneity is incorporated into the model by allowing for different types of consumers
through different values for C in the utility function. In particular, I calibrate C separately for
drivers of four different vehicle types identifiable in the NHTS: cars (including station wagons),
vans (mini/cargo/passenger), SUVs, and pickup trucks. For each vehicle type I calculate the
total price of a mile driven based on the national average tax-inclusive gasoline price ($2.72)18
and the average fuel economy for vehicle type. Total annual miles traveled is reported in the
NHTS; for cars the mean value is 11681. Given a price elasticity of –0.34, this pins down the
value of C. Under this specification of heterogeneity, all consumers within one of the four
consumer groups are identical, and consumers are unable to choose between groups. Instead,
within a vehicle type consumers are able to choose a fuel economy level at a cost, c(gpm),
specific to that vehicle type. To the extent that policy can move individuals into different types
of vehicle rather than just different fuel economy levels within a vehicle type, these simulation
results may misspecify optimal policy.19



17
   Available here: http://nhts.ornl.gov/download.shtml.
18
   Available weekly at http://www.eia.doe.gov/petroleum/data_publications/wrgp/mogas_home_page.html. The
value used here is taken from July 19, 2010.
19
   The direction of bias or misspecification is unclear. For example, suppose that optimal policy actually involves
moving some consumers from SUVs to cars. A higher gasoline tax than the one found in this model may be
necessary to achieve that vehicle type switch. Or, with the option available to switch, the tax may need not be as
high as in this case where there is no option to switch.
                                                     22


        The cost of a vehicle as a function of fuel economy, c(gpm), is calibrated separately for
each vehicle type from manufacturer's suggested retail prices (MSRPs) of models with varying
fuel economy. MSRP data are from Automotive News, and fuel economy data are from the
Environmental Protection Agency.20 In theory, one would regress price on fuel economy for
each vehicle class to find c(gpm). However, even after controlling for observables like size and
horsepower, the regression invariably finds a negative correlation between price and fuel
economy; c(gpm) is increasing. This is because more fuel-efficient cars tend to be smaller and
come with fewer features; luxury cars are less fuel-efficient. The data are not rich enough to
control for these features that affect price and are correlated with fuel economy.
        Instead of a regression, I calibrate the cost function based on two data points: the average
cost and fuel economy for a non-hybrid car and for a hybrid car. Hybrid versions of cars are
nearly equivalent save for the increased fuel economy (e.g. several models come in a hybrid and
non-hybrid version). The price differential should thus represent the additional cost of higher
fuel economy only. For cars, for example, the mean price of non-hybrid models is $28,932 and
the mean fuel economy in miles per gallon is 23.1; the mean price for hybrid models is $34,515
and the mean fuel economy in miles per gallon is 35.2. Between these two points on c(gpm), an
infinite number of functions could be fit. I thus consider only quadratic functions that must be
decreasing in gpm and convex, to satisfy the second-order condition in the analytical model's
maximization problem. These restrictions do not pin down a particular function, so in sensitivity
analysis I examine the impacts of varying c(gpm).
        External damages from gasoline consumption are assumed to be linear, so that marginal
external damages are constant (d(m·gpm) = d·m·gpm). This constant is taken from a recent
assessment of the optimal gasoline tax in the US (Parry 2011), which finds that the optimal tax
rate (i.e., marginal external damages) is $1.23 per gallon. Of these damages, the majority comes
from congestion externalities (52 cents) and accident externalities (41 cents). Climate change
externalities account for nine cents, and other pollutants account for 12 cents. The remaining 10
cents is from oil dependence externalities. Importantly, the two dominant categories comprising
the optimal tax (congestion and accidents) are externalities tied not to gasoline consumption but



20
  Available at http://www.autonews.com/section/prices and http://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/download.shtml,
respectively.
                                                  23


rather to mileage. I include these in the base case simulations but examine alternate
specifications in sensitivity analysis.
        The discount factors are taken from Laibson et. al. (2007), who estimate the parameters
of a quasi-hyperbolic discounting model using a structural model and data on savings and
consumption choices of US households. Their benchmark estimates imply β = 0.7 and δ = 0.96
for annual periodicity. Brown et. al. (2009) find in laboratory experiments a value of β ranging
from 0.6 to 0.7. These values are comparable to estimates in Allcott and Wozny (2010), who
examine the US automobile market and find that consumers value $1 worth of expected
discounted gasoline expenditures only 61 cents (though Allcott and Wozny (2010) are agnostic
about whether the underweighting is due to present bias). By contrast, Fang and Silverman
(2009) find a much lower       of 0.35 from data on welfare program participation.
        The consumer's utility function must account for the fact that older cars are less
preferable to newer cars, otherwise a consumer would never replace her car. I add a negative
term to the utility function linearly increasing in vehicle age (= –D·v, where v is the vehicle's
age). The coefficient D is calibrated via simulation so that the predicted average vehicle age
matches the average vehicle age in the NHTS. For cars, the average age is 8.98 years. The
resulting calibrated value of the coefficient of the age disutility term is 322; the dollar equivalent
utility of a car is reduced by $322 for each year of its age.
        In the analytic model, a consumer choosing to buy a car in period t pays for it in period
t. However, most new car purchases (70%) in the US are financed. As of 2007, the average
down payment on a new car loan is 10% of the total price, the average loan length is six years,
and the average interest rate is 7%, according to Edmunds.com. The financing option is very
relevant to consumers' decisions under present bias. If the entire cost must be paid up front, then
present-biased consumers will probably be less likely to buy durables. If only a small fraction of
the cost is paid up front, then present-biased consumer will probably be more likely to buy
durables. Thus, present bias is often cited as a reason why consumers buy "too much" of items
that are financed (e.g. new cars) and "too little" of items that are not financed (e.g. new
appliances). In the simulation, I assume that all new car purchases are financed at the average
rate terms (10% down, six years, 7% interest rate). Depending on the values of the consumer's
present bias (β) and long-run discount factor (δ), this could increase or decrease the apparent
cost of durables to the consumer.
                                                          24


         Table 1 summarizes the parameters and functional forms of the model.


Simulation
         The model is solved for a finitely lived agent through backwards induction, as in other
papers that model quasi-hyperbolic discounting (Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman 2007),
(Laibson, Repetto and Tobachman 1998). The representative consumer lives 90 years but does
not begin owning a car until age 21. In each period, the agent decides how many miles to drive
his current car and decides whether or not to scrap the car and replace it with a new one.
         The decision over miles traveled, contingent on type of car, can be solved in the same
manner as in the analytic model. Then, given miles traveled, the consumer's decision over
scrapping and replacement is solved computationally. Because of the fixed time horizon, this
can be solved through backwards induction. That is, in the last period the agent chooses the
miles traveled for each possible vehicle and then makes the scrapping decision. (Of course, the
agent will never choose to buy a new car in the final period since he will not be around to use it
in the following period.) Then, given the agent's behavior in the final period, the agent in the
second-to-last period chooses a course of action. This continues until the first period. The agent
at each period is discounting quasi-hyperbolically and knows that his future selves optimize with
a time-inconsistent discount function.21 The solution is identical to an intrapersonal game, in
which the agent is a distinct player at each time period, and solutions are restricted to Markov
equilibria (Strotz 1955-1956). Software implementing the solution method is available on the
author's website.
         Given a representative agent's solution, policy options can be analyzed by evaluating the
agent's true utility at his solution. The true utility includes the external damages from gasoline
consumption and does not include the present bias factor β. Then, optimal or second-best policy
can be found by maximizing the value of true utility over the policy variable, for example the
gasoline tax. The first-best solution can also be found for comparison, by evaluating the agent's
problem without present bias (β = 1) and where the gasoline tax is set to equal marginal external
damages. I run simulations based on 100 representative consumers, whose initial vehicle



21
  Thus it is said that agents are sophisticated about their time-inconsistency. In contrast, a naïve agent would act
now as if his future selves would be consistent, although in the future they would not (O'Donoghue and Rabin
1999).
                                                         25


allocation (ages and fuel economy) is chosen to represent the household-owned vehicle fleet
described in the NHTS.


Results
          I present simulation results from three different specifications of the model. In the first
specification, I omit both heterogeneity and endogenous vehicle lifetimes. Without these two
features, the model is identical to the theoretical model. Thus the results of that model can be
quantified and verified computationally. I omit heterogeneity by including only cars and not the
three other vehicle types; I omit the endogenous lifetime of vehicles by fixing the lifetime at 18
years (about twice the mean car age in the data). As in the theoretical model, consumers choose
in the initial period what vehicle to purchase and then have no option to scrap or replace it.22
          Table 2 presents summary statistics from this first specification under various policy
alternatives. The first column presents statistics from the first-best outcome, which occurs when
the agent is time-consistent and the gasoline tax equals marginal external damages. The row for
"policy instrument" is not relevant to the first-best outcome. The first statistic is the deadweight
loss of the policy, equal to the discounted value of true utility evaluated at the solution minus the
value for the first-best outcome. The units of deadweight loss are dollars, and the values are per
vehicle. The remaining statistics are the mean annual mileage, the mean annual gas
consumption, and the mean fuel economy in gallons per mile.
          The first alternate policy simulation is presented in column 2 of Table 2. In that
simulation (as in all simulations subsequent to column 1) the agent exhibits present bias. The
gasoline tax is set at the Pigouvian level of marginal external damages ($1.23/gallon).
Comparing deadweight loss in column 2 to column 1, present bias reduces the level of true
utility, making the agent worse off. The value of deadweight loss is $226 per vehicle, which is
the discounted sum of deadweight loss over the vehicle's entire lifetime (18 years). The total
number of new passenger vehicle sales in the US in 2009 was 8.9 million,23 so the total annual
deadweight loss from the new vehicles purchased in that year is about $2.01 billion. The average
mileage is lower, and the average gpm is higher, under the Pigouvian tax than in the first best.


22
   Under this specification, because of the assumption of a fixed vehicle lifetime, the model can be solved
analytically rather than through backwards induction.
23
   Available from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics:
http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/html/table_01_17.html.
                                                  26


This and the fact that the outcome under the Pigouvian tax does not achieve the first best confirm
Proposition 1.
       The Pigouvian tax does not bring about the first-best outcome, and Proposition 1 claims
that no gasoline tax, without any other policy instrument, can bring about the first-best outcome.
But what is the lowest deadweight loss that can be obtained with only a gasoline tax; that is,
what is the second-best gasoline tax? I solve for the second-best gasoline tax computationally.
For each value of a gasoline tax, I calculate the value of true utility, and then I choose the tax rate
that maximizes true utility. The resulting value of the second-best gasoline tax is $1.60, 30%
higher than marginal external damages. This suggests that ignoring present bias can lead to
policy prescriptions that are significantly different than optimal levels. Compare column 3 to
column 2. Under the higher, second-best tax of column 3, mileage is lower, gas consumption is
lower, and the average fuel economy is higher (gpm is lower). Deadweight loss is lower with the
second-best tax, but still not zero (the first best is not achieved). This verifies Proposition 1.
       Columns 4 and 5 model policies that achieve the first best using two instruments.
Proposition 2 shows that the first best is achieved with the Pigouvian gasoline tax and a fuel
economy standard requiring a maximum gpm equal to its optimal level. Column 4 enacts these
policies, and the outcomes are identical to those in column 1. Proposition 3 shows that the first
best is achieved with the Pigouvian gasoline tax and a tax on gpm. The optimal gpm tax equals
148440. This tax rate is multiplied by a vehicle's gpm. For the average non-hybrid car, with a
mpg of 23.11, this tax payment is $6423. For the average hybrid car, with a mpg of 35.18, this
tax payment is $4219. Thus the optimal fuel economy tax increases the price of a non-hybrid
relative to a hybrid by $2200. Before the fuel economy tax, the relative price difference between
the two cars is $5500.
       Lastly, column 6 considers a different second-best policy that, like in column 3, has only
one instrument. In column 6, the sole instrument is a fuel economy standard; the gasoline tax
rate is set to zero. As Proposition 4 predicts, the first best is not achieved. In fact, without any
gas tax, this policy leads to the largest deadweight loss. Although the fuel economy is actually
higher (lower gpm) than the first best, mileage and gas consumption are both much higher, since
gasoline is so much cheaper.
       All of the results in Table 2 perfectly corroborate the propositions of the basic theoretical
model with one representative agent. This is unsurprising, since the specification in Table 2 is
                                                 27


no different from that in the theoretical model. Next, I expand on the theoretical model by
considering heterogeneity in consumers and vehicle types. Table 3 presents results from a
specification including the four consumer and vehicle types described earlier. The assumption of
a fixed vehicle lifetime (of 18 years) is maintained. Each summary statistic presented in the
table is an average of the statistic for the four consumer types, weighted by the market share of
the vehicle types from the NHTS.
       Comparing columns 1 and 2 again verifies the predictions of Proposition 1. The
Pigouvian tax fails to achieve the first-best outcome and instead leads to vehicles being too fuel-
inefficient and mileage too low compared to the first best. The second-best gasoline tax is
solved for in this specification, and results are presented in column 3. The second-best gasoline
tax rate is again higher than marginal external damages, here by 18%.
       As in Table 2, in Table 3, columns 4 and 5 compare two sets of policies that each have
two policy instruments. Column 4 considers a gasoline tax combined with a fuel economy
standard, and column 5 considers a gasoline tax combined with a fuel economy tax. All policies
are uniform across all consumer types. In the homogeneous specification in Table 2, each such
set of policies attained the first best, as verified by Propositions 2 and 3. However, with
heterogeneity, Propositions 5 and 6 show that no such set of policies attains the first best, so long
as the fuel economy tax rate and the fuel economy standard are uniform across consumers. The
policies in columns 4 and 5 are thus both second-best policies. The value of both policy
instruments in each column is found numerically by maximizing true utility. Note that the level
of the gasoline tax is not equal to marginal external damages in either column. In column 4, the
gasoline tax is about equal to the second-best gasoline tax in column 3. In column 5, the
gasoline tax is just slightly greater than the Pigouvian tax. Although both policies in columns 4
and 5 are second-best policies, note that the outcomes under the gasoline tax and fuel economy
tax are remarkably closer to the first-best outcomes than are the outcomes under the gasoline tax
and the fuel economy standard. In fact, from Table 3 it appears that the policy in column 5
achieves the first best. However, this is due to rounding; the deadweight loss is about 25 cents.
       The theoretical model was only able to show that neither policy achieved the first best.
The numerical simulation shows that the policy that includes a fuel economy tax results in a
higher value of social welfare than the policy that includes a fuel economy standard. Although
the policy that includes a fuel economy tax does not achieve the first best, it comes remarkably
                                                  28


close. Why does the tax come so much closer to the first best than the fuel economy standard?
Note that a uniform gasoline tax (equal to marginal external damages) plus a fuel economy
standard unique to each consumer type would achieve the first best, as would the same uniform
gasoline tax plus a fuel economy tax unique to each consumer type. The non-uniform policy
values can be found from the theoretical model. The optimal fuel economy standard varies
across consumer types from a minimum of .0335 gpm to a maximum of .0558 gpm, a range that
equals 67% of the minimum value. By contrast, the optimal fuel economy tax varies across
consumer types from a minimum of 148440 dollars per gpm to a maximum of 171870 dollars per
gpm, a range that equals just 16% of the minimum value. By this measure, the heterogeneity in
the optimal standard exceeds the heterogeneity in the optimal tax. Therefore, a uniform standard
gets it "more wrong" than does a uniform tax. This ranking is dependent on the calibration and
should not be expected to hold for any parameter values, in contrast to the well-known result that
Pigouvian taxes dominate uniform command-and-control standards under heterogeneity without
time inconsistency.
       The last column in Table 3 presents the policy simulation that finds the second-best fuel
economy standard when the gasoline tax is fixed at zero. As in Table 2, this policy achieves the
highest deadweight loss of all presented. Notice that the second-best fuel economy standard
(gpmmax = .0558) has the same value as the second-best standard when the gasoline tax is
allowed to be non-zero (column 4). In fact, this value is also almost equal to the first-best fuel
economy for the most fuel-inefficient vehicle type, the pickup truck. Because the cost of higher
fuel economy for pickups is so high, any standard that forces those consumers to increase fuel
economy creates costs that outweigh any benefits. Another reason why the fuel economy tax
yields higher social welfare than the fuel economy standard is that with the standard there is not
much "room to move."
       The last set of results using the preferred parameter values, presented in Table 4, adds in
the endogenous choice of scrapping, and thus uses the backward induction solution method
described earlier. It can be shown numerically as a verification that without present bias (β = 1),
true utility is maximized with a gasoline tax equal to marginal external damages. Table 4
presents the same summary statistics as the earlier tables and adds a row displaying the mean age
of vehicles. In the earlier specifications, this statistic was invariant to policy because of the
                                                 29


absence of a scrapping choice. In Table 4, the deadweight loss values are the discounted values
over an individual's lifetime (age 21 years to age 90 years), rather than a vehicle's lifetime.
       In column 2, the average car age is about one quarter of a year older, the average annual
mileage is 125 miles lower, and the average annual gasoline consumption is about 10 gallons
higher, compared to column 1. All of these changes decrease utility, with a per-person
discounted deadweight loss of $4200 over the person's lifetime (this is the weighted average
deadweight loss over the four consumer types). The mean fuel economy is higher in gpm,
meaning that the average car is less fuel efficient. These results conform to the theoretical
predictions of Proposition 1: the chosen level of gpm is higher than the optimal level and the
chosen level of m is lower than the optimal level. The level of gasoline consumption is higher
under column 2; this holds because gasoline demand is price inelastic.
       The second-best gasoline tax, shown in column 3, is $1.44. This is about 17% higher
than marginal external damages. Deadweight loss decreases from column 2 to column 3. The
average car age decreases, but not quite to the optimal level of 8.59 years. Annual mileage
actually decreases, pushing it farther away from the optimal level than it was under the
Pigouvian tax. Gasoline consumption is less than optimal. Finally, cars are more fuel efficient
than under the Pigouvian policy, but not at the optimal level of fuel efficiency.
       The last two columns of Table 4 examine policies that combine a gasoline tax with a
policy on fuel economy in period zero. Column 4 presents the results for the welfare-maximizing
combination of a gasoline tax and a uniform fuel economy standard, while in column 5 the
policy combines a gas tax with a fuel economy tax. In neither column is the first best achieved.
The optimal level of the fuel economy tax in column 5 is $50663 times the car's gpm. For the
average non-hybrid car, with a fuel economy of 23.1 miles per gallon, this equals $2193. For the
average hybrid car, with a fuel economy of 35.2 miles per gallon, this equals $1440. The
optimal fuel economy tax thus makes the average non-hybrid car about $750 costlier relative to
the average hybrid car.
       Comparing deadweight loss across policies, it can be seen that none of these policies
achieves the first best. The policy option with the lowest deadweight loss is the one from
column 5, with a tax on gasoline and a tax on fuel economy. Both policy options that contain
two separate policies (columns 4 and 5) achieve lower deadweight loss than either policy option
that contains just one policy (columns 2 and 3). As with the results in Table 3, combining a
                                                         30


gasoline tax with a fuel economy tax is closer to the first best than combining a gasoline tax with
a fuel economy standard. However, in Table 4 the policy combining a gasoline tax and a fuel
economy tax results in a substantially different outcome than the first best.
         Finally, in Table 5 I examine how sensitive these results are to the calibrated parameter
values. I investigate five alternative parameter values. For each alternative parameter value, I
present the summary statistics from the first best and from the Pigouvian tax policy. All
simulations assume the fixed vehicle lifetime, heterogeneous agents specification as in Table 3.
Each pair of columns in Table 5 is analogous to columns 1 and 2 of Table 3. Deadweight loss in
Table 5 is the total discounted value over a vehicle's lifetime.
         The first two columns of Table 5 consider less present bias in preferences, i.e. a β closer
to 1. (Clearly, when β = 1, all of the standard results hold and the Pigouvian solution equals the
first best.) Unsurprisingly, with a β closer to 1, the Pigouvian outcome is closer to the first-best
outcome than when β = 0.7 as in the base case. When β = 0.95, the deadweight loss from
employing only a Pigouvian tax is just $5 per vehicle ($45 million annual economy-wide
deadweight loss, based on the number of new vehicles sold in the US).
         I next investigate , the negative inverse of the short-run price elasticity of gasoline
demand. This is a short-run elasticity since it does not account for the agent changing his
automobile choice in response to changes in gas prices. The long-run elasticity, which allows for
choice of fuel economy, can be calculated from this model.24 In the base case where the short-
run price elasticity is –0.34, the long-run price elasticity is –0.40. This is lower than the
preferred estimate of –0.84 from Brons et. al. (2008), but about equal to the median value found
in the meta-analysis in Espey (1998) of –0.43.
         In columns 3-6 of Table 5, I alter  and simulate the outcomes. I also change the value
of C, the constant in the utility function, to match the mean mileage in the data for each of the
four vehicle types. When  = 1, gasoline demand is unitarily elastic. As suggested in earlier
discussion, in this instance present bias does not change gasoline consumption: the effects from a
lower fuel economy and from lower mileage just offset. Furthermore, when  = 0.9, gasoline



24
   The implicit function theorem can be performed on the agent's first-order condition for the choice of fuel economy
to find dgpm/dgas, which can be plugged into the formula for price elasticity of demand. While the utility function
is defined such that the short-run elasticity is constant at –1/ , the long-run elasticity is a function the optimal
mileage, fuel economy, the cost function c, as well as the short-run elasticity.
                                                 31


demand is elastic, so present bias reduces gasoline consumption. Although not shown in Table
5, the second-best gasoline tax in this instance is lower than the Pigouvian tax.
       Columns 7 and 8 are from simulations where the marginal external damages from
emissions are lower than in the base case. In particular, I use the same source for estimates of
damages (Parry 2011), but include only those externalities based directly on gasoline
consumption (climate change, other pollutants, oil dependence) and not those based instead on
mileage (accidents and congestion). The marginal damages are 31 cents per gallons. This
reduces the deadweight loss to just over $100 per vehicle. Optimal mileage and gasoline
consumption is of course higher, since marginal damages are lower.
       Lastly, columns 9 and 10 consider an alternate specification of the cost functions of fuel
economy c. In the base case results, these functions (there is a unique function for each vehicle
type) are based on comparing average costs of hybrid and non-hybrid vehicles, fit to a quadratic.
But this does not pin down a function. Thus, the simulations in columns 9 and 10 use the same
two points and fit a decreasing function through them that is less convex than is the function
specified in the base case. As a result, the deadweight loss from using the Pigouvian tax is more
than twice the deadweight loss with the base case cost function, suggesting that on that
dimension the base case results are conservative.


V. Conclusion
       Growing support is arising from the field of behavioral economics for the claim that
consumers regularly exhibit time-inconsistent preferences and make decisions under a present
bias. Little is known about how this phenomenon impacts optimal policy design or interacts with
market failures. This paper examines how policies addressing externalities perform under time-
inconsistent preferences. The paper's theoretical model suggests that if consumers are time-
inconsistent, policies that do not recognize this fact will not achieve socially optimal outcomes.
The numerical simulation suggests that ignoring time inconsistency can yield policy
prescriptions that substantially differ from those that would bring about the first-best outcome.
       The intuitive results from the model come from a particular and perhaps controversial
specification of welfare-maximization: the long-run criterion. In order to be agnostic about what
welfare criterion ought to be used, I compare the results from the long-run criterion to those
under alternative welfare criteria, and I find conditions under which the main results are robust to
the alternatives. The numerical simulations satisfy these robustness conditions.
                                                 32


       The simulation results are based on several assumptions, any of which could be relaxed
to provide even more sensitivity analyses. For instance, producer behavior is not modeled;
manufacturers also respond to price policies, and this response could affect market prices and
quantities. More heterogeneity could be added in many places: more types of consumers,
regional or temporal variance in gasoline prices or in external gasoline or mileage damages,
more types and features of vehicles. Any of these extensions would no doubt capture more
features of the market. But, the purpose of this simulation is not to pin down optimal policy
point estimates, but rather to provide an idea of the magnitude of the effects of time-
inconsistency on policy prescriptions.
       The theory provided a specific example of a market failure: a durable good that creates
externalities. The simulation was even more specific: automobiles. The theoretical model is
applicable to other externality-producing durable goods, like home appliances home energy
efficiency investments. Furthermore, the framework here may be applicable elsewhere. For
example, time inconsistency is often attributed as relevant to the rise in obesity (Ruhm 2010).
The framework developed here could be used to analyze policy options like taxes on unhealthy
foods, limitations on the availability of certain foods, or subsidies to gym memberships. These
results could similarly be extended with applications to retirement savings or addictive behavior.


References
Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox."
        Working Paper, November 2010.
Allcott, Hunt, and Sendhil Mullainathan. "Behavior and Energy Policy." Science 327 (March
        2010): 1204-1205.
Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. "Estimating Time Preferences from Convex Budgets."
      NBER Working Paper #16347, September 2010.
Ariely, Dan, and Klaus Wertenbroch. "Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance: Self-
        Control by Precommitment." Psychological Science 13, no. 3 (May 2002): 219-224.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. "Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic
      Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
      no. 1 (February 2009): 51-104.
Bhattacharya, Jay, and Darius Lakdawalla. "Time-Inconsistency and Welfare." NBER Working
       Paper #10345, March 2004.
Brons, Martijn, Peter Nijkamp, Eric Pels, and Piet Rietveld. "A meta-analysis of the price
       elasticity of gasoline demand. A SUR approach." Energy Economics 30, no. 5
       (September 2008): 2105-2122.
                                               33


Brown, Alexander, Zhikang Eric Chua, and Colin Camerer. "Learning and Visceral Temptation
      in Dynamic Saving Experiments." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 1 (February
      2009): 197-231.
Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. "Pain at the Pump: The
       Differential Effect of Gasoline Prices on New and Used Automobile Markets." NBER
       Working Paper #15590, December 2009.
Caplin, Andrew, and John Leahy. "The Social Discount Rate." Journal of Political Economy
       112, no. 6 (December 2004): 1257-1268.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen Palmer. "Sulfur Dioxide Control
       by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?" Journal of Political Economy
       108, no. 6 (December 2000): 1292-1326.
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. "Optimal
        Defaults and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 4 (November
        2009): 1639-1674.
DellaVigna, Stefano. "Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field." Journal of
      Economic Literature 47, no. 2 (June 2009): 315-372.
Dellavigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. "Paying Not to Go to the Gym." American
       Economic Review 96, no. 3 (June 2006): 694-719.
Espey, Molly. "Explaining the variation in elasticity estimates of gasoline demand in the United
       States: A meta-analysis." Energy Journal 17, no. 3 (1996): 49-60.
Espey, Molly. "Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International Meta-analysis of Elasticities."
       Energy Economics 20, no. 3 (June 1998): 273-295.
Fang, Hanming, and Dan Silverman. "Time-Inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation:
       Evidence from the NLSY." International Economic Review 50, no. 4 (November 2009):
       1043-1077.
Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian Parry. "Should Automobile Fuel Economy
       Standards be Tightened?" The Energy Journal 28, no. 4 (2007): 1-29.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard Newell, and Karen Palmer. "Energy Efficiency Economics and
       Policy." Annual Review of Resource Economics 1 (October 2009): 597-619.
Greene, David. "Why CAFE Worked." Energy Policy 26, no. 8 (July 1998): 595-613.
Greene, David. "Why the Market for New Passenger Cars Generally Undervalues Fuel
      Economy." Joint Transport Research Centre Discussion Paper No. 2010-6, January
      2010.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi. "Is Addiction "Rational"? Theory and Evidence." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, no. 4 (November 2001): 1261-1303.
Hassett, Kevin, and Gilbert Metcalf. "Energy Tax Credits and Residential Conservation
       Investment: Evidence from Panel Data." Journal of Public Economics 57, no. 2 (June
       1995): 210-217.
                                               34


Hastings, Justine, and Olivia Mitchell. "How Financial Literacy and Impatience Shape
       Retirement Wealth and Investment Behaviors." NBER Working Paper #16740, January
       2011.
Hausman, Jerry. "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-Using
     Durables." Bell Journal of Economics 10, no. 1 (Spring 1979): 33-54.
Hughes, Jonathan, Christopher Knittel, and Daniel Sperling. "Evidence of a Shift in the Short-
      Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand." Energy Journal 29, no. 1 (2008): 113-134.
Johansson, Olof. "Optimal Pigovian Taxes under Altruism." Land Economics 73, no. 3 (August
       1997): 297-308.
Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Anthony Smith. "Equilibrium Welfare and Government
       Policy with Quasi-geometric Discounting." Journal of Economic Theory 105, no. 1 (July
       2002): 42-72.
Laibson, David. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       112, no. 2 (May 1997): 443-477.
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobachman. "Self-Control and Saving for
       Retirement." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1 (1998): 91-172.
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. "Estimating Discount Functions with
       Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle." NBER Working Paper #13314, 2007.
Lofgren, Asa. "The Effect of Addiction on Environmental Taxation in a First and Second-Best
       World." Working Papers in Economics no. 91, Department of Economics, Goteborg
       University, 2003.
Mastrobuoni, Giovanni, and Matthew Weinberg. "Heterogeneity in Intra-monthly Consumption
      Patterns, Self-Control, and Savings at Retirement." American Economic Journal:
      Economic Policy 1, no. 2 (August 2009): 163-189.
Mauzerall, Denise, Babar Sultan, Namsoung Kim, and David Bradford. "NOx Emissions from
      Large Point Sources: Variability in Ozone Production, Resulting Health Damages and
      Economic Costs." Atmospheric Environment 39, no. 16 (May 2005): 2851-2866.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Richard Thaler. "Behavioral Economics." In International
       Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, edited by Neil Smelser and Paul
       Bates. 2001.
O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. "Doing It Now or Later." American Economic Review
      89, no. 1 (March 1999): 103-124.
O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. "Optimal Sin Taxes." Journal of Public Economics 90,
      no. 10-11 (November 2006): 1825-1849.
Parry, Ian. "How Much Should Highway Fuels be Taxed?" In U.S. Energy Tax Policy, by Gilbert
        Metcalf, 269-297. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Robson, Arthur, and Larry Samuelson. "The Evolution of Decision and Experienced Utilities."
      Theoretical Economics, forthcoming.
Ruhm, Chris. "Understanding Overeating and Obesity." NBER Working Paper #16149, 2010.
                                                35


Sanstad, Alan, W. Michael Hanemann, and Maximillian Auffhammer. End-use Energy
       Efficiency in a "Post-Carbon" California Economy: Policy Issues and Research
       Frontiers. California Climate Change Center, UC Berkeley, 2006.
Shogren, Jason, and Laura Taylor. "On Behavioral-Environmental Economics." Review of
      Environmental Economics and Policy 2, no. 1 (Winter 2008): 26-44.
Strotz, R. H. "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization." The Review of
        Economic Studies 23, no. 3 (1955-1956): 165-180.
Thaler, Richard. "Some Empirical Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency." Economics Letters 8,
        no. 3 (1981): 201-207.
Viscusi, Kip, Joel Huber, and Jason Bell. "Estimating Discount Rates for Environmental Quality
       from Utility-Based Choice Experiments." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37, no. 2-3
       (December 2008): 199-220.




                          Table 1: Calibration of Numerical Model
  Function or              Description               Value                    Source
   Parameter
                    Inverse of short-run price         2.941           (Brons, et al. 2008)
                   elasticity of gasoline demand
       C               Utility function scale         Varies by      Calibrated from mileage
                              parameter              vehicle type          data in NHTS
    c(gpm)         Cost of car as function of fuel    Varies by      Calibrated from EPA fuel
                              economy                vehicle type    economy data and MSRP
                                                                                data.
       d              External damages from          $1.23/gallon          (Parry 2011)
                       gasoline consumption
       β            Present bias discount factor         0.7          (Laibson, Repetto and
                              (annual)                                Tobacman, Estimating
       δ             Long-run discount factor           0.96         Discount Functions with
                              (annual)                                Consumption Choices
                                                                     over the Lifecycle 2007)
       D             Consumer disutility from         Varies by        Calibrated to match
                          vehicle age                vehicle type     average vehicle age in
                                                                              NHTS
                                                          36


Table 2: Summary Statistics from Simulation with Homogeneous Consumers, fixed Vehicle
                                       Lifetime
                 (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
              First-best   Pigouvian    Second-      Optimal    Optimal     Second-
                            gasoline       best      gasoline   gasoline    best fuel
                                tax     gasoline   tax and fuel  tax and    economy
                                            tax      economy       fuel     standard
                                                     standard   economy
                                                                    tax
    Policy       N/A         τ = 1.23   τ = 1.60     τ = 1.23    τ = 1.23      τ=0
instrument(s)                τgpm = 0    τgpm = 0    gpmmax =     τgpm =    gpmmax =
                                                       .0335     148440       .0333
 Deadweight       0            226         192            0          0         525
   Loss ($)

    Mean              11417            11070            10743             11417            11417            13309
   mileage

 Mean gas             382.49           405.61           388.46           382.49            382.49           442.82
consumption
  (gallons)

 Mean fuel            .0335             .0366            .0362            .0335            .0335             .0333
 economy
  (gpm)

Notes: Deadweight loss is the total discounted value, per new car, over the lifetime of the car (T = 18 years).
Gasoline taxes τ are in dollars per gallon.
                                                         37


    Table 3: Summary Statistics from Simulation with Heterogeneous Consumers, fixed
                                     Vehicle Lifetime
                  (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)       (6)
               First-best  Pigouvian     Second-        Second-    Second-   Second-
                            gasoline        best           best       best   best fuel
                               tax       gasoline       gasoline   gasoline economy
                                             tax      tax and fuel  tax and  standard
                                                        economy       fuel
                                                        standard   economy
                                                                       tax
    Policy        N/A       τ = 1.23    τ = 1.4454 τ = 1.4315 τ = 1.2304        τ=0
instrument(s)               τgpm = 0      τgpm = 0      gpmmax =     τgpm = gpmmax =
                                                          .0558     150421     .0558
 Deadweight        0          162           147            138          0       1071
   Loss ($)

    Mean             11800            11565            11348            11371            11800            13329
   mileage

 Mean gas            489.30           505.88           494.01           493.70           489.30           596.70
consumption
  (gallons)

 Mean fuel            .0412            .0434            .0432           .0431            .0412            .0444
 economy
  (gpm)

Notes: Deadweight loss is the total discounted value, per new car, over the lifetime of the car (T = 18 years),
averaged over the four vehicle types, weighted by their market shares. Gasoline taxes τ are in dollars per gallon.
                                                         38


                     Table 4: Summary Statistics from Numerical Simulations
                        (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)                                (5)
                     First-best   Pigouvian       Second-best   Second-best                          Second-best
                                 gasoline tax     gasoline tax  gasoline tax                         gasoline tax
                                                                  and fuel                             and fuel
                                                                  economy                            economy tax
                                                                  standard
    Policy              N/A        τ = 1.23         τ = 1.44      τ = 1.26,                            τ = 1.29,
instrument(s)                                                     gpmmax =                           τgpm = 50663
                                                                    .0569
Deadweight               0          4202.7           3850.4        3798.5                                3653.8
 loss ($)

    Mean               8.5941              8.8155               8.7870              8.8154               9.1228
 vehicle age
   (years)

    Mean               11654               11529                11322               11528                11576
   mileage

 Mean gas              499.89              509.33               497.28              505.38               497.82
consumption
  (gallons)

 Mean fuel             0.0426              0.0439               0.0436              0.0436               0.0428
 economy
  (gpm)

Notes: Deadweight loss is the total discounted value, per consumer, over his or her entire lifetime, averaged over the
four consumer types, weighted by their market shares. Gasoline taxes τ are in dollars per gallon.
                                                                                39




                                                    Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis
                            β = 0.95             =1                    = 0.9            d = 0.31           c less convex
                       (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)    (7)          (8)     (9)          (10)
                    First-best Pigouvian First-best Pigouvian First-best Pigouvian First-best Pigouvian First-best Pigouvian
                                gasoline             gasoline               gasoline            gasoline              gasoline
                                  tax                  tax                     tax                 tax                   tax
 Deadweight             0          5         0         150          0          150     0          104       0           348
  Loss ($)

Mean mileage          11800         11758          10782          10150         10598           9909          12958         12762          11894          11362

 Mean gas            489.30         492.16         448.80        448.80         441.65         439.07        555.56         569.98         488.80        525.31
consumption
  (gallons)

  Mean fuel           .0412          .0416         .0417          .0440          .0418         .0441          .0426          .0443         .0411          .0459
  economy
   (gpm)

Notes: Deadweight loss is the total discounted value, per new car, over the lifetime of the car (T = 18 years), averaged over the four vehicle types, weighted by
their market shares.
                                                  40



Appendix
Proofs of Propositions
Proposition 1: To prove the first statement, suppose the contradiction: there exists a set of tax
rates {τtoptβ} that lead to mt* = mtopt for all t > 0 and gpm* = gpmopt. The consumer's first-
order condition for choice of mt in period t is U'(mt*) = (gast + τtoptβ)·gpm*, or U'(mtopt) = (gast
+ τtoptβ)·gpmopt. Since U'' is strictly negative, the last equation can only be satisfied when τtoptβ
= τtpig. When β = 1, then τtpig necessarily induces the optimal solution. When β < 1, the
optimal solution does not change, since the planner does not consider the quasi-hyperbolic
discount factor β. But, the consumer's decision and first-order condition differ from the β = 1
case. Thus, it does not equal the planner's solution.
To prove the second statement, note that the consumer's choice of gpm* is given by her first-
order condition; call this equation F. The implicit function theorem can be used to show how
gpm* varies with β
                                  /              ∑                        ·
                              /                             ∑                      ·
The numerator is positive. The denominator is negative from the second-order condition of the
consumer's optimization problem. Thus, dgpm*/dβ < 0. Since gpm* = gpmopt when β = 1, it
follows that gpm* > gpmopt when β < 1.
The consumer's choice of mt* in each period is a function of the total price of a mile of driving,
(gast + τtpig)·gpm, from the first-order condition U'(mt*) = (gast + τtpig)·gpm. Since U'' < 0,
dmt*/dgpm < 0. When gpm = gpmopt, mt* = mtopt. But when β < 1, gpm* > gpmopt, so mt* <
mtopt at each period t > 0.
Proposition 2: Consider the consumer's problem with the added constraint that gpm ≤ gpmopt.

                 max                                                          ·    ·
                  ,

Subject to
                                                        ·        0       0
                                                 41


Consider this problem's Lagrangian, where the constraint from the period t choice of mt has a
multiplier λt and the inequality constraint on gpm has a multiplier μ. The first-order condition
with respect to mt is
                                                      ·                   ·                   0
The term in brackets is zero from the first-order condition from the static choice of mt. Since
U'' is strictly negative, λt = 0 for all t > 0. Then, the first-order condition for gpm is

                                                                      ·                   0

If μ = 0, then this condition mimics the consumer's first-order condition in the problem without
the fuel economy constraint. Proposition 1 shows that in that case gpm* > gpmopt. This violates
the constraint in this problem. Hence, μ > 0 and gpm* = gpmopt. Then, from the first-order
condition for each decision over mt, each period's choice over mt results in mtopt.
Proposition 3: With a tax on gpm, the consumer's problem is

         max                         ·                                                            ·       ·
          ,

Subject to
                                                              ·       0           0
From the same argument as in the proof to Proposition 2, the Lagrangian multiplier λt on the
period t constraint equals zero, so the first-order condition over gpm is

                                                                              ·               0

With the value of τgpm as given, this first-order condition can be written as

                                                          ·       ·       1           ·               0

When gpm* = gpmopt, then mt* = mtopt for all t > 0 since τt = τtpig. Then, plugging mt* = mtopt
in the first-order condition above makes it equal to the planner's first-order condition, and thus
gpmopt is a solution by definition. So gpmopt and mtopt solve the consumer's problem, and by
the second-order condition this is a unique solution.
                                                         42


Proposition 4: Suppose that some policy exists that induces the first-best outcomes gpmopt and
mtopt. The consumer's first-order condition for the choice of mt must be satisfied: U'(mt) = (gast
+ τt)·gpm. At the first best this is only satisfied with τt = τtpig ≠ 0.
Proposition 5: Suppose that such a set of policies exist that induce the first best. Consumer i's
first order conditions are

                                            ,                 ·            0


                                                     ·                 ·       ,       0

Under the supposition, mt,i* = mt,iopt and gpmi* = gpmiopt. Comparing the consumer's condition
for mt,i with the planner's, it must be true that τt = τtpig in each period t. Then, subtracting
consumer i's condition for gpmi from the planner's condition for gpmi gives

                                        1                 ·                ·       ,


This right hand side is not independent of i, except in the special case where mt,1opt = mt,2opt for
each t. Thus, τgpm is not uniform, a contradiction.
Proposition 6: Suppose that such a set of policies exists that induces the first best. Consumer i's
problem is to maximize utility subject to the emissions tax τt and the restriction on gpm. The
first-order conditions, where the inequality constraint's multiplier is μ, is

                                                 ·                 ·       ,               0


                                            ,                 ·            0
Comparing the second equation, the consumer's first-order condition for her choice of mt,i, with
the planner's equivalent equation, it follows that τt = τtpig, as in the last proof. Then, subtracting
the consumer's first-order condition for choice of gpmi with the planner's condition yields

                                    1                ·                 ·       ,


That is, the shadow value of the constraint equals the price that would induce the first best (τgpm
from the last proof). This is strictly positive, so the constraint binds, and gpmi* = gpmmax.
However, this value is not independent of i, and thus the optimal policy value for gpmmax
cannot be uniform.
                                                  43


Proposition 7: I will show that the optimal policy Pareto improves the Pigouvian policy by
setting the lump sum payments st such that each self in period t > 0 is just as well off in the
optimal policy as in the Pigouvian policy, and (if the condition holds) the period zero self is
strictly better off. In the Pigouvian policy, the single-period utility for any period t > 0 is
u(mt0) – gast ·gpm0·mt0 – d(gpm0·mt0). The tax payment and lump sum payment just cancel each
other out. In the optimal policy, the single-period utility for any period t > 0 is u(mtopt) – (gast
+ τtpig) ·gpmopt·mtopt + st – d(gpmopt·mtopt). Choose lump sum payments st in these periods such
that each single-period utility value is equal under both policies. This implies st = u(mt0) –
u(mtopt) – (d(gpm0·mt0) – d(gpmopt·mtopt)) – gast·(gpm0·mt0 – gpmopt·mtopt) + τtpig·gpmopt·mtopt.
Then, the government's budget constraint defines the zero period lump sum payment s0: s0 =
gpmopt·τgpm + ∑              ·      ·         ∑        . The single-period utility in the zero period
under the Pigouvian policy is –c(gpm0), and under the optimal policy it is –c(gpmopt) + s0 –
gpmopt·τgpm. For the single-period utility in period zero to be strictly higher under the optimal
policy than under the Pigouvian policy, it must be that s0 > –c(gpm0) + c(gpmopt) + gpmopt·τgpm.
Substituting in the expressions for s0 and st from the expressions above yields the condition in
the proposition.
