                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    IS GIFTED EDUCATION A BRIGHT IDEA? ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF GIFTED
                 AND TALENTED PROGRAMS ON ACHIEVEMENT

                                                Sa A. Bui
                                             Steven G. Craig
                                            Scott A. Imberman

                                          Working Paper 17089
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17089


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2011




We would like to thank Aimee Chin, Dennis Epple, Jason Imbrogno, Chinhui Juhn, Brian Kovak,
Jacob Vigdor and seminar participants at APPAM, AEFP, SOLE, Carnegie Mellon University, Georgetown
University, University of Houston, and University of Maryland, and the employees of an anonymous
school district for all of their guidance and assistance in this project. Financial support from the University
of Houston Small Grants program is gratefully appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Sa A. Bui, Steven G. Craig, and Scott A. Imberman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Gifted Education a Bright Idea? Assessing the Impact of Gifted and Talented Programs
on Achievement
Sa A. Bui, Steven G. Craig, and Scott A. Imberman
NBER Working Paper No. 17089
May 2011
JEL No. H75,I2

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we determine how the receipt of gifted and talented (GT) services affects student outcomes.
We identify the causal relationship by exploiting a discontinuity in eligibility requirements and find
that for students on the margin there is no discernable impact on achievement even though peers improve
substantially. We then use randomized lotteries to examine the impact of attending a GT magnet program
relative to GT programs in other schools and find that, despite being exposed to higher quality teachers
and peers that are one standard deviation higher achieving, only science achievement improves. We
argue that these results are consistent with an invidious comparison model of peer effects offsetting
other benefits. Evidence of large reductions in course grades and rank relative to peers in both regression
discontinuity and lottery models are consistent with this explanation.


Sa A. Bui                                            Scott A. Imberman
University of Houston                                Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall                                  University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204-5019                               204 McElhinney Hall
sabui2@mail.uh.edu                                   Houston, TX 77204
                                                     and NBER
Steven G. Craig                                      simberman@uh.edu
University of Houston
Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204-5019
scraig@uh.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17089
I. Introduction

           The pending reauthorization of the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) has renewed

interest in gifted education, in part due to research suggesting that NCLB may have been less

effective at helping high achieving than low achieving students (Neal and Schanzenbach, 2010;

Rebeck, 2008). One possible channel for these findings is the shifting of resources from gifted to

low-achieving students as the incentives in NLCB are to help the latter and not the former. The

opportunity costs of such a resource diversion are difficult to discern, however, because little is

known about the effectiveness of gifted and talented (GT) programs for the three million students

in the US who are classified as gifted. GT programs might help high achieving students because

they group them with other high-achievers, and offer a variety of additional resources including

specially trained teachers and a more advanced curriculum. While early research finds that

ability grouping is correlated with higher achievement, many of these studies are likely biased

due to unobserved characteristics of students, such as motivation, that simultaneously lead

students to be successful and to be grouped in high ability classrooms. 2 Recently, some

researchers have tried to address the bias issue in ability grouping, but with mixed results (Argys,

Rees and Brewer, 1996; Betts and Shkolnik, 2000; Epple, Newlon and Romano, 2002; Figlio and

Page, 2002; Duflo, Dupas and Kremer, forthcoming). Our analysis goes beyond these studies as

it focuses on a group of students who are not well studied – high achievers – and the

effectiveness of the services provided to them. As such, our work significantly expands our

understanding of gifted and talented programs, as we explicitly address their effectiveness using

two unique strategies for overcoming bias - a regression discontinuity design embedded within

the eligibility requirements and an analysis of lotteries to attend premier GT magnet programs.
2
    See Kulik and Kulik (1997) for a review.

                                                 2
         Specifically, we utilize the case of a universal GT evaluation in a large urban school

district in the Southwest (LUSD) where, since 2007, all fifth grade students have been evaluated

to determine eligibility for gifted and talented services starting in sixth grade. Eligibility is

identified by two well-defined cutoffs on an index score that is based on achievement tests, a

non-verbal ability test, grades, teacher recommendations, and socio-economic status. We exploit

these cutoffs to set up a regression discontinuity (RD) design whereby students who score just

above the cutoffs are compared to those who score just below. Under certain conditions, for

which we provide evidence that this analysis meets, our estimates provide the causal impact of

enrolling in a GT program on achievement for students on the margin of eligibility.

         The second research strategy we employ uses randomized lotteries that determine

admission to two middle schools with over-subscribed magnet GT programs. Conditional on

meeting the district-wide GT eligibility requirements and completing an application, students are

randomly offered admission to the district’s premier magnet schools. This allows us to examine

achievement and attendance differences between students who win the lottery and attend the

magnet GT schools, and those who lose the lottery and attend other “neighborhood” programs. 3

We also provide evidence that these premier GT schools generate a more intensive treatment

along observable measures than the neighborhood GT programs.

         To our knowledge, only Bhatt (2009) specifically studies the effect of GT programs on

achievement, although Davis, Engberg, Epple, Sieg and Zimmer (2010) find that higher income

parents are more likely to stay in public schools when their children are eligible for GT

programs. While Bhatt finds significant improvements in math achievement, her instrumental

3
 Students that lose the lottery can attend GT programs in their local school, other magnet schools (based on other
specializations), or charter schools. The GT programs in these other schools are called neighborhood programs,
because they are not designed to attract GT students from other attendance zones.

                                                         3
variables methodology suffers from weak instruments, leaving open the potential that her

estimates are biased. Our work offers a wider scope of inquiry, and further offers the two distinct

identification strategies. Thus, our study will be the first to establish credibly causal estimates of

the impacts of GT programs on student achievement.

           Our RD analysis shows that students exposed to GT curriculum for the entirety of 6th

grade plus half of 7th grade exhibit no significant improvement in achievement. This is despite

substantial increases in average peer achievement on the order of one-fourth to one-third of a

standard deviation, an increased likelihood of being placed in advanced classes, and the

opportunity to attend a GT magnet program. We also find no improvements within student

subgroups. While our estimates are local to the RD margin we note that, due to the multiple

factors that go into the eligibility index, students near the discontinuity show wide variation in

achievement levels, leading to a more generalizable interpretation than most RD designs. For

example, students who score precisely at the eligibility threshold range from 45 to 97 national

percentile rankings in reading and between 55 and 98 percentiles in math. 4

           The lottery results, comparing students in the two premier GT magnet schools to other

GT students, also show little improvement in overall 7th grade achievement with the exception of

science scores. This is despite improvements in mean peer achievement on the order of one

standard deviation, and higher quality teachers as measured by teacher fixed effects. We also

note that, although the lottery analysis answers a different question than the RD, it has the

advantage of evaluating the impact of receiving a more intense treatment for students who would




4
    The inter-quartile ranges are 78 to 92 for reading and 83 to 94 for math.

                                                             4
be infra-marginal in the RD framework, as lottery participants tend to be from the upper part of

the GT distribution. 5

         There are several pathways through which exposure to GT programs might increase

student achievement. We demonstrate below that teachers in the premier schools with lotteries

have larger fixed effects on achievement than teachers who instruct lottery losers, and that

marginal students in the GT program take more advanced courses than marginal students not in a

GT program. 6 Additionally, while we cannot directly assess these mechanisms, GT may induce

parents to become more involved in their children’s schooling or the additional schooling options

available to GT students may generate a better match between students and their schools.

         Nonetheless, we find that peer effects amongst GT students are especially interesting in

this context given the large improvements in peer quality from enrolling in GT. If peer effects

follow a monotonic model whereby being surrounded by higher achieving students improves

one’s own achievement, as found in Imberman, Kugler and Sacerdote (2009), better peers should

be helpful. For a marginal GT student, however, the peer effect may not necessarily be positive.

That is, a marginal GT student is likely to go from being near the top of the regular class to being

near the bottom of the GT class. Further, even students in the middle of the GT distribution may

experience a similar loss of ranking in the magnet GT schools compared to neighborhood

schools. In this context it is possible that an invidious comparison (IC) model proposed by

Hoxby and Weingarth (2006), whereby students are demoralized by reductions in their relative

ranking or teachers provide more resources to students at the top of the classroom distribution,

5
  While the average GT student in 7th grade scores 1 standard deviation above the mean 7th grade student, the lottery
participants score 1.6 standard deviations above the mean.
6
  Conversations with school district officials suggests that the GT curriculum is more likely to include more detail
and go more in-depth into topics, rather than cover the regular curriculum more quickly and add additional topics
(increase breadth).

                                                          5
applies. We present suggestive evidence using both course grades and the ranking of students

within each class that indicates invidious comparison may be sufficiently important to balance

out the other characteristics of GT programs that would be expected to increase achievement.



II. The Gifted and Talented Program in LUSD

        LUSD is a very large school district in the Southwestern US with over 200,000 students.

The district is heavily minority and very low income, although the minority population is more

heavily Hispanic rather than African-American. Panel A of Table 1 show that gifted students are

less likely to be economically disadvantaged, more likely to be white, less likely to have limited

English proficiency, and perform better on both cognitive and non-cognitive measures of output

than non-GT. Schools in LUSD also have a monetary incentive for attracting gifted students as

LUSD provides a funding boost of 12% over the average daily allotment for a regular student.

        In order to be identified as GT in LUSD, a student must meet the eligibility criteria set

forth in the “gifted and talented identification matrix,” which we will refer to as “the matrix.” A

copy of the matrix for entry into GT in 2008-09 is provided in Figure 1. The matrix converts

scores on standardized tests – Stanford Achievement Test for English speaking students and the

Aprenda exam for a subset of Spanish speaking students with limited English proficiency –

scores on the Naglieri Non-verbal Abilities Test (NNAT), average course grades, teacher

recommendations, and indicators for socio-economic status into an index score we call “total

matrix points.” 7



7
 For socioeconomic status, students get 5 extra points (out of a maximum of 108) for having limited English
proficiency, being classified as special education or being classified as economically disadvantaged. Students who
are members of a minority group get a further 3 point bonus.

                                                         6
         Students can meet eligibility requirements in one of two ways. The first is having 56 total

matrix points, including at least 16 points from the Stanford Achievement Test or Aprenda and

10 points from the NNAT. 8 Alternatively, students can qualify by having 62 total matrix points

regardless of Stanford, Aprenda and NNAT scores. During 5th grade all students are evaluated

for GT, including those who participated in the GT program in elementary school. 9 This

selection framework allows us to model qualification across the eligibility boundary by using a

fuzzy RD methodology. Specifically, while all students who meet the requirements above

qualify, not all end up being classified as GT because parents are allowed to opt-out of the

program, or students may enroll and then withdraw. 10 Further, some who do not initially meet

the requirements later become identified as GT. This is mainly because students qualify for entry

in 7th grade after not qualifying in 6th, parents appeal the recorded matrix scores by submitting an

alternative standardized test taken within the prior 12 months, data is corrected or missing data is

added later. 11




8
  Students can reach 16 points from the Stanford Achievement Tests through different combinations of scores on
four subjects. For example a student who is in the 90th percentile in math and the 80th percentile in reading will
qualify regardless of science and social studies scores. Alternatively a student could meet this requirement by
scoring in the 80th percentile in all four exams. See Figure 1 for details on the score to points conversions. For the
Naglieri test a score of 104 (no percentiles are given) would be equivalent to 10 matrix points.
9
  Elementary students must re-qualify in 5th grade to maintain their classification in middle school. Students who
qualify for GT in middle or high school generally keep their status through graduation, although they can be
removed from the GT program if they perform poorly. Those who do not qualify in 5th grade have the opportunity to
be re-evaluated in later years at their school’s discretion. All students are also evaluated for GT services in
kindergarten, but unfortunately the matrix data was incomplete prohibiting us from evaluating the GT program in
elementary schools.
10
   Another reason a student may not show up in the data as GT is if his or her school does not have enough GT
certified teachers to provide the required services. However, this is very rare as only 2 of the 41 traditional middle
schools in LUSD had no GT students in 7th grade in 2009-10.
11
   Below we show that the missing data does not appear to substantially influence our results. Additionally, results
for 6th grade show a similar sized likelihood of being GT to the left of the boundary, suggesting that qualification in
7th grade rather than 6th is not an important factor.

                                                           7
            Table 1 also shows means from the lottery sample in panel B. The students in the lottery

are significantly stronger academically than the average GT student in panel A, consistent with

our view that the lottery results reflect a LATE for students in the upper portion of the GT

distribution while the RD estimates reflect impacts on the “marginal” GT students. For example,

in 7th grade the lottery participants score 0.6 standard deviations higher than mean GT student. 12

Lottery participants are also wealthier and whiter than the average GT student. A key element

from the lottery sample is the attrition rate. Of the 542 students that entered the lottery, 18.8%

are not in the school district by 7th grade, and in fact, most of these students leave the sample

before 6th. There is potential for attrition bias in the lottery sample, however, as lottery losers

who leave are likely different from winners who leave as evidenced by the slight differences in

achievement of winners and losers in Table 1. We will address potential attrition bias in two

ways – by reweighting the sample to look like the pre-lottery sample on observables, and through

the use of a new bounding analysis proposed by Engberg, Epple, Imbrogno, Sieg and Zimmer

(2010). 13



III. Model and Specification

1. GT Program Evaluation Using Regression Discontinuity

            The objective of the RD analysis is to estimate a LATE that differentiates students who

enroll in GT from students who do not, but who are otherwise equivalent. Figure 2 shows the

increase in GT identification two years after evaluation (7th grade) as a function of the students’

matrix points. The gradual increase up to 28% at the first cutoff (of students with a matrix score


12
     Throughout this paper we standardize scale scores from each exam within grade and year across the district.
13
     We also test for selective attrition in the RD sample but find little evidence to suggest it is a problem there.

                                                              8
of 56) reflects missing data, qualifying in 7th grade and the district’s appeals process. Upon

reaching the first threshold, GT enrollment jumps to 45 percent. Enrollment increases further at a

steep rate between the two cutoffs, hitting 79% at the second cutoff (62 matrix points). After

reaching the second cutoff, GT enrollment slightly increases further to 82 percent.

           Given the increase in GT over this range is steep but not discontinuous, we convert the

two thresholds into a single cutoff. To do this we map components of the matrix scores into

three-dimensional space as shown in Figure 3. Each axis reflects one of the three portions of the

matrix score that determines eligibility – NNAT points, Stanford/Aprenda points, and other

points, which includes socio-economic status, grades and teacher recommendations. Students

who are on or above the surface are eligible for GT while those below or behind are ineligible.

We then take the Euclidean distance from each student’s total matrix points to the closest integer

combination on the surface. 14 The resulting value, which we call the distance to the qualification

threshold, equals zero if the student just barely qualifies for GT. Figure 4 shows GT enrollment

as a function of Euclidean distance from the qualification threshold. Students just below the

cutoff have a 25% likelihood of being in GT, however students just above the threshold have a

likelihood of approximately 79 percent. 15

           Since qualification for GT via the observed matrix score does not translate perfectly with

enrollment in GT due to appeals, substitute exams, opt-outs, and data issues, our estimation

strategy uses a “fuzzy RD” model where we conduct a two-stage least squares regression within


14
     The Euclidean distance is measured as
                                                                                             where i refers to the
student’s own score and s refers to the closest integer combination on the surface. We thank Jake Vigdor for first
suggesting this method to us.
15
   Note that by construction the distance measure has an empty mass between 0 and 1 and -1 and 0 since the smallest
distance to another integer point is 1.

                                                        9
a range of values that includes the cutoff (Hahn, Todd and Van der Klaauw, 2001; Lee and

Lemieux, 2009). For most of this paper we will use ten distance units below and above the cutoff

for our bandwidth since the relationships between distance and the achievement outcomes are

close to linear over this range, allowing us to use a linear smoother. We show later that our

results are not sensitive to the choice of bandwidth. Hence, we estimate the following two-stage

least squares (2SLS) model:

     1          ,


      2     ,                    ,


where Aboveit is an indicator for whether student i in year t has a distance measure above the

cutoff, Distance is the Euclidean distance of the student’s matrix score to the eligibility cutoff,

and X is a set of pre-existing (5th grade) observable characteristics which includes the 5th grade

dependent variable (e.g. lagged achievement), gender, ethnicity, gifted status, and LEP status.

GT is an indicator for whether the student is enrolled in a GT program in year t + k and Y is test

scores, attendance, or disciplinary infractions in that year. Since students are tested in January of

each year, we focus on scores in the second year after evaluation (7th grade) as assessment in the

first year will only provide five months of program exposure, although we provide estimates for

6th grade outcomes in the online appendix.



2. GT Magnet Evaluation Using School Lotteries

          LUSD has two middle schools with GT magnet programs that are over-subscribed, and as

a result the district uses lotteries to allocate available spaces. 16 While the losers of the lottery still

16
  There are 8 middle schools with GT magnet programs in total (out of 41 traditional middle schools), but only two
are over-subscribed. By seventh grade, of the 109 lottery losers, 21 enroll in one of the lottery magnet schools, while

                                                          10
have the opportunity to receive GT services in their neighborhood school, the two magnet

schools are considered to be premium schools because of their large proportions of GT students

and focus on advanced curricula. 17

        Our analysis compares the performance of students who win the lottery and attend one of

the magnet GT programs to those who lose the lottery and either attend a neighborhood GT

program in the district, a magnet school based on a different specialty, or a charter school. Hence

in the lottery sample we estimate the following 2SLS model conditional on applying for

admission to magnet program with a lottery:

                      3

                          4

where GTMagnet is an indicator for attending any GT magnet program, including those that do

not hold a lottery, Admitted is an indicator for being offered a slot at a program with a lottery, X

is a set of student level controls, and        and      are lottery fixed-effects. 18

        One important caveat to the lottery is that students who have an older sibling in the

school are exempted from the lottery and automatically given admission. Unfortunately, LUSD

was unable to provide us with data on siblings. Nonetheless it is likely that this would have, at

most, a negligible impact on our estimates. First of all, while one might be concerned that

students with older siblings differ from others in some unobservable way, the pre-selection


only 5 attend one of the other six GT magnet programs. On the other hand, of the 265 lottery winners, only 3 attend
one of the other six GT magnets in 7th grade.
17
   One of the two lottery schools also has an attendance zone. GT students from the attendance zone bypass the
lottery, hence we drop from our sample any student zoned to that school.
18
   Since we focus only on one cohort, 5th graders in 2007-08 (who are in 7th grade in 2009-10), there is a single
lottery fixed-effect indicator in each regression. Models with 6th grade outcomes, and hence two cohorts of students,
have three indicators. Also note that coding GTMagnet for students who attend a non-lottery GT magnet as zero
instead of one has no effect on the results.


                                                        11
process for entry - all students need to qualify for GT based on their matrix points and need to

follow the same application process for entry into the magnet - mitigates the scope for this type

of selection substantially. Second, if such a selection process was occurring we would expect to

see differences in observables between students offered a slot in the magnet and those not

offered one. As we will show later our lottery sample is very well balanced between “winners,”

including those accepted under the sibling rule, and “losers.”

       An additional concern is whether the presence of an older sibling generates a differential

impact on magnet students. For example, this could happen if having an older sibling in the

school provides a student with help on homework or assistance dealing with teachers. While we

cannot completely rule out such a situation, we note that many lottery losers will have older

siblings in the school they ultimately attend as well, particularly if they attend their local schools.

Hence, unless older sibling benefits differ by magnet status, this phenomenon should have little

impact on the estimates.


IV. Regression Discontinuity Estimates of GT Impacts

1. Data

       Our data consists of the administrative records from 2007-08 to 2009-10. While we have

data for universal assessments conducted in 2006-07, many schools were given exemptions from

the new rules that year in order to allow for an orderly transition to the new system. As such, we

start our sample in 2007-08, the second year of the mandatory GT assessment, and examine

outcomes through the 2009-10 school year. For outcomes we use scale scores standardized

across LUSD within grade and year on the Stanford Achievement Test, as well as attendance

rates and counts of disciplinary infractions warranting an in-school suspension or more severe


                                                  12
punishment. The test results are in standard deviation units for math, reading, language, science

and social studies exams. 19 After restricting the sample to a 20 unit band around the cutoff, we

look at achievement of approximately 2,600 students in one 7th grade cohort and 5,500 students

in two 6th grade cohorts who were evaluated for GT in 5th grade. 20



2. Tests of Validity of RD Design

         A primary concern with any regression-discontinuity analysis is that there is a potential

for manipulation of the forcing variable (qualification for GT) that determines treatment. Such

manipulation could bias the results if it is correlated with outcomes (Lee and Lemieux, 2009). In

Online Appendix Figure 1, we provide density plots around the discontinuity. Differences in

density around the discontinuity are similar in size to changes at other parts of the distribution,

suggesting that manipulation is unlikely to be occurring. 21

         In Table 2 we provide tests of discontinuities in pre-existing (5th grade) student

characteristics. 22 We find no discontinuities in race, gender, LEP status, prior gifted status,

special education status, eligibility for free or reduced-price lunch, disciplinary infractions,


19
   While some LEP students are evaluated using the Aprenda exam, a Spanish-language alternative to the Stanford
Achievement Tests, only 0.5% of 5th grade students in LUSD take only the Aprenda exam and hence have no
Stanford scores. Thus, we drop students who only have Aprenda scores.
20
   Within this bandwidth the total matrix scores have an inter-quartile range of 48 to 65 with a minimum of 39 and a
maximum of 79.
21
   Ideally one would like to conduct McCrary’s (2008) test. Since there are no observations between 1 and 0 or -1
and 0 (see note 16) and there is positive mass between integers further out, this could mistakenly generate a positive
result. Hence, instead we test for discontinuities at the two cutoffs in the total matrix points to check for
manipulation. In both cases the test is statistically insignificant.
22
   A related concern is that laid out by Barreca, Guldi, Lindo and Waddell (2010) that heaping in running variables
could lead to biased estimates if the heaps are correlated with unobservables and the bandwidths are small enough so
that heaps are concentrated only on one side of the cutoff. We do not find any evidence of heaping in the matrix
scores. Nonetheless, by construction some heaping will occur in the transformation from matrix scores to Euclidean
distances. This is not a problem in our context, however, as our bandwidths are wide enough to include substantial
observations both at heaping and non-heaping points on both sides of the cutoff. We will also show later that our
results are quite robust to choice of bandwidth.

                                                         13
attendance rates, and achievement with the exception of math. 23 Given that math is the only

covariate that is significant we believe this to be a spurious result. Nonetheless, since

achievement is highly correlated over time we correct for this by providing results both with and

without controls that include the lagged (5th grade) dependent variable.

         In column (15) we test whether there is any difference in whether a component of the

matrix is missing and find no supporting evidence. This suggests that the fact that some students

are missing data is unlikely to affect our estimates. The next two columns address teacher

evaluations. 24 The concern is that if teachers know that a student is short of the qualification

threshold they may provide a large enough score for certain types of students to overcome it. If

this were the case we would expect to find a discontinuity in the teacher scores or the points in

the matrix the student gets from his or her teacher. We find no statistically significant

discontinuity in either measure of teacher recommendation. Nonetheless, concerns may still

remain about teacher manipulation. Hence, later we provide an additional specification test to

check for bias from teacher manipulation through their recommendations.

         Finally, in columns (18) though (20) we test whether there is a discontinuous likelihood

of being enrolled two years after evaluation. Given that Davis, et al. (2010) find evidence that

high income students are more likely to stay in public schools if identified as GT, we check if

such a phenomenon occurs in LUSD. We find no statistically significant change in the likelihood

of enrollment at the discontinuity regardless of the student’s economic status. Hence, given these

23
   Online Appendix Figures 2 – 4 provide graphical representations of these results. Tests that do not condition on
appearing in the data in 7th grade are similar and are provided in Online Appendix Table 1, along with tests using the
6th grade sample. These are also similar for all measures except for females which shows a small but statistically
significant increase. In Online Appendix Table 2 we provide estimates without clustering of standard errors. These
show no change in the significance levels of the estimates.
24
   Although teacher recommendations are due before achievement scores are calculated, district officials informed
us that many teachers submit their recommendations late.


                                                         14
results and those described above we see little evidence that GT qualifications were manipulated

in a way that would violate the assumptions underlying the RD methodology.



3. Results

        Figure 5 presents the initial reduced-form results for three of the five achievement tests,

and Figure 6 for the other two. These achievement test results are from 7th grade, and thus

encompass about a year and a half of GT program exposure. Our analysis compares students of

up to ten distance units above the GT qualification boundary with students who are no more than

ten units below. 25 The coefficient estimates presented in the first panel of Table 3 as well as the

means provided in Figure 5 show that there is no improvement in reading or language Stanford

scores after a year and a half of GT participation, and that there is a negative and significant

point estimate for math. Figure 6 confirms the findings in columns (4) and (5) of Table 3 of no

discernable impacts on achievement in social studies or science.

        Panel B of Table 3 provides estimates from our preferred specification of equation (2)

that contains student level controls measured during 5th grade including the lagged dependent

variable, race, gender, economic disadvantage, LEP status, and gifted status. In this panel, all of

2SLS estimates are close to zero while math, reading and social science are negative and all t-

statistics are below one. Drawing 95% confidence intervals around the estimates, we can rule out

modest positive impacts of GT on marginal students of 0.06 standard deviations (sd) in math,




25
  Online Appendix Figure 5 shows that our Euclidean distance measure correlates very well with total matrix points
in a linear fashion.

                                                       15
0.09 sd in reading, 0.15 sd in language, 0.13 sd in social studies and 0.23 sd in science. The point

estimates themselves, however, clearly suggest a zero effect. 26

         In columns (6) and (7) we examine impacts on non-cognitive outputs, disciplinary

infractions and attendance rates. While there is no effect on disciplinary infractions, we do find a

marginally significant negative effect on attendance rates. The drop in attendance rates of 1.1

percentage points is equivalent to attending school two fewer days in a 180 day school year. As

we will demonstrate below, however, this estimate is sensitive to specification.

         Panel C presents results that correct for the possibility of teacher manipulation. Even

though our earlier tests did not suggest it to be a substantial problem, we are especially

concerned because an administrator acknowledged that time deadlines are lax for

recommendations leaving opportunities for teachers to “top up” the scores of marginal GT

students to put them over the threshold. We address this possibility by replacing a student’s

matrix points with a synthetic matrix score if the points from a teacher recommendation are

potentially pivotal. That is, for students whose other matrix components place them within 10

points of the cutoff, the teacher recommendation, with a maximum of 10 points, is potentially

determinative. 27 Thus for these students we replace their total matrix score with the predicted

value from a regression using the full 5th grade sample of total matrix points on all matrix

components excluding teacher points:


26
   Online Appendix Table 3 provides results for 6th grade. These are similar to those for 7th grade and are more
precise due to the addition of an extra year of data. For social studies we can rule out effects of 0.15 sd while for
other tests we can rule out impacts of 0.09 sd and higher. Appendix Table 4 provides results with the lagged
dependent variable but without the other covariates. These are similar to the results in Panel B of Table 3. Finally
Appendix Table 5 shows the results to be robust to the inclusion of middle school fixed-effects.
27
   While teacher recommendations would not be pivotal for students within 10 points above the cutoff, only
adjusting scores on one side of the cutoff could introduce bias, particularly if teachers only have information on
some of the components at the time they make their recommendations. Hence, we replace scores within 10 points
above the cutoff with the synthetic scores as well.

                                                          16
                   5

                                                                                    .

where TotalPoints is the student’s final score on the GT qualification matrix, StanfordPoints are

the number of matrix points received from performance on Stanford Achievement Tests,

NNATPoints are matrix points from the non-verbal abilities test, ObstaclePoints are matrix

points from socioeconomic status, and GradePoints are matrix points from the student’s average

grades in 5th grade. We then convert these “synthetic matrix points” to Euclidean distances from

the eligibility surface. This method purges the teacher component from the matrix scores from

any case where the teacher could have influence, freeing the estimates from potential biases from

teacher manipulation.

         The results using the synthetic scores including all controls used in panel B are provided

in panel C. Since we are essentially adding measurement error to the first stage, the cutoff

instruments are considerably weaker. Nonetheless they remain highly significant indicating that a

discontinuity remains. 28 The 2SLS results show negative and insignificant effects for math,

reading, language and social science while science estimates, although positive, are very close to

zero. Discipline results are also similar to those in panel B. On the other hand, attendance

impacts turn positive, albeit they are statistically insignificant. Given the potential influence of

attendance on teacher recommendations, further RD analyses of this outcome should be

interpreted with caution. Nonetheless, since the results for all other outcomes are consistent with

the estimates in panel B, we use the baseline model with controls as our preferred specification.




28
  In Online Appendix Figure 6 we provide a graph of the first stage for the synthetic teacher scores. The point
estimate for the first stage is 0.23 with a standard error of 0.04.

                                                         17
       To test for heterogeneity in program impacts across student characteristics, Table 4

provides 2SLS estimates for 7th grade for various student populations. In general, we find little

evidence of differences by gender, demographics, or economic status. The only distinction is that

the attendance estimates are more negative for women and black students, but we are cautious in

drawing interpretations from this given the results in panel C of Table 3.

       In Table 5 we test the sensitivity to our RD estimates to model specification using our

preferred model with controls. We find that our estimates hold regardless of whether we add

middle school fixed-effects, limit the data to observations with no missing matrix components,

use smaller or wider bandwidths, or conduct local linear regressions with optimal bandwidths

determined by leave-one-out cross validation. However, when we use a quadratic smoother as

the functional form, the estimates show significant improvements in language and science

achievement scores. These results become insignificant using a cubic smoother due to larger

standard errors. Further inspection, however, suggests that this estimate is being driven by

excessive curvature at the discontinuity. Online Appendix Figures 7 and 8 show that the

quadratic estimates are mainly driven by random variation at the discontinuity and hence tend to

overestimate what appears to be the true impact. As such, we believe a linear smoother captures

the correct estimates.

       A further concern is that the lack of positive effects may be due to top-coding of the

exams. Since GT students are high-achievers many of them may not be able to exhibit growth on

achievement tests as they are very close to answering every question correctly. To address this,

in Online Appendix Figures 9 – 13 we provide distribution plots of raw scores on each of the 7th

grade Stanford Achievement Tests for students with Euclidean distances between -10 and 10. In



                                                18
all cases the mass of the distribution is centered far from the maximum score. For example in

math the modal score is 62 out of 80 while it is 67 out of 84 for reading leaving substantial room

for improvement.

         Another potential reason for not finding an effect of GT services on student outcomes is

that there may be little treatment on students. In Table 6, however, we illustrate the extent to

which entering GT generates a measureable treatment. We estimate the impact of GT on peer

achievement, where a student’s peers are determined by other students in a grade-teacher-course

cell, 29 enrollment in “Vanguard” classes which are pre-Advanced Placement classes with

advanced curricula targeted to gifted students, school choices, and teacher quality.

         Teacher quality is measured through the use of teacher fixed-effects. These are estimated

using a procedure in the spirit of Kane and Staiger (2008). Specifically, we use teacher-student

linked achievement data for LUSD middle school students from 2007-08 to 2009-10 to estimate

the following model

                       6                                                        γ     δ

where Y is achievement in a given subject, and X is a set of student level controls for economic

status, gender, race/ethnicity, special education status, and LEP status. Z is a set of controls for

mean peer achievement (defined at the grade-course-teacher level) in each Stanford

Achievement Test. Finally, δ is a set of school fixed effects and γ is a set of teacher fixed




29
  Ideally one would like to use the actual classroom as the peer group. Unfortunately specific course section data are
not available. To test the extent to which this is an issue, in Online Appendix Table 6 we sort students in to synthetic
classrooms of at most 35 students under the assumption that students are tracked by their 5th grade achievement in
the given subject (row (i)) or randomly (row (ii)). With the exception of math in 7th grade the estimated change in
peer achievement is similar to those found in Table 6 under both assumptions.

                                                          19
effects. 30 Kain and Staiger (2008) show that a similar framework closely replicates the results

from a randomized allocation of students to teachers. 31

         Table 6 shows in columns (1) to (5) that peer achievement is between 0.24 and 0.35

standard deviations higher for GT students relative to non-GT students. 32 The table also shows

that GT students are more likely to enroll in Vanguard classes and attend a GT magnet program.

Interestingly, most of the school switching does not appear to come from students leaving their

zoned school for GT magnets. Rather, students appear to move from schools other than their

zoned school – mostly non-GT magnets – to the GT magnets. Finally, and perhaps surprisingly,

GT students do not appear to get assigned better teachers as measured by teacher fixed effects.

This may be due to the fact that in many schools both GT and non-GT students can access

advanced classes taught by the same teacher. Nonetheless, the change in peers and the increase

in enrollment in advanced classes suggest that the lack of achievement improvements arises in

spite of what is generally viewed to be positive treatments. We also note that results for 6th grade

are stronger as they show peer differences of 0.37 to 0.46 standard deviations as well as larger

differences in Vanguard class enrollment. These are provided in Online Appendix Table 8.




30
   We estimate this model such that each observation is assigned a weight equal to the teacher’s share of classes
taught to a student in a given subject. For example if a student takes a class in US history and another class in
geography, then the student will have two observations in the social studies regression, one for each class, where he
would be given a weight of ½ for each observation. Additionally, since the Stanford exams are given in January, we
assign to each student the teachers they had in the spring of the previous academic year and the fall of the current
academic year.
31
   Our model diverges from Kain and Staiger (2008) in two key ways. First, they use a random effects rather than
fixed effects framework. We prefer the latter as it allows for weaker identification assumptions. Second, they utilize
a Bayesian smoother that adjusts estimates for teachers with few observations towards the mean. While this strategy
is important when trying to identify the influence of teachers on students, it is inappropriate in our context where we
are trying to see if GT students receive higher quality teachers as teachers with fewer observations will tend to be
younger and less experienced and hence pushing their estimates to the mean would give us biased measures of
actual teacher quality.
32
   Reduced form and first stage results are provided in Online Appendix Table 7.

                                                         20
Below we investigate potential explanations for these findings, but first we turn to our analysis of

GT magnet lotteries.



IV. Estimates of the Impact of Attending a GT Magnet Using Randomized Lotteries

       One reason the RD analysis does not show positive impacts from GT services on student

outcomes may be that the qualification boundary is set low enough so that students who

marginally qualify for GT services are not be able to take advantage of the purported benefits,

and thus show no differences with respect to the marginal students not using GT services.

Because the RD analysis is a LATE, it is not possible to examine GT effectiveness on other parts

of the student quality distribution. Hence, in this section we present results using lotteries for the

two GT magnet middle schools. Because the lottery is random, the comparison is across the

entire distribution of those who apply. While these students are higher achieving than marginal

GT students on average, they also cover a wide range of achievement. The disadvantage,

however, is that the lottery losers have a range of alternative experiences, so the comparison

treatment is not as clear as for the RD. Additionally, in this analysis we are asking a different

question. While in the RD we examine the impact of being in GT or not, in the lottery analysis

we identify the impact of gaining a more intense treatment conditional on being classified as GT

and applying for the treatment.



1. Data

       Our lottery sample is derived from the set of 5th grade students determined to be eligible

for GT in 2007-08 who apply for admission to one of the two middle schools with an over-



                                                 21
subscribed GT magnet program. 33 We restrict our analysis to students who are observed to be

enrolled in LUSD in 5th grade as these are the only students for whom we have pre-lottery

characteristics. Also, this restriction reduces the likelihood of endogenous attrition as students

who enter the lottery from outside LUSD would be more likely to leave if they lose the lottery,

as many have previously attended private or charter schools. In addition, one of the two schools

has a regular program for students in the attendance zone.34 Since students zoned to the school

do not participate in the lottery, we drop them from the sample as well.

         While admission for non-zoned students is determined by a lottery, our data does not

directly provide the lottery numbers or outcomes. Instead we can identify whether a student is

offered admission or put on a wait list. We can further identify whether a student is offered a

spot off of the wait list which are allocated based on the student’s lottery number. Students with

an older sibling in the school are exempt from the lottery, but as discussed above we believe the

impact of this on our results is negligible. In total the sample includes 542 students who

participate in a lottery. Of these 394 are offered admission and 148 are not. By 7th grade 440

students including 331 winners (84%) and 109 losers (74%) remain in LUSD. The treatment

received by the lottery losers varies, as they can attend GT classes in their neighborhood school,

a charter, or in a non-GT magnet school that is open to all students. Since there is some non-

33
   The application process involves a single form where students may apply to up to three of the eight magnet
schools. Students also list which is their 1st, 2nd and 3rd choice schools. Unfortunately our data only informs us of
whether a person is offered a spot or wait listed and does not have direct information on applications. Hence if a
student is offered a spot at his or her first choice school we do not know if they applied for the other school.
Nonetheless, we find no cases where a student is placed on the wait list for one of the lottery schools and offered a
spot or waitlisted at the second while there are multiple instances whereby students are waitlisted at a lottery school
and offered a slot at a non-lottery magnet. Hence, it appears that applying to both lottery magnets was very rare
behavior in our data.
34
   The second school does not have zoned students, although it does include a program for students with severe
physical disabilities such as blindness and deafness. Students who are enrolled in this alternative program are not
included in our lottery sample.


                                                          22
compliance with the lotteries we employ a 2SLS strategy that instruments GT magnet attendance

with lottery outcomes. 35



2. Tests of Validity of Lottery Design

         Table 7 presents the balancing tests for the lottery sample. The results strongly suggest

that the lotteries for both magnet middle schools are conducted in a random way, as the ex-ante

baseline (5th grade) sample has no significant coefficient on any of the twenty covariates we

test. 36 When we look at the ex-post estimation (7th grade) sample, we again find no significant

differences between winners and losers except for math which is significantly higher for winners

at the 10% level. Although having one significant result out of twenty regressions can be

spurious, it is nonetheless possible that this is due to differential attrition between lottery winners

and losers. Indeed, when we estimate the impact of winning a lottery on attrition by 7th grade we

find that lottery winners are 11 percentage points less likely to attrit (standard error of 0.04).

         We thus use these results to inform our specification and analysis in three ways. First, as

with the RD analysis, we present our results both with and without controls for lagged student

scores as well as demographic characteristics. Second, we use a weighting procedure in the

regressions that mimics the original lottery sample in order to correct for potential attrition bias.

To do this we reweight the sample by the inverse of the predicted probabilities from a probit of

attrition on 5th grade student characteristics. 37 Third, we estimate bounds on the impact of GT



35
   By 7th grade 67% of lottery winners attend a magnet with a lottery while 17% attend another school and 16%
leave the district. For lottery losers, 18% attend a lottery campus in 7th grade while 56% attend a different school and
26% leave the district.
36
   Results for the 6th grade sample are similar as are results where standard errors are not clustered. These are
provided in Online Appendix Tables 9 and 10.
37
   Results of the probit regression are provided in Online Appendix Table 11.

                                                          23
using a procedure proposed by Engberg, et. al. (2010). The procedure uses observable

characteristics to estimate the proportion of the sample that includes students of various types

including those who are at risk of leaving LUSD if they lose the lottery. Then, through a

generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator, upper and lower bounds are generated. The

upper bound assumes students at risk of leaving due to losing the lottery have achievement equal

to the mean of students who stay and comply with the lottery results, while the lower bound

assumes these same students score at the 95th percentile of the outcome distribution for all

staying participants. 38



3. Results for GT Magnet Programs

         Two-stage least squares estimates of the impact on student achievement from attending

one of the two magnet GT programs are shown in Table 8. Reduced-form estimates are provided

in Online Appendix Table 12. 39 We provide both unweighted (rows 1 and 2) and inverse

probability weighted (rows 3 and 4) estimates where the latter corrects for possible attrition bias.

In rows (5) and (6) we provide upper and lower bounds that account for potential attrition bias

using the Engberg, et al. (2010) methodology.

         The results in Table 8 using our preferred specification of weighting with controls (row

4) suggest that, with the exception of science, which shows a 0.28 sd improvement, there is little

impact of attending a GT magnet on achievement or attendance. 40 Due to the small sample sizes


38
   That is, the upper bound assumes students at risk of leaving have only average scores, while the lower bound
assumes they are in the upper tail. These assumptions are those suggested by Engberg, et al. (2010).
39
   The first stage is always significant at the 1% level with point estimates of 0.57 (standard error of 0.06) for
unweighted and 0.47 (0.11) for weighted regressions. Detailed first-stage results are available upon request.
40
   Note that teacher manipulation is not a concern in this identification strategy, hence we can use the attendance
results with confidence. Additionally, we do not provide discipline results as only 4% of students in the lottery
sample have any disciplinary infractions in 7th grade.

                                                          24
the estimates are somewhat imprecise, particularly using the inverse-probability weighted model.

Even so, we note that when one looks at row (4) the point estimates for math, reading and social

studies are negative and the estimate for language is effectively zero. 41 Hence, we believe these

estimates provide strong evidence of a lack of positive impact of attending a magnet on

achievement other than in science. 42 The bounding analysis in rows (5) and (6) confirm the

results in row (4). 43 Once again we see little to suggest that there is any substantial positive

impact on math, reading, language and social studies. For science, the lower bound does drop to

zero which suggests that the positive result there may be due to attrition bias, but it nonetheless

confirms that there is at least no negative impact on science scores.44

         In Table 9 we investigate to what extent there is an observable difference in treatment

from attending a GT magnet. In particular, we focus on differences in peer achievement and

teacher quality as measured by the teacher-fixed effects methodology described in Section 4.3

which are substantial. 45 Using the weighted estimates, students who attend magnets gain peers,

measured at the grade-course-teacher level, who score on average between 0.7 and 1.2 standard



41
   Results for 6th grade, provided in Online Appendix Table 13, show somewhat larger, albeit still insignificant in the
preferred model, impacts for math and language and no impact for science. They also show a significant negative
impact on attendance of -0.6 percentage points (roughly one fewer day per year).
42
   Top-coding of exams is a potentially even larger concern here than in the RD since the achievement levels of the
lottery sample are higher. In Online Appendix Figures 14 - 18 we provide distribution plots of raw scores on 7th
grade exams by lottery winners and losers. Although the mass of achievement is further to the right than in the RD
sample, there nonetheless appears to be substantial room for achievement to improve for most students. Hence we
do not believe that top-coding explains our lack of positive effects.
43
   We do not provide bounding analyses for attendance as it performs poorly when the mean outcome is centered
near a top-code as it tends to estimate outcomes to be above the top-code, which is the case in this sample since
mean 5th grade attendance rates are 98.0 with a maximum of 100.
44
   Online Appendix Table 14 shows lottery results when we use attending a lottery magnet specifically as treatment
(e.g. place non-lottery magnets in same category as neighborhood GT) and when we identify students who are taken
off the wait list as losing the lottery. In both cases the results are similar to baseline except that science impacts
become statistically insignificant.
45
   Estimates without controls and estimates for 6th grade are provided in Online Appendix Table 16 and are similar
to those shown in Table 9.

                                                          25
deviations higher than peers for the lottery losers. 46 Additionally, teachers are of higher quality.

A student who attends a GT magnet gains math teachers who add an average of 0.09 sd to

student achievement and English and Social Studies teachers who add 0.03 and 0.04 sd to

achievement, respectively. 47 Finally, in Online Appendix Table 17 we investigate whether there

is any variation in the estimates by student types. Due to the small sample we are limited in how

finely we can cut the data, but nonetheless we find no discernable patterns across subpopulations.

Hence it is clear that GT magnet students gain large improvements in their educational

environment yet provide little evidence of improvement in achievement except in science. In the

next section we discuss some potential explanations for the lack of positive impacts in both the

RD and lottery analyses despite the apparent improvements.



V. Discussion

         Given that we have established that GT students experience substantial treatments

including better peers, more advanced courses (in the RD analysis), and higher quality teachers

(in the lottery analysis), it is perplexing that we find little evidence of positive impacts on

achievement. One possibility is that our achievement measure is not well suited to discerning

improvements in gifted students. This would be particularly worrisome if we were to use a state

accountability exam targeted towards low achieving students, but less of an issue with Stanford

Achievement Test. Indeed, we have already shown that there is little evidence of bunching near


46
   In Online Appendix Table 15 we provide results under assumptions of student sorting into sections by ability or
randomly as was done in Appendix Table 6 for the RD analysis. The results generally show similar levels of peer
improvement where the difference does not fall below 0.5 standard deviations in any case.
47
   As in the RD analysis, we also look at differences in course level. While there are no significant differences in 7th
grade in the likelihood of enrolling in Vanguard courses, in 6th grade students who attend magnets are approximately
10 percentage points more likely to take vanguard courses in math, English and social studies while they are 9
percentage points more likely to take Vanguard in science.

                                                          26
the maximum score (top-coding) in either the RD or lottery samples. Nonetheless, it is possible

that the additional course material taught in GT classes may not be well aligned with topics

covered in the achievement test. 48 While we cannot rule out this possibility, we note that the

improvement in peers would be expected to generate higher achievement even if the curriculum

is not well targeted to the exam.

        Another potential explanation is marginal students may suffer due to difficulty with more

advanced material. In this view, the eligibility cut-off may be set at an inappropriate level as it

leads the district to classify students who are unable to deal with the advanced GT material.

While this explanation could be relevant for the RD results, we demonstrate that the lottery

sample includes higher achieving students for whom the advanced material would be more

suitable. We therefore end up with a puzzle whereby we have a lack of impact from a very large

change in peer achievement and other inputs that are generally thought to improve achievement.

        Given the strength with which peer effects have been found to operate in several different

contexts, one would expect that we would find achievement improvements simply from the peer

effects alone (Angrist and Lang, 2004; Duflo, Dupas and Kremer, 2010; Hoxby and Weingarth,

2006; Imberman, Kugler and Sacerdote, 2009; Lavy, Paserman and Schlosser, 2008; Lavy and

Schlosser, 2007). Nonetheless, one possible reason for finding no impact of the differential GT

resources is that the peer effect, in addition to the potential benefits found in the literature cited

above, also has a potential cost as entering GT may reduce a student’s relative ranking within the

class. This could generate negative impacts through an invidious comparison model of peer



48
  Ideally, one would like to test some outcomes that might better align with the GT curriculum such as college-
going, SAT scores, and AP/IB exam scores. Unfortunately, since the matrix and lottery data are only available for
the last few years, not enough time has elapsed to investigate these outcomes.

                                                        27
effects where one’s own performance falls with a reduction in one’s position in the within-

classroom achievement distribution (Hoxby and Weingarth, 2006).

       There is substantial evidence from the educational psychology and sociology literature,

moreover, that students who are placed in higher achieving ability groups can be psychologically

harmed. A measure that is commonly used in this literature is the idea of a student’s “self

concept,” how a student perceives his or her own abilities relative to an objective metric such as

achievement. Marsh, Chessor, Craven and Roche (1995) compare GT students to observably

similar students in mixed GT and non-GT classes and find that GT students show declines in

their math and reading self concept. Additionally, Zeidner and Schleyer (1999) find lower self

concept and more test anxiety in gifted students in ability segregated classrooms. Similar results

are also found by Preckel, Gotz and Frenzel (2010) and Ireson, Haliam and Plewis (2010).

       Since we do not have direct evidence on student confidence, we make use of student

course grades to test whether the necessary conditions are met for an invidious comparison

model to be valid. It is uncertain to what extent course grades reflect absolute levels of

achievement compared to achievement relative to other students. Nonetheless, course grades are

used by students to assess their own performance, and thus may provide some information as to

how students perceive their own relative rank. Additionally, although it is difficult to establish

causality, there is nonetheless a link between grades and students’ self-concept (Marsh,

Trautweing, Ludtke, Koller and Baumert, 2005), satisfaction (Howard and Maxwell, 1980), and

self-worth/self-esteem (Crocker, Karpinski, Quinn and Chase, 2003; Owens, 1994). In Panel I of

Table 10 we provide estimates of the impact of GT enrollment on course grades in the RD model

and of attending a GT magnet on grades in the lottery analysis. In both cases there are clear



                                               28
reductions in grades. For the RD sample grades fall by a statistically significant 4 points out of

100 (3 points changes a grade from a B+ to a B, for example) in math and by 2 to 3 points in

other subjects, although these estimates are not statistically significant for 7th grade. 49 For the

lottery analysis the grade reductions are even more dramatic with drops of 7 points in math, 8 in

science, and 4 in social studies using the inverse-probability weighted regressions.

         In addition to the raw grades it is useful to consider how students’ rankings within their

peer groups differ by treatment status, as this provides a direct measure of how a student

perceives his or her position in the achievement distribution. We assume that students mostly

compare themselves to their school-mates who take the same courses. Thus, we rank students

within each school-grade-course cell by their final course grades and convert these rankings to

percentiles. Figures 7 and 8 demonstrate that the rankings based on 7th grade courses exhibit

notable drops when students cross the GT eligibility threshold. In panel II.A of Table 10, we

provide regression results while adding controls for race, gender, economic disadvantage, LEP,

and prior gifted status. The results show that marginal GT students have a relative rank of 13 to

21 percentiles lower than marginal non-GT students in 7th grade. Panel II.B provides the impact

of attending a GT magnet on rank and finds that magnet students in 7th grade are nearly 30

percentile rankings lower than the non-magnet students.

         To the extent that the negative estimates for grades and rank in the RD analysis reflects

absolute changes in learning, this suggests that the more difficult course work could be ill suited

to students at the eligibility margin. However, we would not expect the lottery participants to be

ill suited to more difficult coursework given their high positions in the GT achievement

49
  In the RD sample we also find a significant drop in reading grades in 6th grade, and among students who take
reading in 7th grade of four points. For the lottery sample, however, only a handful of students take reading in 7th
grade and hence the estimates are very imprecise.

                                                          29
distribution. Additionally, we find little difference in the likelihood of enrolling in a “Vanguard”

class between lottery winners and losers which serves as a proxy for curricular differences. Thus,

it seems likely that some portion of the grade effects reflect changes in relative rank. Hence, the

necessary conditions are clearly met for invidious comparison to play a role offsetting the

expected positive impact of course selection, teacher quality, and peer effects.


VI. Summary and Conclusion

       In this paper, we identify the impact of providing gifted and talented services on student

achievement and behavior. We exploit a unique universal evaluation in a large urban school

district in the Southwest US where all students are evaluated for GT eligibility in 5th grade

regardless of prior GT status. This allows us to specify a regression discontinuity for students on

either side of the eligibility cutoff, and examine achievement, attendance and discipline

differences by 7th grade. We also exploit a second data set, where two of the middle schools with

GT magnet programs in this district are over-subscribed and conduct lotteries to determine

admission amongst a pool of eligible GT students. The advantage of the two different

identification strategies is that we examine not only the marginal GT students in the RD, but also

a much wider portion of the ability distribution in the lottery analysis. The caveat in our

strategies, however, is that the alternative to GT treatment varies. Marginal students not admitted

to the GT program take “regular” classes, while students that lose the lottery receive GT services

but in a less intensive atmosphere than that provided in the magnet schools.

       Our analysis shows that both the RD and lottery samples meet the standard validity tests,

with the main exception that lottery losers are more likely to leave the district. We correct for

attrition in the lottery sample through inverse probability weighting for our estimates and we also


                                                30
generate coefficient bounds using a procedure proposed by Engberg, et al. (2010).

       The RD results indicate that GT services generate little impact on achievement for

students on the margin of qualifying. For the lottery analysis we also find little evidence of

improvement in achievement or attendance with the exception of science. These results are

surprising given that we find large improvements in peer achievement on the order of 0.3

standard deviations in the RD analysis, and 0.7 to 1.2 standard deviations in the lottery analysis.

In addition, we find that students on the margin of GT eligibility enroll in more advanced classes,

while students that gain admittance to the premier GT magnet schools gain higher quality

teachers. The estimates from these two samples and specifications are reduced forms, in that they

do not differentiate among the many mechanisms by which student achievement might be

impacted. Nonetheless, we are able to rule out maximum score truncation as a potential

explanation. Additionally, while a lack of alignment of the curriculum to the tests could play a

role, it does not explain the lack of response to substantial improvement in peers. Further, while

difficulty with the advanced material could explain the RD results for marginal students, it does

not explain the magnet lottery results.

       Finally, we find that raw course grades and students’ relative rankings amongst his or her

peers as measured by grades fall substantially in both the RD and lottery models. Along with the

lack of achievement improvements in spite of large improvements in peer quality, this result is

consistent with an invidious comparison model of peer effects, whereby students are demoralized

or garner fewer teacher resources by being placed lower in the achievement distribution of their

class. The possibility that GT students are subject to invidious comparisons is suggestive of

limitations to the benefits of having better peers and more educational inputs.



                                                31
VII. References

Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang. “Does Schooling Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence
   from Boston’s Metco Program,” American Economic Review, 94 (2004): 1613-1634.

Argys, Laura, Daniel Rees, and Dominic Brewer. "Detracking America's Schools: Equity at Zero
   Cost?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 15, no. 4 (1996): 623-645.

Barecca, Alan I., Melanie Guldi, Jason M. Lindo, and Greg R. Waddell. “Running and Jumping
   Variables in Regression Discontinuity Designs.” University of Oregon, mimeo (2010).

Betts, Julian, and Jaimie Shkolnik. "The Effects of Ability Grouping on Student Achievement
   and Resource Allocation in Secondary Schools." Economics of Education Review 19, no. 1
   (2000): 1-15.

Bhatt, Rachana. "The Impacts of Gifted and Talented Education." SSRN Working Paper No. 09-
   11 (2009).

Crocker, Jennifer, Andrew Karpinski, Diane M. Quinn and Sara K. Chase. “When Grades
   Determine Self-Worth: Consequences of Contingent Self-Worth for Male and Female
   Engineering and Psychology Majors.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85, no.
   3 (2003): 507 – 516.

Davis, Billie, John Engberg, Dennis N. Epple, Holger Sieg, and Ron Zimmer, “Evaluating the
   Gifted Program of an Urban School District using a Modified Regression Discontinuity
   Design,” NBER Working Paper #16414, September, 2010.

Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentivers, and the
   Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” American
   Economic Review, forthcoming.

Engberg, John, Dennis Epple, Jason Imbrogno, Holger Sieg and Ron Zimmer. “Evaluating
   Education Programs That Have Lotteried Admission and Selective Attrition.” University of
   Pennsylvania, miemo (2010).

Epple, Dennis, Elizabeth Newton, and Richard Romano. "Ability Tracking, School Competition,
   and the Distribution of Educational Benefits." Journal of Public Economics 83, no. 1 (2002):
   1-48.

Figlio, David, and Marianne Page. "School Choice and the Distributional Effects of Ability
    Tracking: Does Separation Increase Equality?" Journal of Urban Economics 51, no. 3
    (2002): 497-514.




                                              32
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. "Identification and Estimation of
   Treatment Effects With a Regression-Discontinuity Design." Econometrica 69, no. 1 (2001):
   201-209.

Howard, George S. and Scott E. Maxwell. “Correlation Between Student Satisfaction and
  Grades: A Case of Mistaken Causation?” Journal of Educational Psychology 72, no. 6
  (1980): 810 – 820.

Hoxby, Caroline and Gretchen Weingarth. “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School
   Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects,” American Economic Association Annual
   Meetings, http://www.aeaweb.org/annual_mtg_papers/2006/0108_1300_0803.pdf (2006).

Imberman, Scott A., Adriana D. Kugler, and Bruce I. Sacerdote. "Katrina's Children: Evidence
   on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees." University of Houston, mimeo
   (2009).

Ireson, Judith, Susan Haliam and Ian Plewis. “Ability Grouping in Secondary Schools: Effects
    on Pupil’s Self-Concepts.” British Journal of Educational Psychology 71, no. 2 (2010): 315 –
    326.

Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas O. Staiger. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement:
   An Experimental Evaluation.” NBER Working Paper No. 14607 (2008).

Kulik, Chen-lin, and James Kulik. "Ability Grouping." In Handbook of Gifted Education, edited
   by Nicholas Colangelo and Gary Davis, 230-242. Boston: Allyn and Bacon (1997).

Lavy, Victor, M. Daniele Paserman and Analia Schlosser. “Inside the Black Box of Ability Peer
   Effects: Evidence from Variation in High and Low Achievers in the Classroom,” NBER
   Working Paper no. 14415 (2008).

Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser. “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at School,”
   NBER Working Paper no. 13292 (2007).

Lee, David, and Thomas Lemieux. "Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics." NBER
   Working Paper No. 14723, 2009.

Marsh, Herbert W., Danuta Chessor, Rhonda Craven and Lawrence Roche. “The Effects of
  Gifted and Talented Programs on Academic Self-Concept: The Big Fish Strikes Again.”
  American Educational Research Journal 32, no. 2 (1995): 285-319.

McCrary, Justin. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity Design:
  A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics 142, no. 2 (2008): 698 – 714.




                                              33
Neal, Derek, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. "Left Behind by Design: Proficiency Counts
   and Test-Based Accountability." Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 2 (2010): 263 –
   283.

Owens, Timothy J. “Two Diminsions of Self-Esteem: Reciprocal Effects of Positive Self-Worth
  and Self-Deprecation on Adolescent Problems.” American Sociological Review 59, no. 3
  (1994): 391 - 407.

Preckel, Franzis , Thomas Gotz and Anne Frenzel. “Ability Grouping of Gifted Students: Effects
   on Academic Self-Concept and Boredom.” British Journal of Educational Psychology 80
   (2010), no. 3: 451 - 472.

Reback, Randall. "Teaching to the Rating: School Accountability and the Distribution of Student
   Achievement." Journal of Public Economics 92, no. 5-6 (2008): 1394-1415.

Zeidner, Moshe and Esther Jane Schleyer. “The Big-Fish-Little-Pond Effect for Academic Self-
   Concept, Test Anxiety and School Grades in Gifted Children.” Contemporary Educational
   Psychology 24, no. 4 (1999): 305 – 329.




                                              34
Figure 1 - Gifted and Talented Matrix for GT Entry in 2008-09
                                                 Figure 2: Gifted Status in 7th Grade
                                                     by 5th Grade Matrix Score
                                        1
                 Receiving G&T Services
                 .4
                  4      .6     .8
  Probability of R
0     .2




                                            30   40             50            60               70   80
                                                  Euclidean Distance to Closest Elegibility Point
                         Figure 3: Surface Plot of GT Qualification by Matrix Points

               40


               35


               30


                25

Other Points    20

                15

                10

                    5

                     0
                     4
                         8
                     12

  NNAT Points            16
                             20
                             24
                                                                                                                                                   38 39 40
                              28                                                                           26 27 28 29 30   31 32 33 34 35 36 37
                                                                           16 17 18 19   20 21 22 23 24 25
                                                                13 14 15
                                               6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                                   0 1 2 3 4 5
                                                               Stanford /Aprenda Achievement Test Points
Figure 4: Gifted Status in 7th Grade by Distance to Boundary
              Based on 5th Grade Matrix Points
                                        1
                 Receiving G&T Services
                 .4
                  4      .6     .8
  Probability of R
0     .2




                                            -10       -5                 0                   5      10
                                                  Euclidean Distance to Closest Elegibility Point
Stanford Achievement Test - Standard Deviations         Figure 5: Stanford Math, Reading & Language in
                                                              7th Grade by Distance to Boundary
    .4        .6      .8        1      1.2




                                                  -10            -5                  0                   5       10
                                                               Euclidean Distance to Closest Elegibility Point

                                                                     Math       Reading        Language
                ment Test - Standard Deviations         Figure 6: Stanford Social Studies & Science in
                                                             7th Grade by Distance to Boundary
                      .6       .8      1
Stanford Achievem
        .2     .4
                4




                                                  -10           -5                  0                   5       10
                                                              Euclidean Distance to Closest Elegibility Point

                                                                        Social Studies      Science
                                   Figure 7: Rank in Course by Final Grade
                                    in 7th Grade by Distance to Boundary
                                              Math and English
          65
  ank (Percentiles)
       55      60
Ra
50        45




                      -10                  -5                  0                   5                               10
                                         Euclidean Distance to Closest Elegibility Point

                                                            Math          English
                      Students with multiple courses in a subject are given the average rank over those courses.
                                    Figure 8: Rank in Course by Final Grade
                                     in 7th Grade by Distance to Boundary
                                           Social Studies and Science
          65      60
   ank (Percentiles)
     50    55
 Ra
45        40




                       -10                  -5                  0                   5                               10
                                          Euclidean Distance to Closest Elegibility Point

                                                       Social Studies           Science
                       Students with multiple courses in a subject are given the average rank over those courses.
                                        Table 1 - Characteristics of Students Evaluated for Middle School GT in 2007-08
                                                     A. All 5th Grade Students                                      B. GT Magnet Lottery Sample
                                        Gifted in                                                                         Not in GT Magnet
                                      2009-10 (7th         Not Gifted in      Not in Sample in      In GT Magnet in               in            Not in Sample in
                                         Grade)              2009-10              2009-10               2009-10                2009-10              2009-10
                                                                   A. 5th Grade Characteristics
Female                                    0.54                 0.48                  0.50                  0.51                  0.54                  0.57
                                         (0.50)               (0.50)                (0.50)                (0.50)                (0.50)                (0.50)
Economically Disadvantaged                0.59                 0.89                  0.81                  0.24                  0.41                  0.17
                                         (0.49)               (0.31)                (0.39)                (0.43)                (0.49)                (0.37)
LEP                                       0.23                 0.37                  0.28                  0.02                  0.06                  0.04
                                         (0.42)               (0.48)                (0.45)                (0.15)                (0.24)                (0.20)
Asian                                     0.11                 0.02                  0.03                  0.28                  0.16                  0.19
                                         (0.31)               (0.13)                (0.18)                (0.45)                (0.37)                (0.39)
Black                                     0.13                 0.28                  0.33                  0.12                  0.21                  0.18
                                         (0.34)               (0.45)                (0.47)                (0.32)                (0.41)                (0.38)
Hispanic                                  0.52                 0.66                  0.56                  0.22                  0.23                  0.14
                                         (0.50)               (0.47)                (0.50)                (0.41)                (0.42)                (0.35)
White                                     0.24                 0.04                  0.09                  0.38                  0.40                  0.50
                                         (0.43)               (0.19)                (0.28)                (0.49)                (0.49)                (0.50)
Gifted                                    0.68                 0.06                  0.15                  0.85                  0.85                  0.83
                                         (0.47)               (0.25)                (0.36)                (0.36)                (0.36)                (0.37)
Stanford Math                             0.74                 0.06                  0.18                  1.61                  1.39                  1.72
                                         (0.59)               (0.39)                (0.47)                (0.79)                (0.71)                (1.03)
Stanford Reading                          0.64                 -0.02                 0.11                  1.72                  1.60                  1.83
                                         (0.41)               (0.39)                (0.47)                (0.78)                (0.77)                (0.87)
Stanford Language                         0.74                 -0.16                 0.01                  1.61                  1.48                  1.83
                                         (0.59)               (0.57)                (0.67)                (0.84)                (0.76)                (0.94)
Stanford Social Science                   0.43                 -0.61                 -0.42                 1.52                  1.48                  1.75
                                         (0.68)               (0.68)                (0.80)                (0.86)                (0.84)                (0.91)
Stanford Science                          0.50                 -0.50                 -0.30                 1.47                  1.36                  1.61
                                         (0.66)               (0.65)                (0.76)                (0.89)                (0.79)                (0.95)
Disciplinary Infractions                  0.04                 0.21                  0.25                  0.02                  0.05                  0.01
                                         (0.26)               (0.73)                (0.87)                (0.15)                (0.24)                (0.10)
Attendence Rate                          98.26                97.25                 96.58                 98.35                 97.98                 97.00
                                         (2.35)               (4.52)                (4.95)                (2.00)                (2.34)                (3.75)
                                                                       B, 7th Grade Outcomes
Stanford Math                             1.11                 -0.40                  -                    1.70                  1.53                   -
                                         (0.45)               (0.41)                  -                   (0.84)                (0.86)                  -
Stanford Reading                          0.95                 -0.31                  -                    1.66                  1.58                   -
                                         (0.37)               (0.38)                  -                   (0.66)                (0.72)                  -
Stanford Language                         1.08                 0.17                   -                    1.59                  1.44                   -
                                         (0.57)               (0.58)                  -                   (0.80)                (0.72)                  -
Stanford Social Science                   0.88                 -0.09                  -                    1.70                  1.51                   -
                                         (0.64)               (0.60)                  -                   (0.88)                (0.80)                  -
Stanford Science                          1.00                 -0.18                  -                    1.72                  1.36                   -
                                         (0.79)               (0.71)                  -                   (0.94)                (0.77)                  -
Disciplinary Infractions                  0.28                 1.25                   -                    0.05                  0.13                   -
                                         (1.11)               (2.61)                  -                   (0.24)                (0.86)                  -
Attendence Rate                          97.37                95.02                   -                   97.84                 97.57                   -
                                         (3.19)               (6.13)                  -                   (2.52)                (3.16)                  -
Observations                             1,919                 8,748                3,652                  291                   149                   102
Standard deviations in parentheses. Achievement is measured in standard deviation units within grade and year across the district. Disciplinary infractions are the
number of times a student is given a suspension or more severe punishment. Economically disadvantaged refers to students who qualify for free lunch, reduced-price
lunch or another federal or state anti-poverty program.
                                             Table 2 - Reduced-Form Estimates of Discontinuities in Pre-Existing (5th Grade) Student Characteristics

                                                                                                                                Free /
                                                                                             Gifted in 5th     Special                          Stanford -        Stanford -          Stanford -
                             Black          Hispanic          Female            LEP                                          Reduced-Price
                                                                                                Grade         Education                           Math             Reading            Language
                                                                                                                                Lunch
                               (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)               (8)               (9)                 (10)
Above GT Cutoff               -0.000          0.014            0.024            0.039           -0.050           0.005            0.049         -0.067***            0.006               0.006
                             (0.029)         (0.038)          (0.042)          (0.040)         (0.047)          (0.011)          (0.037)         (0.026)            (0.026)             (0.041)
Observations                 2,650            2,650            2,650            2,650           2,650           2,650            2,650            2,637              2,638               2,636
                                                               # of                                                                                             Enrolled (Free/     Enrolled (Non-
                           Stanford -       Stanford -                       Attendance      Any Missing                        Teacher
                                                           Disciplinary                                      Teacher Score                       Enrolled       Reduced-Price       Free/ Reduced-
                         Social Studies      Science                          Rate (%)       Matrix Data                         Points
                                                           Infractions                                                                                             Lunch)            Price Lunch)
                              (11)             (12)            (13)             (14)             (15)            (16)             (17)             (18)              (19)                 (20)
Above GT Cutoff               0.040           0.004            -0.001           -0.269          0.000            2.965            0.497           0.049              0.054               0.039
                             (0.049)         (0.042)          (0.028)          (0.190)         (0.008)          (2.715)          (0.321)         (0.030)            (0.037)             (0.053)
Observations                 2,636            2,637            2,650            2,650           2,650           2,648            2,648            3,438              2,177               1,261
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Disciplinary infractions are the number of infractions warranting a suspension or more severe punishment
per year. Regressions include a linear smoother with a slope shift above the cutoff. The sample is limited to students with Euclidean distances from qualifying via the GT qualification matrix of
between -10 and 10. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by 5th grade school.
The estimation sample - students observed in LUSD two years after evaluation (7th grade) - is used is for columns (1) to (17) . Regressions using the full set of evaluated students provides similar
results and is provided in the online appendix.
                               Table 3 - Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Impact of Receiving G&T Services
                                                                 Stanford Achievement Test
                                                                                                                      Disciplinary     Attendance
      Model              Dependent            Math          Reading      Language       Social           Science
                                                                                                                      Infractions       Rate (%)
                          Variable                                                     Studies
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                     A. Baseline
  Reduced Form        Above GT Cutoff       -0.061**         -0.005          -0.004        -0.020         -0.011          -0.006        -0.691**
                                             (0.030)        (0.029)         (0.044)       (0.038)        (0.060)         (0.120)         (0.311)
 2SLS - 1st Stage     Above GT Cutoff       0.440***       0.443***        0.442***      0.440***       0.440***        0.436***        0.438***
                                             (0.057)        (0.057)         (0.058)       (0.058)        (0.057)         (0.058)         (0.058)
2SLS - 2nd Stage       Enrolled in GT       -0.138**        -0.011          -0.008        -0.045         -0.025          -0.014          -1.578*
                                             (0.068)        (0.065)         (0.100)       (0.085)        (0.135)         (0.276)         (0.802)
              Observations                    2,612          2,614          2,612          2,610          2,612           2,653           2,652
                                                           B. With Individual Controls
  Reduced Form        Above GT Cutoff         -0.016         -0.001          0.005         -0.007         0.008           0.003          -0.502*
                                             (0.022)        (0.020)         (0.031)       (0.031)        (0.048)         (0.112)         (0.268)
 2SLS - 1st Stage     Above GT Cutoff       0.465***       0.457***        0.457***      0.454***       0.456***        0.451***        0.456***
                                             (0.060)        (0.061)         (0.061)       (0.061)        (0.061)         (0.060)         (0.060)
2SLS - 2nd Stage       Enrolled in GT         -0 035
                                              -0.035         -0 002
                                                             -0.002          0 010
                                                                             0.010         -0 016
                                                                                           -0.016         0 017
                                                                                                          0.017           0 007
                                                                                                                          0.007          -1 101*
                                                                                                                                         -1.101
                                             (0.047)        (0.044)         (0.068)       (0.068)        (0.106)         (0.248)         (0.653)
              Observations                    2,597          2,600          2,596          2,594          2,597           2,650           2,649
                                                        C. Using Synthetic Matrix Scores
  Reduced Form        Above GT Cutoff         -0.024         -0.028          -0.028        -0.054         0.002           0.088           0.346
                                             (0.028)        (0.020)         (0.039)       (0.041)        (0.059)         (0.130)         (0.309)
 2SLS - 1st Stage     Above GT Cutoff       0.229***       0.232***        0.230***      0.228***       0.229***        0.230***        0.229***
                                             (0.038)        (0.038)         (0.039)       (0.039)        (0.038)         (0.038)         (0.038)
2SLS - 2nd Stage       Enrolled in GT         -0.106         -0.121          -0.120        -0.236         0.011           0.382           1.509
                                             (0.122)        (0.085)         (0.170)       (0.188)        (0.256)         (0.568)         (1.328)
              Observations                    2,579          2,580          2,579          2,576          2,578           2,619           2,618
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Disciplinary infractions are the number of infractions
warranting a suspension or more severe punishment per year. Synthetic matrix scores replace matrix scores for students where a teacher
recommendation could be pivotal (e.g. total points w/o the recommendation is fewer than 10 away from the relevant cutoff) with the predicted
value from a regression of total points on all components excluding the teacher points. See text for details. Controls for race, gender, economic
                                                    Table 4 - 2SLS Estimates of Impact of Receiving G&T Services
                                                                    Estimates for Sub-Populations
                                                                                           Stanford Achievement Test
                                                                                                                          Social                        Disciplinary Attendance
                                                  First Stage         Math            Reading         Language           Science          Science       Infractions   Rate (%)
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)             (7)          (8)
 (1) Females                                       0.531***          -0.023           -0.030            -0.028           -0.041            -0.003           0.177          -1.909**
                                                    (0.063)          (0.054)          (0.049)           (0.068)          (0.083)          (0.114)          (0.230)          (0.726)
       Observations                                  1,336            1,336            1,335             1,335            1,333            1,336            1,361            1,360
 (2) Males                                         0.410***          -0.022            0.044             0.093            0.040            0.046           -0.205            0.029
                                                    (0.076)          (0.081)          (0.061)           (0.106)          (0.110)          (0.147)          (0.495)          (1.119)
       Observations                                  1,237            1,237            1,240             1,236            1,237            1,237            1,260            1,260
 (3) Free/Reduced-Price Lunch                      0.512***           0.009           -0.032             0.014           -0.016           -0.031            0.160           -0.895
                                                    (0.064)          (0.050)          (0.047)           (0.079)          (0.083)          (0.113)          (0.306)          (0.671)
       Observations                                  1,644            1,644            1,645             1,644            1,644            1,645            1,669            1,669
 (4) No Free/Reduced-Price Lunch                   0.366***          -0.126            0.076             0.000           -0.023            0.095           -0.613           -1.370
                                                    (0.088)          (0.097)          (0.076)           (0.130)          (0.177)          (0.178)          (0.606)          (1.367)
       Observations                                   929              929               930              927              926              928              952              951
 (5) Black                                         0.605***          -0.068            0.124            -0.100            0.092            0.092           -0.181          -2.006*
                                                    (0.116)          (0.082)          (0.081)           (0.144)          (0.154)          (0.177)          (0.366)         (1.027)
       Observations                                   435              435               435              435              433              434              447              447
 (6) Hispanic                                      0.453***          -0.024           -0.032             0.058           -0.043            0.048           -0.067           -1.109
                                                    (0.059)          (0.066)          (0.057)           (0.087)          (0.086)          (0.126)          (0.400)          (0.865)
     Observations                                    1,680            1,680            1,682             1,679            1,679            1,680            1,708            1,708
 (7) White                                           0.289            0.015           -0.195             0.014            0.093           -0.446           -0.151           2.301*
                                                    (0.183)          (0.257)          (0.221)           (0.277)          (0.375)          (0.529)          (0.513)          (1.285)
     Observations                                     325              325              325               325              325              326              330              329
 (8) Gifted in 5th Grade                           0.368***          -0.096            0.033             0.182            0.093            0.129            0.699           -2.041
                                                    (0.082)          (0.102)          (0.095)           (0.124)          (0.159)          (0.230)          (0.558)          (1.421)
       Observations                                  1,003            1,003            1,005             1,004            1,003            1,004            1,017            1,016
 (9) Not Gifted in 5th Grade                       0.534***          -0.003           -0.005            -0.045           -0.035           -0.027           -0.291           -0.666
                                                    (0.071)          (0.056)          (0.053)           (0.077)          (0.090)          (0.122)          (0.288)          (0.636)
       Observations                                  1,570            1,570            1,570             1,567            1,567            1,569            1,604            1,604
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Disciplinary infractions are the number of infractions warranting a suspension or more severe
punishment per year.. Controls for race, gender, economic disadvantage and lagged (5th grade) dependent varable included, along with a linear smoother with a slope shift above the
cutoff included. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by 7th grade school. Sample is limited to students with Euclidean distances from qualifying via the GT
qualification matrix of between -10 and 10.
                                          Table 5 - 2SLS Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Impact of Receiving G&T Services
                                                                          Specification Checks
                                                                                              Stanford Achievement Test
                                                                                                                     Social                       Disciplinary    Attendance
                                                            First Stage      Math         Reading     Language      Science          Science      Infractions      Rate (%)
                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)              (6)            (7)             (8)
 (1) Quadratic Smoother                                     0.424***         0.120         0.007        0.246**         0.146        0.305*          -0.445          -0.565
                                                             (0.063)        (0.112)       (0.071)       (0.111)        (0.135)       (0.159)        (0.505)         (1.253)
     Observations                                             2,609          2,597         2,600         2,596          2,594         2,597          2,650           2,649
 (2) Cubic Smoother                                         0.371***         0.057         -0.029        0.276          -0.019        0.409          -0.617          -0.455
                                                             (0.103)        (0.238)       (0.157)       (0.203)        (0.244)       (0.332)        (0.745)         (2.036)
     Observations                                             2,609          2,597         2,600         2,596          2,594         2,597          2,650           2,649
 (3) Add Middle School Fixed Effects                        0.460***         -0.014        0.007         0.041          0.009         0.023          0.067          -1.039*
                                                             (0.057)        (0.037)       (0.041)       (0.065)        (0.065)       (0.112)        (0.249)         (0.600)
     Observations                                             2,609          2,597         2,600         2,596          2,594         2,597          2,650           2,649
 (4) Limited to Observations With                           0.456***         -0.027        0.003         0.013          -0.004        0.029          0.068          -1.186*
     No Missing Matrix Data                                  (0.061)        (0.048)       (0.044)       (0.067)        (0.068)       (0.108)        (0.263)         (0.684)
     Observations                                             2,538          2,526         2,528         2,525          2,522         2,525          2,577           2,576
 (6) Distance Between -4 & 4                                0.387***         0.116         -0.097        0.132          -0.029        0.338          -0.762          -0.835
                                                             (0.084)        (0.167)       (0.111)       (0.159)        (0.170)       (0.246)        (0.518)         (1.647)
     Observations                                              849            845           848           845            842           844            860             859
 (5) Distance Between -8 & 8                                0.462***          0.005         0.014         0.111          0.056         0.115          -0.162          -0.638
                                                             ((0.056))      ((0.058))     ((0.046))     ((0.072))      ((0.080))     ((0.103))      ((0.325))       ((0.758))
     Observations                                             2,057          2,047         2,052         2,047          2,044         2,047          2,084           2,083
 (6) Distance Between -12 & 12                              0.472***         -0.009        0.018         -0.013         0.007         0.019          0.001           -0.823
                                                             (0.055)        (0.039)       (0.036)       (0.057)        (0.063)       (0.086)        (0.209)         (0.549)
     Observations                                             3,178          3,162         3,163         3,158          3,158         3,160          3,222           3,220
 (6) Distance Between -16 & 16                              0.488***         -0.022        0.009         -0.015         -0.022        0.017          0.100           -0.438
                                                             (0.055)        (0.035)       (0.030)       (0.045)        (0.061)       (0.077)        (0.179)         (0.497)
     Observations                                             3,756          3,735         3,736         3,731          3,729         3,733          3,806           3,804
 (7) Local Linear Regressions                                    -           0.073         0.000         0.019          0.056         0.222          1.476           -0.434
     with Rectangular Kernel                                     -          (0.117)       (0.072)       (0.186)        (0.080)       (0.177)        (1.002)         (1.203)
     Observations                                                -           1,075         1,078          708           2,044         1,074           429            1,092
     Bandwidth (from Leave-One-Out
                                                                 -             5             5             3              8             5              2               5
     Cross Validation)
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Disciplinary infractions are the number of infractions warranting a suspension or more
severe punishment per year. Controls for race, gender, economic disadvantage, LEP, prior gifted status and lagged (5th grade) dependent varable included and a linear smoother
with a slope shift above the cutoff except where noted.. Sample is limited to students with Euclidean distances from qualifying via the GT qualification matrix of between -10
and 10. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by 7th grade
school.
                                                             Table 6 - 2SLS Estimates of Impacts of G&T Services
                                                            Effects on Educational Environment and Student Choices

                                      Peer Reading       Peer Lang
                     Peer Math         Scores in         Scores in         Peer Soc        Peer Science                           # of Core                          Enrolled in
                   Scores in Math      Read/Eng          Read/Eng        Scores in Soc       Scores in      # of Core             Vanguard        Enrolled in        Vanguard
                      Classes           Classes           Classes          Classes        Science Classes Regular Classes          Classes       Vanguard Math        English
                         (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)
Enrolled in GT        0.348**            0.287*           0.311**            0.235*            0.272*            -0.014            1.145*            0.315*             0.241
                      (0.166)            (0.156)          (0.146)            (0.132)           (0.150)           (0.267)           (0.624)           (0.158)           (0.171)
Observations           2,629             2,494             2,494              2,567             2,567             2,643             2,643             2,629             2,497


                    Enrolled in        Enrolled in                    Attends Non-                                               Read/Eng                          Social Science
                     Vanguard          Vanguard        Attends Zoned   Zoned GT            Attends Other     Math Teacher      Teacher Fixed    Science Teacher    Teacher Fixed
                   Social Science       Science            School    Magnet Campus          Non-Zoned        Fixed Effect         Effect          Fixed Effect         Effect
                        (10)              (11)              (12)          (13)                  (14)             (15)              (16)               (17)              (18)
Enrolled in GT         0.282*            0.282*            -0.050           0.260**           -0.210**           -0.001             0.016             0.005             0.014
                       (0.165)           (0.165)           (0.109)          (0.109)            (0.098)           (0.025)           (0.010)           (0.014)           (0.013)
Observations           2,567             2,567             2,623              2,623             2,623             2,650             2,621             2,621             2,621
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Teacher fixed effects are estimates from a student-level regression of achievement on
lagged achievement, peer lagged achievement, race, gender, special education, LEP, at-risk status, teacher fixed-effects and school fixed-effects. Controls for race, gender,
economici di
          disadvantage,
              d          LEP
                         LEP, prior
                                  i gifted
                                       if d status and
                                                     d llagged
                                                             d (5
                                                               (5th
                                                                  h grade)
                                                                       d ) ddependent
                                                                                 d varable
                                                                                        bl iincluded.
                                                                                               l d d Al
                                                                                                      Also iincludes
                                                                                                               l d a lilinear smoother
                                                                                                                                   h with i h a slope
                                                                                                                                                 l    shift
                                                                                                                                                       hif above
                                                                                                                                                            b    the
                                                                                                                                                                  h cutoff.
                                                                                                                                                                        ff Peers
                                                                                                                                                                            P
are defined by teacher-course id-grade cells. The sample is limited to students with Euclidean distances from qualifying via the GT qualification matrix of between -10 and 10. *,
**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by 7th grade school.
                                                  Table 7 - Balancing Tests for GT Magnet Lotteries - Covariates Measured in 5th Grade


                                                                                                                                                 Special
                              Asian            Black          Hispanic          White        Econ Disadv        Female          At-Risk         Education          LEP             Gifted
Sample                         (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)             (9)              (10)
Ex-Ante - Baseline           -0.030            0.030           0.041           -0.041           -0.035          -0.006           -0.011          -0.019            -0.033          -0.028
Lottery                      (0.044)          (0.038)         (0.044)          (0.050)          (0.045)         (0.047)          (0.010)         (0.017)          (0.022)         (0.035)
Observations                   542              542             542              542             542               542            542              542              542             542
Ex-Post - Estimation          -0.027           0.041           0.042            -0.057           -0.050          -0.001           -0.009          -0.015          -0.031           -0.024
Sample                       (0.048)          (0.038)         (0.055)          (0.056)          (0.059)         (0.052)          (0.011)         (0.023)          (0.027)          (0.047)
Observations                   437              437             437              437             437               437            437              437              437             437
                                                                                       Stanford Achievement Test

                                           Total Matrix                                                                                        Attendance                         Teacher
                           GT Magnet          Points           Math           Reading          Language     Social Studies      Science           Rate          Infractions        Score
Sample                        (11)             (12)            (13)            (14)              (15)            (16)            (17)             (18)              (19)            (20)

Ex-Ante - Baseline            0.035            0.243           0.027            0.073           -0.034           0.053            0.010          -0.180            -0.022          0.029
Lottery                      (0.030)          (0.926)         (0.069)          (0.063)          (0.077)         (0.089)          (0.076)         (0.201)          (0.021)         (1.304)
Observations                   542              542             540              541             539               540            539              542              542             536
Ex-Post - Estimation          0.055            0.909          0.128*            0.100            -0.059          0.063            0.090           -0.064          -0.022           -1.005
Sample                       (0.045)
                             (0 045)          (1.173)
                                              (1 173)         (0.074)
                                                              (0 074)          (0.075)
                                                                               (0 075)          (0.077)
                                                                                                (0 077)         (0.096)
                                                                                                                (0 096)          (0.088)
                                                                                                                                 (0 088)         (0.230)
                                                                                                                                                 (0 230)          (0.025)
                                                                                                                                                                  (0 025)          (1.471)
                                                                                                                                                                                   (1 471)
Observations                   437              437             437              437             436               437            436              437              437             434
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Disciplinary infractions are the number of infractions warranting a suspension or more severe
punishment per year. Lotteries for two schools were conducted in 2007-08 hence regresions include indicators for lottery fixed effects. Coefficients are for an indicator for whether the
student won the lottery. Robust standard errors clustered by 5th grade school in parentheses. Results without clustering are similar and provided in the online appendix.
                                  Table 8 - Effect of Attending a GT Magnet School Relative to a GT Neighborhood Program
                       Model                                                        Stanford Achievement Test                                    Attendence Rate
                                                             Math            Reading        Language      Social Studies           Science             (%)
                                                              (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)                   (5)                (6)
   (1)    2SLS - Unweighted, No Controls                     0.042             0.023             0.102             0.039           0.249**            -0.434
                                                            (0.178)           (0.103)           (0.065)           (0.083)          (0.114)           (0.636)
          Observations                                        437               438               436               437              437               440
   (2)    2SLS - Unweighted, Controls                        -0.100            -0.058           0.142*             -0.032           0.208*            -0.425
                                                            (0.112)           (0.105)           (0.081)           (0.098)           (0.119)          (0.411)
          Observations                                        437               438               435               437              436               440
   (3)    2SLS - Weighted, No Controls                       -0.266            -0.130            -0.060            -0.120            0.243            0.043
                                                            (0.291)           (0.221)           (0.148)           (0.214)           (0.201)          (1.996)
          Observations                                        436               437               435               436              436               439
   (4)    2SLS - Weighted, Controls                          -0.224            -0.018            0.001             -0.036          0.281**            0.364
                                                            (0.171)           (0.172)           (0.114)           (0.136)          (0.130)           (1.489)
          Observations                                        436               437               435               436              436               439
   (5)    Engberg, Epple, Imbrogno, Sieg, Zimmer             -0.019            -0.095            0.074             -0.064           0.344*               -
          (2011) Bounds - Upper Bound                       (0.196)           (0.157)           (0.162)           (0.185)           (0.180)              -
          Observations                                        437               438               436               437              437                 -
   (6)    Engberg, Epple, Imbrogno, Sieg, Zimmer             -0.353            -0.310            -0.207            -0.389            -0.013              -
          (2011) Bounds - Lower Bound                       (0.251)           (0.192)           (0.215)           (0.249)           (0.248)              -
          Observations                                        437               438               436               437              437                 -

Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Lotteries for two schools were conducted in 2007-08 hence all regresions
include indicators for lottery fixed effects. Coefficients are for an indicator for whether the student is enrolled in a GT magnet program in 7th grade. Robust
standard errors clustered by 7th grade school in parentheses. Results without clustering are similar and provided in the online appendix. Controls include
indicators during 5th grade for race, gender, special education, LEP, at-risk status, gifted, whether the student was enrolled in a GT magnet, and a lagged
dependent variable. Weighted regressions are weighted by the inverse of the estimated probability of remaining in the data. See text for details. In order to
avoid slow convergence due to a very small portion of the sample being in special education or LEP, we drop those controls from the bounding analysis.
Additionally, we do not cluster the standard errors on the bounding analysis due to inability for the estimator to converge. Finally, we do not provide bounds for
attendance due to poor performance with censored data. See paper for details.
                              Table 9 - Treatments from Attending a GT Magnet School Relative to a GT Neighborhood Program

Model                                                Mean Peer Achievement (Std Deviations)                                    Teacher Fixed Effects
                                      Math in        Reading in Language in       Social            Science in       Math       English/     Social       Science
                                     Math Class       English       English     Studies in           Science                    Reading      Studies
                                                       Class         Class       Soc Class            Class
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)                 (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)
2SLS - Unweighted, Controls           1.066***        0.659***       0.579***        0.794***       0.524***       0.081***      0.032**       0.031*       0.017
                                       (0.145)         (0.149)        (0.120)         (0.123)        (0.122)        (0.015)      (0.013)       (0.017)     (0.014)
Observations                             440            436             436             439            439            440          440          440          440
2SLS - Weighted, Controls             1.164***        0.751***       0.686***        0.952***       0.659***       0.085***      0.032***     0.041**       0.016
                                       (0.179)         (0.172)        (0.143)         (0.180)        (0.166)        (0.019)       (0.011)     (0.019)      (0.013)
Observations                             439            435             435             438            438            439          439          439          439
Achievement is measured in standard deviations of scale scores within grade and year. Teacher fixed effects are estimates from a student-level regression of
achievement on lagged achievement, peer lagged achievement, race, gender, special education, LEP, at-risk status, teacher fixed-effects and school fixed-
effects. Lotteries for two schools were conducted in 2007-08 hence all regresions include indicators for lottery fixed effects. Coefficients are for an indicator
for whether the student is enrolled in a GT magnet program in 7th grade. Peers are defined by teacher-course id-grade cells. Robust standard errors clustered
by 7th grade school in parentheses. Results without clustering are similar and provided in the online appendix. Weighted regressions are weighted by the
inverse of the estimated probability of remaining in the data. See text for details. Controls include indicators during 5th grade for race, gender, special
education, LEP, at-risk status, ggifted, whether the student was enrolled in a GT magnet,
                                                                                     g             gg dependent
                                                                                          and a lagged    p        variable. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                               Table 10 - 2SLS Estimates of Impacts of G&T on Course Grades and Rank (2007-08 Evaluation Cohort)
                                              I. Course Grades                                                   II. Rank in Course (Percentiles)
                        Math              English       Social Studies       Science                   Math         English        Social Studies       Science
                         (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)                      (5)           (6)               (7)               (8)
                                                                         A. Regression Discontinuity Analysis
                                                                                        i. 7th Grade
Enrolled in GT        -4.142**             -2.621           -2.473             -1.501              -21.1***         -15.5**          -17.1***           -13.2**
                       (1.616)            (1.744)          (1.645)            (1.052)                (6.9)           (7.1)             (5.8)             (6.0)
Observations            2,643              2,510            2,581              2,602                   2,643         2,510             2,581             2,602
                                                                                       ii. 6th Grade
Enrolled in GT       -3.422***             -1.953          -2.931**          -3.411**              -17.9***        -16.9***          -22.6***           -22.9***
                      (1.179)             (1.491)           (1.355)           (1.442)                (6.2)           (6.5)             (7.0)              (6.9)
Observations            2,739              2,609            2,754              2,733                   2,739         2,609             2,754             2,733
                                                                           B. Lottery Analysis (7th Grade)
Unweighted,          -8.283***           -4.096**          -4.062**         -6.988***              -29.5***        -27.1***          -27.8***           -29.3***
Controls              (1.660)             (1.561)           (1.654)          (1.309)                 (4.8)           (5.0)             (6.5)              (6.3)
Observations             440               437               439               439                     440            437               439               439
Weighted,            -7.311***             -2.719          -4.733**         -8.121***              -30.7***        -30.4***          -33.8***           -36.1***
Controls              (1.847)             (1.990)           (1.733)          (2.297)                 (5.4)           (7.7)             (6.8)              (8.9)
Observations             439               436               438               438                     439            436               438               438
Rank is determined by rank-ordering the final grade in each course within school, grade and year, converted to percentiles. RD: Controls for race, gender,
economic disadvantage, LEP, and prior gifted status are included along with a linear smoother with a slope shift above the cutoff. Sample is limited to students
with Euclidean distances from qualifying via the GT qualification matrix of between -10 and 10. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by
7th grade school. Lottery: Lotteries for two schools were conducted in 2007-08 hence all regresions include indicators for lottery fixed effects. Coefficients are
for an indicator for whether the student is enrolled in a GT magnet program in 7th grade. Peers are defined by teacher-course id-grade cells. Robust standard
errors clustered by 7th grade school in parentheses. Results without clustering are similar and provided in the online appendix. Weighted regressions are
weighted by the inverse of the estimated probability of remaining in the data. See text for details. Controls include indicators during 5th grade for race, gender,
special education, LEP, at-risk status, gifted, and whether the student was enrolled in a GT magnet. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.
