                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAX REFORM, INTEREST RATES
                      AND CAPITAL ALLOCATION



                      Patric H. Hendershott




                      Working Paper No. 1708




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1985




Comments by Don Fullerton and David Ling on an earlier draft and by
participants in the NBER's Summer Institute are gratefully
acknowledged, as is the superb computer assistance of David Linn.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budget and Taxation and
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #170 8
                                                     Septerrber 1985




                        Tax Reform, Interest Rates
                         and Capital AlloOation

                                 ABSTRACT




      The impacts of four major tax reform proposals on the level of interest

rates and the allocation of the American capital stock are derived. The four

plans are Bradley—Gephardt, Kemp—Kasten, Treasury I and Treasury II. The

allocation is among seven types of nonresidential capital, rental housing, and

owner occupied housing held by households in five different income classes.

The inflation—neutrality of the four plans as also deduced.




                                                            Patric H. Hendershott
                                                            Hagerty Hall
                                                            Ohio State University
                                                            1775 College Road
                                                            Columbus, Ohio 43210
                                                            (614) 422—0552
                                                            August 1985



               Tax Reform, Interest Rates and Capital Allocation

                             Patric H. Hendershott



      Four major tax reform proposals have been advanced recently: the

Bradley—Gephardt plan, the Kemp—Kasten proposal, and the Treasury—Department

plans I and II. These are comprehensive proposals likely to have significant

impacts on investment and real capital allocation. The impacts will reflect

both the direct effect of statutory tax changes and the indirect effects

elicited by changes in interest rates and incomes. This paper estimates the

impacts of tax changes on interest rates and capital allocation, holding income

constant.

      Supply—siders believe that the lowering of marginal tax rates will

increase real income and Treasury tax revenue by inducing greater work effort

and saving. While virtually all economists accept this argument in principle,

many, if not most, believe the magnitude of these responses to be small. We

have not modeled such responses and effectively assume that the tax reforms are

revenue neutral and will not alter either the level or distribution of after—

tax income.1 (While households receive a tax cut on average, the tax increase

for businesses will result in lower real returns to some factor of production

and thus to households who own all factors.)

      This paper begins with a general discussion of rental user costs for real

capital, the primary determinants of capital allocation, and then presents

calculations of the user costs under current law. Section II contains a

description of the allocation simulation model, and analyses of the four tax

reform proposals, including their inflation neutrality, are reported in Section

III. The model contains seven types of nonresidential capital, rental housing

and owner—occupied housing. Households in six income classes with endogenous
                                         —2—


tenure choices are considered. A given capital sLock is allocated among the

various capital components, with the level of interest rates adjusting to

maintain aggregate demand equal to the fixed stock.

         We conclude that interest rates would decline significantly in response

to all reforms except Kemp—Kasten: three percentage points if Treasury I were

enacted, two points in response to Bradley.-Gephardt, and one point if Treasury

II were passed. A final section suggests that significant positive saving

interest rate elasticities, both domestic and foreign, might reduce the

declines under Treasury I and Bradley—Gephardt by a percentage point.



                        I. Investment Hurdle Rates or User Costs

General Considerations

         As is well known (Hall and Jorgenson, 1967), the decision to invest

depends on whether the present value of the expected revenue from investment

exceeds the supply price of capital, and on marginal investments the two will

be equal. After allowance for taxation, the equilibrium condition for

investment is

                                  (r+d+T ii) (1—k—Tz)

                                     lT                                 (1)

where T    is   the business tax rate, p is the gross marginal product of capital,

r is the real after—tax financing rate, d is the economic depreciation rate,

T   is   the concurrent equivalent tax rate on inflationary gains, ii   is    the

expected inflation rate, and k is the investment tax credit.2 In general, z is

the present value of the stream of tax depreciation allowances,
                                                                     TAXDEPt,
obtained by discounting the stream of depreciation allowances by the required

nominal after—tax financing rate:
                                                         —3--



                                           N
                                               TAXDEP
                                      z=  t=l [   (l+r) (l+Tr)]
                                                                                              (2)



where N is the depreciation period of the asset. The right side of equation

(1) is the "investment hurdle rate" or rental user cost for a particular asset.

The lower the user cost, the greater will be production of the asset, and the

lower will be the productivity of the marginal investment (p).

          In a "neutral" tax system, the net user and thus net marginal

productivities (p — d) would be the same for all equally—risky assets. This

can be achieved in a variety of ways. For example, with k = 0,                           -t
                                                                                              = 0 and
either z = 1 —— expensing ——                or    -r =    0, then p — d =   r.   Alternatively, with k =

0,   -r
          = 0 and z =       d/(r    + d) ——      tax     depreciation equal to economic depreciation,

then p — d =         r/(l—t)    .   In   either case, if the r's were equal for all assets,

the tax system would be neutral across them.3

          Assuming that firms use a fixed fraction of debt, b, for financing all

investments, the real after—tax financing rate can be expressed as



                            r       [b(l—$-r)i + (1—b) (l—y-r)e —      ir]/(l+ir)   ,         (3)



where          and y-,   respectively,     are the portions of interest and equity returns

that are deductible at the business level, and e is the required nominal return

to investors. (Currently                  = 1 and y =           0.)
          Portfolio equilibrium of investors requires that



                                      (l_Te)e =        (l—x)i    +,                           (4)




where           is the rate at which equity returns are taxed at the personal level,
           e
x is the relevant tax rate for taxable interest (the lower of the personal tax

rate and that implicit in tax—exempt yields) , and                          is the risk premium
                                                 —4—


required on equity investments. For all investments except owner—occupied

housing of low and middle income households, x is the tax rate implicit in

tax—exempt yields x. Substituting (4) into (3), the real after—tax financing

rate for capital other than owner—occupied housing is:



                                                     (l—x )i + S
            r                                              e
                    =   [b(l—61)i +   (1—b) (i—IT)
                                                         1— T e
                                                                            —   T]/(l+).      (3')




If TI   were equal to T             (which would be true if I = T e = 0) and x                     r, r
                                                                               e
would equal [(l—T)i —               ÷ (l—b)]/(l+ir) for all assets. Further, if all

interest expense were deductible at the same rate and all investments were

equally risky, all r's would be equal.

        All interest expense is not deductible at the same rate, the clearest

example being owner—occupied housing. Because this asset is held by households

with a wide range of income subject to the full array of marginal personal tax

rates, the tax rates at which interest is deductible (and at which equity the

owner has in the house would have been taxed had the household rented) vary

across households. More generally, the real after—tax financing rate for the

jth household is



            r. =
                J
                         {b.(l—tji
                           J    J
                                      +   (l—b,)(l—x)i
                                             J       J
                                                               — ir —   ]/(l
                                                                        J
                                                                                  +   ir).   (5)




The tax rate applicable to own equity investment, x,, is defined as the minimum

of the tax rate paid on the last dollar of taxable interest earned or implicit

in tax—exempt yields:
                                                 —5—


                                                 (r. + sur.)
                                      x. =   min                            (6)
                                                 X.

 The sur, allows the tax rate on the last dollar of interest earned to exceed
         J

 the rate at which the last dollar of interest expense is deductible (t.) , and

reflects the potential only partial taxation of interest income. (Under

current law, sur, = 0 and         =   1.)    Finally, loan—to—value ratios will vary.

depending on the relative after tax costs of debt and own equity financing.

The greater is x., the lower will b. be.
                     J                       J

        The above r's are appropriate for computation of the user cost relevant

to the quantity of housing demanded by homeowners, but not to          the decision of
households    whether to own or rent. The .'s and x's appropriate for the user

cost relevant to the tenure decision depend on the average rates at which

interest for the entire house purchase is deducted and on which the entire

owner—equity investment would have been taxed (Hendershott and Slemrod, 1983).



User Costs Under Current Law

        Under current law, net income (imputed rents) from owner—occupied housing

is not taxed and no depreciation is deductible [the T'S in equation (I)           are
zero). However, property taxes on owner—occupied housing are deductible and

thus the tax saving from these taxes on a dollar of housing (assuming a

property tax rate of 0.012) is subtracted from the right side of (1). For

corporations T      = 0.4924;   for noncorporate business (excluding owner occupied

housing) ,   T is   taken to be the maximum tax rate on personal interest, Tim =

0.53.   Each of thesevalues reflects an assumed maximum state and local tax

rate of 0.06 which is deductible at the federal level.
                                                     —6—



           The investment tax credit, k, equals 0.06 for 3 year equipment, 0.10                           for
longer      lived equipment and public utility structures, and zero for other

structures; the inflation tax, T,                     is   O.7-r for inventories, because FIFO

accounting is used for 70 percent of inventories, and is close to zero for

other assets. Also, equipment is depreciated for tax purposes at 150% of

declining balance over tax lives of 3 or 5 years; structures are depreciated

at 175% of declining balance over 10, 15 or 18 years; and inventories are

effectively depreciated for tax purposes upon sale or one and a half months

after purchase, on average.

           For corporations, t           depends on the taxation of dividends and capital

gains and the division of equity raised between new issues and retained

earnings (Fullerton, 1985). More generally,




                                     e
                                         =   ntdiv   + (l—n)T
                                                                 cg
                                                                      ,                          (7)



where n is the proportion of equity funds raised by new issues, Tdi is the tax

rate on dividends and                is the tax rate on equity capital gains. We assume n
                               Tcg
=   0.1;     t         = T. /2; and            = O.4T. /4 under current law, where T. is the
                 div     im               cg         im                            im
maximum tax rate on personal interest. The 0.4 is unity less the statutory

sixty percent capital gains exclusion. The divisions by 2 and 4 allow for tax

deferral and avoidance activities. Thus T =
                                                             e
                                                                          Ol4-r.   .   For noncorporate

businesses (including households investing in owner—occupied housing), t

equals 0.

       Empirically, the tax rate implicit in tax—exempt yields varies with the

maturity of the security. For short—term tax exempts, the ratio of prime grade

tax—exempt to risk—free taxable yields has not deviated far from unity less the

corporate tax rate or roughly 0.5. For ten—year bonds, which are more relevant

for the long—term investments being analyzed, the ratio has been closer to 0.7.
                                             —7—


The implicit tax rate of 0.3, rather than the federal tax rate of 0.46 (the

state and local tax rate is not relevant if corporations invest in their own

jurisdictions), reflects a number of factors, but the most important is likely

the tax saving from optimally trading bonds (taking capital losses and

deferring capital gains).4 This is especially important because high

transactions costs virtually eliminate any gains from trading municipal bonds.

The tax rate implicit in long—term tax exempt yields is assumed to be given by:



                             x = (—O.3)T,                                    (8)
                              e        i




where          is the federal corporate tax rate and the 0.3 measures the gains from

optimal trading.

            In our analysis of owner—occupied housing, we consider households at five

different income levels (column 1 of Table 1) in order to deduce the tax rates

that are representative of households in five income ranges: $12,500 to

$25,000, $25,000 to $30,000, $30,000 to $50,000, $50,000 to $100,000 and over

$100,000. The federal and state and local tax rates relevant to the quantity—

demanded decision are listed in columns 2 and 3 (the marginal federal rate

jumps near the middle of two ranges), and the total tax rate ——            the   federal

plus the state times one minus the federal ——           is   shown in column 4. For the

highest income class, x, =
                                O.7Tf
                                        =   0.322.   For the other classes, the x. equal

the T. shown in the table. The last column is the tax rate relevant to the
        J

tenure choice (a weighted average of the average tax rates applied to debt and

equity) .      These tax rates are discussed in more detail in Hendershott and Ling,

1985.
                                        —8—


      For all investments other than real estate, b =         1/3.   For real estate

investments other than owner—occupied housing, b            2/3. For owner—occupied

housing, we vary b. depending on the relative attractiveness of debt and equity

financing. More specifically,



                                     0.5 if x r.
                             b. =    0.667 if       =                     (9)
                                     0.85 if
                                                J       J
The minimum 0.5 reflects an assumed average wealth constraint on households;

the optimal b, for unconstrained households is likely zero.

      The assumed loan—to—value ratios far exceed the 0.33 to 0.4 average

economy—wide ratio observed for owner—occupied housing. Such ratios are

heavily influenced by older owning households who have repaid their mortgages.5

These are relatively insensitive to housing rental costs (see note 11).

Households under forty use far more debt (the average loan—to—value ratio for

first—time homebuyers in 1984 was 87 percent) and often make quite long—term

housing decisions. It is the decisions of such households that we are

attempting to capture, and their present—value weighted average loan—to—value

ratio is probably near two—thirds.

      Based upon Ibbotson—Sinquefield calculations, we assume 1 for corporate

equities is 0.075, and thus the risk premium for corporate assets, which have a

one—third loan—to—value ratio, is (l—b) = 0.05.         The risk premium for

depreciable real estate investors is also about 0.075.6 Because real—estate

assets are presumed to have a loan—to—value ratio of two—thirds, the premium,

for these assets is only 0.025. We assume this also to be the premium for

owner—occupied housing. This relatively low premium is consistent with owners

having certainty with regard to their "vacancy" and "breakage" rates and thus

greater certainty with respect to their net operating incomes than is the case

with rental properties.
                                         —9—


      The risk—adjusted net (of depreciation) investment hurdle rates for

alternative investments are reported in Table 2 for three different inflation

rates. In the base case,     = 0.05 and I =    0.11.   We also consider higher

 (0.10) and lower (0.0) inflation rates. The interest rates associated with

these inflation rates were generated by the model described in the next

section. As can be seen, di/dir =   1.48, midway between the nontax (unity) and
tax [di/dii   l/(l—T)--2] Fisherian values.7

      Under a neutral tax system, these rates would be the same for all assets,

As can be seen, this is not true under current law. At a five percent

inflation rate, the tax—favored assets are equipment, with its generous tax

credit, and housing, especially that occupied by high—income households. The

tax—penalized assets are inventories, whose inflationary gains are not indexed,

and corporate structures, especially industrial structures which receive no tax

credit. Also, corporate investments are penalized relative to noncorporate,

owing to their double taxation, and risky assets are penalized relative to less

risky real estate assets (Bulow and Suiimers, 1984) 8 The difference in hurdle

rates for industrial structures and housing, on average, is 4½ percentage

points. The difference in the cost of housing for high and low income owners

is over 3 percentage points. Moreover, the higher is inflation, the greater

are the biases in favor of rental and high—income owner housing and is the

penalty against corporate investments.



                       II. The Capital Allocation Model9

An Overview

      The basic model allocates a fixed private capital stock among various

classes of nonresidential and residential capital. The allocation depends on

the rental or user costs for the capital components, the price elasticities of

demand with respect to the rental costs, and the elasticities of homeownership
                                      —10—



with respect to the cost of owning versus renting. The interest rate adjusts

in response to tax changes so as to maintain the aggregate demand for capital

at its initial level. The fixed capital stock assumption implies zero interest

elasticity of saving.

      Table 3 lists the distribution of the U.S. capital stock at the end of

1983 by type. A number of simplifying assumptions are made in the construction

of the model. Because well over 90 percent of inventories are held by

corporations and nearly 90 percent of rental housing is held by noncorporate

business, we assume that each of these assets is held totally by corporate and

noncorporate business, respectively. While equipment is depreciable over 3 or

5 years, about 95 percent of it is classified as 5—year. We treat all

equipment as 5—year.'° Because public utility structures (which are virtually

all corporate) are depreciated over a shorter life that other structures and

are eligible for the investment tax credit, they are treated separately. With

these assumptions and distinctions, the capital shares are those listed in the

percent share column.

      Current law treats owner—occupied housing differently depending upon the

tax position of the owner, with higher income households paying a lower rental

cost owing to their lower after—tax financing rate. Thus it is necessary to

distribute the owner—occupied housing stock across households at different

income levels. The distribution depends upon the number of owners within each

income range as well as the income range and the rental costs for each of the

ranges.

      For all assets except rental housing, the demand for the asset is

determined by the investor in the asset, be it a corporation, unincorporated

business or a household. For rental housing, demand is determined by renters,
                                          —11-.



 based upon their incomes and the market rent level. Thus, the total quantity

of rental housing, like the total quantity of owner housing, is built up as the

sum   of   the demands by households in different income brackets.

       Table 4 indicates divisions of the demand for housing across six income

classes. The first three columns contain the income classes selected, the

division of 80 million households across these classes, and the assumed

ownership rates for these classes. Columns 4 and 5 give the distribution of

the income of owners and renters across these classes. Column 4 is the product

of columns 1, 2 and 3 divided by the sum of the products. In the column 5

calculation, the fraction of households owning is replaced by the fraction

renting. Columns 6 and 7 give the distribution of the owned and rented stocks.

       These distributions and the ownership rates were calculated from model

equations described below. The equations imply an aggregate ownership rate of

0.56, significantly below the current observed rate which is heavily influenced

by tenure decisions made during the 1970s when the cost of owning was far lower

than today because real after—tax mortgage rates were so much lower. Put

another way, if real after—tax mortgage rates remain at the early l980s level,

we would anticipate a significant decline in the aggregate ownership rate over

time (holding demographic factors constant) .      Given that ownership rates do

not reflect a long run equilibrium, the distribution of the housing stock

between owned and rented also does not. The assumed equilibrium distribution

is that shown in Table 4, not that in Table 1. That is,. 10 percent of the

existing owner—occupied housing stock f (2269—2032)/2269] has been shifted from

owner to rental.

Model Equations

       The model explains 13 rental costs: seven for the different types of

nonresidential capital, five for owner—occupied housing of households in our

five income ranges, and one for rental housing. As discussed in the previous
                                                —12—


section, these costs depend on numerous provisions of the tax law, the

depreciation rate of the asset, the expected inflation rate and the level of

interest rates in the economy. Moreover, rental costs for household tenure

choice decisions (s,)   differ        from those for quantity demanded decisions (p.)

because the tax rates relevant to the after—tax financing rates differ (see

Table 1). We summarize the rental cost equations as



                                                                           (l)—(7)
                                      Pk(tk1di,l])
                          p. =
                              J
                                      p.(tax,d.ir,i)
                                       J   j j                             (8)—(l2)

                          p
                                  =   p(tax,d,ir,i)                        (13)


                              J
                                  =   .(ta.,d,ir,i).
                                       J   JJ                              (l4)—(l8)




      There are seven demand equations for nonresidential capital (NK):

corporate inventories, corporate and noncorporate 5—year equipment, 10— and

15—year public utility structures, and other corporate (industrial) and

noncorporate (commercial) structures. Assuming that production functions are

Cobb—Douglass [Berndt(1976)], these demand equations can be written as



                                       NKk =   Zk/pk,                      (19)—(25)




where the Zk are constants (depending on given outputs) and the            are the

rental costs.

      The housing demand and tenure choice equations come from the

specification of a translog indirect utility function for households (King,

1980) and the empirical application of it to the ownership decision

(Hendershott and Shilling, 1982). The estimated odds of owning equation was
                                                —13—




          1°\                                               2 —            2
      log1          =   —3.846log(./p)   —   .383f(log.)          (log   p) ].

                J




Taking antilogs and solving, the ownership rates for the five highest income

classes are



                                    0, =     eLj/(l_eLj),                        (26)-(30)



where the L. equal the right—hand side of the log [o./(L..oj] expression. The

ownership rate for the lowest income class is assumed to be zero.

      There are also five demand equations for owner housing and six for rental

housing based on our six income classes, the lowest of which consists solely of

renters. These demands are the products of the demands per owning/renting

household and the number of ownino/renting households. The specific form of

the equations comes from application of Roy's identity to the indirect utility

function and substitution from the estimated odds of owning equation. For

owner housing (OH), the demand equations are

              OH.       o,HH,Z(3.846 + .766 log p i/p.,                          (31)—(35)




where 0, is the ownership rate for the jth class, HH. is the number of

households in the jth class, and the Z, are constants which are proportional to

the incomes of representative households in the classes. For rental households

(RH), the equations are



              RH. =     (l—0JFIH.Z.(3.846 + .766 log p)/p,                       (36)—(41)
                3           3 JJ
                                             —14—


where P' the user cost for rental housing, is the rental price facing all

households -

      Lastly,   equality between the sum of the demands and the existing capital

stock determines the level of interest rates in the economy:



                         NK + OH.        +    RH.   =   K.            (42)
                                j




      Given current tax law and assumed levels of the interest and expected

inflation rates, the k' p.,       ,   and p are known (listed, net of the d's in

Table 2). The NK kwere listed in Table 3, and the OH. and RH. calculations
                                                    j       j

were reported in Table 4. The o. and HH, were also listed in Table 4. The Z
                               J       j                                   k
can be calculated under current law from equations (19)—(25); the Z. are

proportional to the incomes of the representative households in the classes and

are scaled such that the sum of the demands for owner and rental housing equals

the total existing housing stock of 2892 billion dollars.



                    III. Analysis of Alternative Tax Regimes

      The impact of four tax reforms on the level of interest rates, rental

costs, and capital shares are calculated in this section. We begin with an

analysis of the reforms, consider the impacts on the net user costs (p—d's) and

the interest rate, and then turn to the capital stock effects. This analysis

effectively assumes zero saving response. Other saving assumptions are

considered in a final section.

Tax Reform Proposals

      Table 5 lists the important business tax parameters for current law and

the four tax reform plans. All reforms lower the corporate tax rate (and the

maximum personal tax rate, see Table 6) and eliminate the investment tax

credit. Proposed capital gains taxation and tax depreciation changes vary
                                        —15—


widely, however. Bradley—Gephardt treats these items less favorably than

current law: capital gains would be taxed at the regular income tax rate which

translates into a 30 percent rate vis—a—vis the current 20 percent, and tax

depreciation lives would be increased significantly, 40 years for structures

rather than the current 18 and 10 years for equipment rather than the current

5. Even with greater acceleration (250%DB versus l75%DB), first year tax

deductions for structures would decline from 10 percent to 6 percent and for

equipment the decline would be from 30 to 25 percent. Kemp—Kasten would treat

capital gains and tax depreciation far more generously than either current law

or the other proposals. On capital gains, a choice would exist, the options

being nominal gains taxed at 60% of the lowered regular rate or only real gains

taxed at regular rates. Moreover, property investments could be effectively

written off entirely in the year of purchase. Nonfinancial neutrality would

then exist for depreciable properties because p—d would equal r for all such

assets.

      Treasury I attempts to neutralize the tax system for inflation by

indexing everything. Only real capital gains, including those in inventories,

would be taxed ( =   0),   depreciation would be on a replacement, rather than

historic, cost basis, and only the "real" part of interest expense would be

taxed and could be deducted.'2 Treasury I also attempts to tax all assets and

business forms (except owner—occupied housing) equally. To this end, tax

depreciation for each depreciable asset would equal the Treasury's best

estimate of true economic depreciation, the investment tax credit would be

dropped, real capital gains would be taxed at the regular income tax rate, and

half of corporate dividends would be deductible at the corporate level. The

indexation of inventory gains, the removal of the tax credit, and the proposed

tax depreciation treatment would result in p—d equaling r/(l—-r) for all
                                        —16—

 properties except owner—occupied housing, and the partial dividend exclusion

 would reduce discrepancies between the r's for corporate and noncorporate

 investments.

       Treasury II retreats from these principles in significant respects: all

 interest would continue to be deductible, investors in nondepreciable assets

 would have the option of paying taxes on nominal capital gains at one—half of

 the regular income tax rate, tax depreciation would exceed economic

 depreciation, and only one—tenth of dividends would be deductible. Tax

 depreciation would be especially generous for equipment that continues to be

 classified as 3 or 5 years and for public utility structures; allowable

 depreciation would exceed that under current law even at zero inflation.

However, most 5—year equipment would be reclassified as 6,7 and even 10 year

equipment. For industrial structures, tax depreciation would be more favorable

only at inflation rates of 6 percent or greater.

      Table 6 contains tax rates relevant to household behavior. The numbers

for the different income levels in the table are the tax rates relevant to the

quantity—demanded and tenure—choice (in parentheses) decisions. The maximum

rates at the bottom of the table are the assumed marginal rates at which

interest income and corporate equity are taxed, and the rates implicitly built

into tax—exempt yields. The income tax rates reflect the deductibility of a

0.06 state and local income tax rate under current law and Bradley—Gephardt, but

the nondeductibility under Kemp—Kasten and the Treasury plans.

      From equation (7) and the surrounding discussion, T is a weighted average

of T./2 (one—tenth weight) and the capital gains tax rate (nine—tenths weight),

(l—excl)'r./4 where excl is the capital gains exclusion. The exclusions are:

0.6 (current law), 0.0 (Bradley—Gephardt and Treasury I), 0.4 (Kemp—Kasteri) and

0.5 (Treasury II). The tax rate implicit in tax—exempt yields is defined by
                                                                               Xe
= (3—O.3)Tf.
                                     —17--


       The own—equity financing rates and loan—to—value ratios for owner—occupied

 housing are fully specified by equations (6), (7), and (9) and the provisions of

 the reform proposals. For Bradley—Gephardt, the surtax applies to the three

 highest income classes; thus own—equity financing (the tax—exempt interest rate

 being the opportunity cost) is cheaper than debt financing and a 50 percent

 loan—to—value ratio is assumed. The interest indexation feature of Treasury I

 (3< 1) would also have a major impact on the opportunity cost of own equity

 financing generally (as well as on tax—exempt yields —— see note d to Table 6

Because only 55%/38% of nominal interest income would be taxed in a five/ten

percent inflation world, the tax rate relevant to own equity financing would be

55%/38% of the marginal rates shown in Table 6 or the tax—exempt rate,

whichever is less.

      The partial dividend exclusion is of little import in our model because

only 10 percent of equity financing is from new share issues on which dividends

are paid. (Dividends are saved initially by the the retention of earnings,

offsetting the future payment of dividends.) Thus y in the model is only 0.05

under Treasury I and 0.01 under Treasury II, 10 percent of the 50 and 10 percent

exclusions, respectively.



Impacts on Interest Rates and Capital Allocation, 5% Inflation

      Table 7 lists the present value of depreciation allowances (z) for

corporate and noncorporate (in parentheses) investments under current law and

the various reforms. The values reflect the depreciation rules, the assumed 5%

inflation rate (the depreciation base is indexed under the Treasury plans and

Kemp—Kasten), and the discount rates listed at the bottom of the table. The

differences in discount rates across assets for any given tax regime primarily

reflect two factors.13 For corporate and noncorporate equipment, the

differences are largely determined by the extent of taxation of equity returns
                                      —18—

at the personal level (the differences vary directly with T). For noncorporate

equipment and structures, the differences largely reflect the two and a half

percentage point difference in risk [(l—b) equals 0.025 for real estate and

0.05 for other assets]. The lower is the discount rate, the greater is the

present value of depreciation deductions, ceteris paribus.

      Because the discount rates are quite similar across reforms, differences

in the z values across reforms are largely due to the generosity of the

depreciation allowances. Clearly, Kemp—Kasten is the most generous (its z's are

less than unity because the real after—tax discount rate implied by the model,

roughly 7 percent, on average, exceeds 3½ percent). Treasury II is close to

cuxrent law for 18 year structures, but more favorable for equipment and far

more favorable for public utilities. Both Treasury I and Bradley—Gephardt are

considerably less generous than current law.

      Table 8 contains the level of interest rates and the various investment

hurdle rates under current law and the reforms. As can be seen, the reform—

induced decline in interest rates varies from 3 percentage points under Treasury

I, 2 points with Bradley—Gephardt, one point with Treasury II, to zero with

Kemp—Kasten. This variation contrasts markedly with the near equality of

after—tax discount rates across reforms listed in Table 7. The far higher level

of interest rates under Kemp—Kasten than under Treasury I follows directly from

their different methods of attempting to achieve tax neutrality across assets

with different lives. As was shown above, when neutrality is achieved by

expensing (Kemp—Kasten), the real after—tax interest rate equals the net

marginal products; when neutrality is obtained by setting tax depreciation

equal to true economic depreciation (Treasury I), the real after—tax interest

rate equals the net marginal products times one less the business tax rate.
                                                 -19-

      The biases inherent in current law when inflation is five percent were

discussed above. Whether the reforms would dampen them is of interest. All

reforms do reduce the bias in favor of equipment by removing the investment

tax credit, but some bias is still retained under Treasury II and

Kemp—Kasten owing to the indexed depreciation schedules in excess of economic

depreciation. The Treasury plans and Bradley—Gephardt would also more than

remove the bias against inventories, the Treasury plans through their

indexation of inventory gains and Bradley-Gephardt by its generally unfav-

orable treatment of depreciable assets. The bias in favor of utilities

4-
     , sr
  e± 4-   1..   4    1.- 4,
                    n.       .
                         . .,1 1 ... a -..   own.
                                               4
                                                  ,
                                                 -1-...   .l1.,   ...   1
                                                                  £emJ a. 4' 4-L.-
                                                                          0i   ui    4..-.,-   e-.l- meI- -I-...
credit, but the rental cost declines nevertheless under Kemp—Kasten and

especially Treasury II because of their relatively generous depreciation

allowances.


      The plans differ the most, however, in their treatment of owner—occupied

housing. Under current law, the rental cost of this housing is over 3

percentage points higher for households with adjusted gross income of $17,500

than for households with AGI of $130,000. All reforms would narrow this

difference, but the spread is still nearly 2 percentage points under Treasury II

and 1½ points under Treasury I. With Bradley—Gephardt and Kemp—Kasten, the

spread is only one—third of a point.14 Treasury I would also sharply increase

the bias in favor of all owner—occupied housing by its indexation of interest

expense for all investments except owner—occupied housing, and Bradley—Gephardt

would increase the bias by its generally unfavorable treatment of depreciable

assets.

      The data in Table 9 indicate how the capital stock would be reallocated

under the various reforms. These reallocations follow fairly directly from the

realignment of investment hurdle rates just discussed. Owing to the loss of the

investment tax credit, equipment and utilities would shrink under all plans,

except utilities would rise in response to the far more generous depreciation
                                       —20..


 allowances in Treasury II. Industrial and commercial structures, in contrast,

would grown under all reforms except Treasury I. The Treasury I results are

driven by the exemption of home mortgage interest from the interest indexation

provision. This exemption, along with the 3 percentage point decline in

interest rates, raises the demand for owner—occupied housing by 28 percent, a

rise fueled by an 8 percentage point increase in the homeownership rate. While

rental housing is curtailed correspondingly, residential structures rise by 9

percent overall, crowding out other real capital. Treasury II and Kemp—Kasten

have virtually identical impacts, except for the distribution of corporate

structures between utilities and industrials; Bradley—Gephardt is similar to

Kemp—Kasten except that it generally favors real estate assets more and

corporate assets less.

      The homeownership rate declines slightly under Treasury II and Kemp—

Kasten, with the declines being concentrated in the higher income classes where

the cut in marginal tax rates is greatest. The unchanged rate under Bradley—

Gephardt is the net result of significant increase in ownership by households

with incomes under $25,000 and decrease by those with incomes over $55,000.

Inflation Neutrality

      Only Treasury I and Kemp—Kasten make serious attempts at achieving

inflation neutrality, the latter by proposing effective expensing of capital

outlays and the former by setting tax depreciation equal to economic

depreciation and indexing both depreciation allowances and interest. As can be

seen in Table 10, Kemp—Kasten comes close to achieving neutrality: no asset

other than inventories changes by more than one percent in response to a ten

percentage point increase in expected inflation, and the inventory change is

only —3 percent. With indexing of inventories, Kemp—Kasten would be inflation

neutral. The interest rate response to inflation is roughly the lId—i) one

would expect (the average r for Kemp—Kasten is about 0.3).
                                               —21—

         Treasury I is far less successful in achieving neutrality. This failure

follows directly from the exclusion of home mortgage interest expense from the

interest indexation provision. As a result, the interest rate response to

inflation is greater than the unity one would expect in a fully interest—indexed

system, and the demand for business capital, especially double—taxed corporate

capital, falls. Because the interest rate increase is not sufficient to

maintain the real after—tax interest rate for owner—occupied housing [di/di

l/(l_rh) '   where
                     Th
                          is   the rate at which nominal home mortgage interest is

deductible], a significant increase in both the homeownership rate and the

quantity of housing demanded by owning households occurs.

         Higher inflation is very negative for owner—occupied housing under current

law and would continue to be under Treasury II because the average tax rate at

which expenses are deductible is significantly less for owner housing than for

other capital. Thus, the real after—tax interest rate paid by owners tends to

rise, while that for other capital falls (see Titman, 1982) 15 This negative

impact would be dampened under the other reforms because the differential

between tax rates at which expenses are deductible would narrow (less by

Bradley—Gephardt, which allows mortgage interest deductibility at only the 14

percent rate, than under Kemp—Kasten). Nonetheless, both Treasury II and

Bradly—Gephardt are significantly more inflation neutral than current law.

         The other major implication of Table 10 is the benefit of inflation for

less risky noncorporate depreciable real estate (commercial and rental

structures), relative to risky corporate depreciable properties. The double

taxation of corporate capital implies a greater increase in its financing rate

for a given increase in the interest rate than is the case for noncorporate

business. The relatively greater financing rate raises the rental cost both

directly and indirectly via reduced depreciation deductions in present value

terms.
                                        —22--


                           V. Supply of Capital Responses

       The impacts of the reform proposals on interest rates reported above were

based upon the assumption of zero interest elasticity of savings or, more

accurately, of the supply of capital. Other assumptions are possible. The

implications of them are briefly explored here.

       Summers (1981) has noted that infinite long—run interest rate elasticity

is implied by the pure life—cycle model when households have a strong bequest

motive. Under this assumption, the after—tax return to savers is fixed and thus

the new interest rate level (1 ) can be exnressed in terms of the pre—reform

level (I0 ) and the tax rates on saving before and after the enactment of the

reform (t and t ):
         0     r



                                             l—t
                                       1 =
                                        r    1—t
                                                   0.
                                                       1.
                                                        0
                                                   r




       To utilize this relation, the t's must be identified with a tax rate in

our model. Higher income households are less likely to be wealth constrained

than other households and are thus more likely to behave as the life—cycle model

suggests. Higher income households also do most of the saving in the U.S. and

hold most of the wealth. The natural counterpart for t in the model is thus     x,
the tax rate implicit in tax—exempt yields. This is the after—tax risk—free

return to households with incomes above roughly $70,000 under current law and

all the reforms.

      Table 11 lists the calculated interest rates under the various reforms for

two different methods of calculation. Column 1 summarizes the level of rates

provided by our capital allocation model (zero saving or supply of capital

response) .   Column 2 presumes that savings behavior maintains the real 10—year

tax—exempt yield. As can be seen, endogenous saving or supply behavior leads to
                                         —23—


interest rate declines roughly comparable to those obtained with the fixed—

capital model for all reforms except Kemp—Kasten. Thus for the Treasury plans

and Bradley—Gephardt, the percentage changes in the various capital components

would be quite similar in the case of endogenous saving to those presented

above.

         With Kemp—Kasten, endogenous saving results in a percentage point decline

in rates; marginal tax rates are cut significantly and thus before tax interest

rates must decline to prevent after—tax interest rates from rising.16 In

contrast, the substantial investment incentives (depreciation and capital gains)

prevent the total demand for capital from falling, the quantity demanded would

increase in response to the decline in interest rates and thus all capital

components would tend to grow.

      A further complicating factor in the determination of the impact of tax

reform on interest rates is the net foreign demand for U.S. capital. Unless

foreign countries cut their marginal tax rates on interest income or move their

interest rates pan passu with those in the U.S., a decline in U.S. interest

rates would represent a decline in after—tax returns to foreigners. As a result

capital would flow out of the U.S. and domestic interest rates would not need to

fall as much to bring the demand and supply of capital in the U.S. into balance.

In the extreme case of no adjustment in foreign taxes or interest rates and

perfectly elastic international capital flows, U.S. interest rates would not

fall at all but the U.S. capital stock would, the fall being greater the larger

is the decline in interest rates computed from the fixed—capital stock model. A

more balanced view would incorporate less than perfectly elastic capital flows

and significant changes in foreign interest rates in response to movements in

U.S. rates. Thus a fall in foreign demand for U.S. capital would tend to dampen

the decline in U.S. rates, but not eliminate it.
                                       —24—


         For Treasury II and Kemp—Kasten, the domestic and foreign supply of

capital responses are offsetting. Because the decline in interest rates

necessary to maintain real after—tax interest returns to domestic savers is

greater than that generated by the fixed—capital model, interest rates will tend

to fall by more than the latter calculation and the U.S. capital stock would

tend to grow. On the other hand, any decline in U.S. rates induces a movement

of capital abroad which tends to limit the decline. Thus, the direction of bias

in the rate declines computed from the fixed—capital stock model is uncertain.

         For Treasury I and Bradley—Gephardt, the domestic saving response (weakly)

reinforces the dampening influence of the foreign response, i.e., the level of

taxable interest rates necessary to maintain tax—exempt yields is higher than

that generated by the fixed capital stock model. We ran alternative simulations

for rate declines equal to two—thirds those produced by the fixed—capital model.

In these, the aggregate capital stock was determined endogenously as that

consistent with the imposed rates. The total capital stock fell by 7 percent in

the Treasury I simulation, where the interest rate was raised one percentage

point above the model determined level, and by 5 percent in the Bradley—Gephardt

simulation, where the interest rate was raised by two—thirds of a percentage

point. As a result, all capital components fell relative to the fixed—capital

simulations. Because the higher level of interest rates lowers the present

value of tax depreciation on longer—lived capital more than on shorter—lived

capital, the allocations of the lower capital stocks are tilted slightly more

toward shorter lived capital than are the allocations of the fixed capital

stock.
                                       —25—


                                    vi. Summary

      The paper begins with presentation of a methodology for computing rental

costs of capital under any tax regime. Current tax law is then specified and

rental costs are calculated. At a five percent inflation rate, the tax—favored

assets under current law are equipment, with its generous tax credit, and

housing, especially that occupied by high—income households. The tax—penalized

assets are inventories, whose inflationary gains are not indexed, and corporate

structures, especially industrial structures that receive no tax credit.     Also,

corporate investments are penalized relative to noncorporate, owing to their

double taxation, and risky assets are penalized relative to less risky real

estate assets. The difference in hurdle rates for industrial structures and

housing, on average, is 4½ percentage points. The difference in the cost of

housing for high and low income owners is over 3 percentage points.

      A model is then constructed to allow calculation of the impact of changes

in tax regimes and/or expected inflation on interest rates and the allocation of

real capital. The model allocates     fixed private capital stock amourig various

classes of nonresidential and residential capital, depending upon the rental

costs for the capital components, the price elasticities of demand with respect

to the rental costs, and the elasticities of homeownership with respect to the

cost of owning versus renting. The interest rate adjusts in response to tax

changes so as to maintain the aggregate demand for capital at this initial

level. The fixed capital stock assumption implies zero interest elasticity of

saving.

      The impacts of four tax reforms are then analyzed: Treasury I (TI)

Treasury II (TII), Bradley—Gephardt (BG) and Kemp—Kasten (KK). The greater are

the investment incentives of a tax plan, the higher is the level of interest

rates computed by the model. Accordingly, interest rates are unchanged in
                                      —26—


response to KK with its near expensing of depreciable capital, but decline

by a percentage point under TI, two   points      under BG and three points under

Til with indexation of interest income and        expense   (except home mortgage

interest).


       All reforms reduce the current bias in      favor    of equipment by removing

the   investment tax credit, but some bias is still retained under Treasury II
and Kemp—Kasten owing to the indexed depreciation schedules in excess          of

economic depreciation. The Treasury plans and Bradley-Gephardt would also
more than remove the bias against inventories, the Treasury plans through

their indexation of inventory gains and Bradley-Gephardt by its generally

unfavorable treatment of depreciable assets. The bias in favor of utili-

ties tends to shrink in all cases owning     to   the removal of the investment

tax credit, but the rental cost declines nevertheless under Treasury II,

especially, Kemp—Kasten because of their exceptionally generous depreciation

allowances.

       The plans differ the most, however, in their treatment of owner—occupied

housing. Under current law, the rental cost of this housing is over 3

percentage points higher for households with adjusted gross income of $17,500

than for households with AGI of $130,000. All reforms would narrow this

difference, but the spread is still nearly 2 percentage points under Treasury II

and 1½ points under Treasury I. With Bradley—Gephardt and Kemp—Kasten, the

spread is only one—third point. Treasury I would also sharply increase the bias

in favor of all owner—occupied housing by its indexation of interest expense for

all investments except owner—occupied housing, and Bradley—Gephardt would

increase the bias by its generally unfavorable treatment of depreciable assets.

       We next examined the sensitivity of the tax regimes to inflation by

computing the changes in asset categories when the expected inflation rate

increases from zero to ten percent. Kemp—Kasten is close to inflation neutral;

only inventories change by more than one percent and there the change is only 3
                                         —27—


percent. Treasury I is even less neutral than current law, owing to its

exclusion of home mortgage interest expense from the interest indexation

provision. Treasury II and Bradley—Gephardt are significantly more neutral than

current law, but each contains a strong bias against owner—occupied housing,

because interest is deducted at a much lower tax rate by owners than by other

business, and in favor of depreciable real estate.

      Lastly, we considered endogenous supply of capital responses —— a positive

elasticity of domestic and net foreign saving to increases in the relevant real

after—tax interest rates. The domestic and foreign responses are offsetting

under Treasury II and Kemp—Kasten, leading us to believe that the computed

interest rate effects are appropriate. The expected interest rate declines in

response to Treasury I and Bradley—Gephardt could be smaller than those computed

with the fixed—capital stock model.
                                      —28—




                                   FOOTNOTES

l.This does not mean we believe the plans to be revenue—neutral. In

particular, Kemp—Kasten clearly is not. We analyze it nonetheless because its

proinvestment features are unique among the reforms.



2.We do not consider the impact of imperfect loss offsets. For an analysis of

these and other details of corporate taxation, see Auerbach (1983).



3.This is only true, of course, if the i's in equation (1) are the same for all

assets. In fact, the i'S are zero for owner—occupied housing. Given this

fact, expensing for depreciable assets and the nondeductibility of property

taxes on owner—occupied housing would lead to tax neutrality —— p —     d    =   r   for

both depreciable assets and owner—occupied housing ——    but   setting tax

depreciation equal to economic depreciation would not.



4.Optimal bond trading is discussed in Constantinides and Ingersoll (1984).

Other sources of the low implicit yield in longer—term tax exempts are the

greater risk of losses due to default and call on municipals relative to

Treasuries and the 80 percent limitation of the portion of interest on

indebtedness to carry tax exempts that commercial banks can deduct.



5.Sixty percent of owning households with incomes under $15,000 in 1983 had

house—to—income ratios exceeding 4, suggesting that the households were

retired, and did not have a mortgage. In contrast, eighty percent of owning

households with incomes over $25,000 had mortgages and only five percent with

incomes above $25,000 had house—to—income ratios above 4.
6.The National Association of Homebuilders (1985, p.51) assumes a 14 percent

value for e when          is six percent. This inflation rate translates into a tax—

exempt rate just above 8 percent in our model and thus a risk premium of about

6 percent. Price—Waterhouse has used an e of 16 percent in their calculations.



7.Hendershott (1981) discusses why midway values would be expected.



8.The impact of (l—b) on p is (l—TZ)/(l—T) (l+ir),        ignoring   the effect on z.

The impact on p—I, the risk—adjusted hurdle rate, is thus [T(l—z)—lr(l—T)]/(l—

T)   (l+Tr).   With z =    = 0.5,   the two and a half percentage point greater (1—b)J

for risky assets raises p—by just over a percentage point.



9.The model is both an extension and simplification of that used by Hendershott

and Shilling (1982) to analyze the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981. The

extension is a more detailed treatment of nonresidential capital; the

simplification     is an exogenous specification of risk premia.       Gravelle   (1985)

uses a somewhat similar model to analyze Treasury I.



lO.The rental costs for 3— and 5—year equipment were seen in Table 2 to be

quite similar.



ll.The decline has already shown up in younger, more mobile households. For

married households under 40, the decline in ownership rates between 1980 and

1983 were, by five year age category: 14—19 (.273 to .168), 20—24 (.361 to

.319) 25—29 (.586 to .522) , 30—34 (.752 to .697) and 35—39 (.826 to .786)

(The .273 for the 14—19 category is for 1978, when this ownership rate peaked.)

For older married households, ownership rates have been constant or have risen.
                                          —30—


12.The Treasury would assume a real interest rate of 6 percent and allow the

deduction of (or would tax) only 6/(6+Tr) of interest paid (or earned) , where   ir




is   the actual inflation rate in a tax year. Thus if inflation were 5 percent,

only 55 percent of interest would be taxed and deducted. With zero inflation,

all interest would be taxed and deducted; with 10% inflation only 38 percent

would.      (However, mortgage interest outlays on one's principal residence would

be fully deductible.)



l3.The differences are also somewhat sensitive to b If r —    x is large and to T
— r.   ,   which is over 0.1 for Kemp—Kasten.



14.Deductibility of home mortgage interest (and state and local taxes?) at the

lowest 15 percent rate, a la Bradley—Gephardt, would enhance the efficiency

aspects of the Treasury plans.



15.This statement would seem to be at variance with the sharp shift to

homeownership in the 1970s. The latter occurred because interest rates did not

fully reflect expected general inflation and expected house price inflation

likely far exceeded expected general inflation.



16.If Kemp—Kasten were made revenue neutral by increasing tax rates (marginal

and average) on capital income, the decline in interest rates would be less.
                                       —31—

                                      REFERENCES



Auerbach, A.J., "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity, 2, 1983, 451—505.



Berndt, E.R., "Reconciling Alternative Estimates of the Elasticity of

Substitutio3" Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1976, 59—68.



Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheets for the U.S.

Economy, April 1984.



Bulow, J.I.1 and L.H. Summers, "The Taxation of Risky Assets," Journal of

Political Economy, 92, 1984, 20—39.



Constantinides, G.M., and J.E. Ingersoll, Jr.,, "Optimal Bond Trading with

Personal Taxes," Journal of Financial Economics, 13, September 1984, 299—335.



Fullerton, D., "The Indexation of Interest, Depreciation, and Capital Gains: A

Model of Investment Incentives," NBER Working Paper 1655, June 1985.



Gravelle, Jane G., "Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the Taxation

of Income from Business Capital," National Tax Journal, 35, March 1982, 1—20.




_______   "Assessing Structural Tax Revision with Economic Models: The Treasury
Tax Proposals and the Allocation of Investment," Congressional Research Service,

The Library of Congress, April 8, 1985.



Hall, R.E. and D.W. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American

Economic Review, June 1967, 56, 391—414.
Hendershott, P.H., "The Decline in Aggregate Share Values: Taxation, Valuation

Errors, Risk and Prof itability," American Economic Review, December 1981, 909—

922.




Hendershott, P.H. and D.C. Ling, "Tax Reform, Homeownership, and the Demand for

Housing," mimeo, August 1985.



Hendershott, P.H., and J.D. Shilling, "The Impacts on Capital Allocation of

Some Aspects of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance

Quarterly, April 1982, 242—273.



Hendershott, P.H., and J. Slemrod, "Taxes and User Cost of Capital for Owner—

Occupied Housing," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics

Association, Winter 1983, 375—393.



King, M.A., "An Econometric Model of Tenure Choice and the Demand for Housing

as a Joint Decision," Journal of Public Economics, 14, 137—159.



Musgrave, J.C., "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United States,

1980—83," Survey of Current Business August 1984, 54—59.



National Association of Home Builders, "Impacts of the President's Tax Proposal

on Housing," July 1985.



Summers, L.H., "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth

Model," American Economic Review, 71, September 1981, 533—544.



Titman, S.D., "The Effect of Anticipated Inflation on Housing Market

Equilibrium," Journal of Finance, 37, 1982, 827—842.
                                      —33—


                                    Table 1

          Tax Rates Relevant to Housing Decisions Under Current Law



Income
______                        Quantity_Demanded                 Tenure Choice
                                                                ______________

                            Federal    State Total

 17,500                       .14        .03    .166                  .147

 27,500                       .16        .035   .189                  .210

 40,000                       .18/.22 .04       .232                  .279

 70,000                      .28/.33 .05        .340                  .390

130,000                       .42        .06    .455                  .450
                                         —34—




                                       Table    2


                         Net (of Depreciation) Risk—Adjusted
                            Rental Costs Under Current Law



                  Tax        Depr.        ir=.00                      ir=. 10
                 Credit Rate              i=.0381          i=. 11     1=. 1859




Inventories                               .0640            .0806      .1003

Equipment

   3—year          .06        .32         .0411            .0518       0639
                                         (.0284)          (.0436)    (.0462)

   5—year         .10         .15         .0421            .0510      .0606
                                         (.0301)          (.0428)    (.0429)

Structures

   10—year        .10         .08         .06 48           .0737      .0818

   15—year        .10        .05          .0751            .0822      .0879

   Industrial      —         . 03        .0961             .0992      .1022

   Real Estate     —         .03         (.0685)          (.0618)    (.0537)

Owner—Occupied
Housing

   17,500          —         .015        .0548            .0616       .0708

   27,500          —         .015        .0536            .0589       .0666

   40,000          —         .015        .0529            .0539       .0588

   70,000          —         .015        .0462            .0415       .0397

  130,000          —         .015        .0411            .0299       .0219

*Measured as p—d, less 0.025 for corporate assets and noncorporate equipment
to adjust for their assumed greater risk. Data for noncorporate business
investments are in parentheses.
                                       —35—

                                     Table 3
              Private Capital Stock in the U.S. at the End of 1983

                                  Dollar Value              Percent Share
                                   (billions)
Inventories                                     814              12.0

      Corporate                  769

      Noncorporate                45

Equipment                                     1451

      Corporate                 1183                             17.4

      Noncorporate               269                                 4.0

Nonresidential Structures                     1634

      10—Year Public             138                                 2.0
      Utilities

      15—Year Public             322                                 4.7
      Utilities

      Other Corporate            546                                 7.9

      Noncorporate               628                                 9.2

Rental Housing                                  624                  9.2

      Corporate                   70

      Noncorporate               553

Owner—Occupied Housing                        2269               33.4
                                              6793              100.0

Sources: Data for all assets except inventories and public utilities are from
Musgrave (1984). The inventory data are from the Federal Reserve (1984) and
the public utility data are based on the fractions given in Gravelle (1982),
i.e., 28 percent of nonresidential structures are public utilities and 33
percent of these have a 10—year tax life.
                                         —36—

                                          Table 4
                     Assumed Distribution of Owner and Rental Housing
                                 Across Six Income Classes
                                                                  Owner—
Income        Households    Fraction    % of Income % of Income Occupied Rental
Range          (millions)   that Own    of Owners    of Renters  Housing Housing
(thousands)

less than 12½    9.6         0           0            10                   79

l2½—25          24         .578         14            19        248      162

25—30           12         .614         12            13        211      116
30—50           22.4       .657         33            32        639      281
50—100           9.6       .739         28            19        601      161
over 100         2.4       .785         13             7        333       61

                80                     100           100       2032      860
                                               Table   5


                       Important Tax Parameters for Business Investment



                   Current Law     Bradley—Gephardt          Kemp—Katen       Treasury   I     Treasury II
Maximum
Corporate
Tax Rate
    Federal         .46                 .30                      .35               .33             .33
    Total           .4924               .342                     .389              .37             .37

Investment Tax       yes                no                        no               no               no
Credit

Capital Gains      Nominal gains   Nominal gains           Nominal gains at   Real gains       Nominal gains at
                   at 40% of        at regular             60% of regular     at regular       50% of regular
                   regular rate       rate                 rate or real       rate             rate or real
                                                           gains at regular                    gains at
                                                           rate                                regular rate

Depreciation *      175%/150% DB   250% DE over               Near      **    3%   per year,   DB/SL over
Tax Deductions       or SL over     40/10 years               Expensing       SL, indexed      28/6 years
First year:         18/5 years                                                                 indexed
   Structures         10%                6%                        6%               3              4%
   Equipment          30%               25%                       20%              18%            27%

Tax on Inven—      70% of          70% of                  70% of                   0              0
tory Gains         regular rate    regular rate            regular rate

Interest             no                 no                        no               yes            no
Indexation

Partial Dividend     no                 no                        no           yes(50%)         yes(lO%)
Exclusion


*All tax reforms have multiple maturity equipment classes. The first (full)
                                                                             years depreciation rates
    for an "average" piece of equipment and for a current 18 year industrial structure.
  More than 100 percent, indexed for inflation, of the original value is written off at
                                                                                        straight line
rate over 25 years. With a low 3½ percent real discount rate, this is
                                                                       equivalent to expensing.
                                        —38—

                                       Table 6
                              Tax Rates Related to Households

Income                Current        Bradley—           Kemp—               Treasury
Level                  Law           Gephardt           Kasten          I          II

 17,500                .166             .166              .27          .18        .18
                      (.147)           (.068)            (.159)       (.115)     (.120)

 27,500                .189             .170              .275         .185       .185
                      (.210)           (.099)            (.222)       (.138)     (.149)

 40,000                •232a            .174              .28         .19         .19
                      (.279)           (.139)            (.265)       (.166)     (.204)

 70,000                •340b            .183              .29         .30        .30
                      (.383)           (.204)            (.286)       (.274)     (.292)

130,000                .455             .192              .30         .41        .41
                      (.450)           (.208)            (.294)       (.367)     (.386)

Maximum Rates
  Interest Income(t.
                  ''
                     )C53               .342              .30         .41        .41
  Real Equity(t)      .0742             .0941             .0555                  .0667
  Tax Exempts(x)      .322              .210              .245
                                                                      .l12
                                                                      .081       .231

Deductibility of
Property Taxes          Yes             Yes               Yes           No          No

a)Average of 0.213 and 0.251 used for the $30,000 to $50,000 income range;
  the rate jumps around $38,000.

b)Average of 0.316 and 0.364 used for the $50,000 to $100,000 income range;
  the rate jumps around $66,000.

c)These are the rates at which interest income is taxed (real interest under Treasury
  I ).  The rate at which business (noncorporate) interest expense would be deducted
  is lower under Kemp—Kasten and the Treasury plans, 0.2856 and 0.389 respectively,
  owing to the state and local offset at the Federal level.

d)This rate varies with the expected inflation rate because x   (—O.3)Tf and B =
  .06/(.06+r). The value shown is for it = 0.05. For it =   o.o
                                                              x = 0.231; for it =
  0.1, xe = 0.0248.                                               e
                                             —39—

                                           Table 7
                           Present Value of Depreciation Deductions
                            for Corporate and Noncorporate Assets*
                                  (Inflation Rate Equals 5%)

               Current         Treasury I Treasury II    Bradley—     Kemp—
                Law                                      Gephardt     Kasten
Equipment

    3 year          .868         .853        .915         .885           .933
                (.876)          (.870)      (.922)       (.893)         (.936)

    5 year          .782         .705        .836         .711           .898
                (.795)          (.734)      (.850)       (.728)         (.902)

Structures

    10 year         .622         .542        .807         .560           .770

    15 year         .507         .415        .749         .440           .710

    18 year      .483            .292        .428         .350           .669
                (.587)          (448)       (.609)       (.434)         (.845)

Nominal After—Tax
Discount Rate

   Corporate    .1264            .1308       .1301        .1281          .1345
   Noncor. Equ. .1170            .1200       .1226        .1180          .1321
   Real Estate .0843             .0915       .0922        .0889          .1055

*Noncorporate values are in parentheses.
                                           —40—                          19a

                                      Table 8
              Interest Rates and Risk—Adjusted Net Rental User Costs*
                          (Expected Inflation Rate of 5%)

                         Current   Treasury       Treasury   Bradley—   Kemp—
                           Law         I            II       Gephardt   Kasten
Level of
Interest Rates             .11       .0800          .1012     .0911     .1106

Inventories               .0806      .0616          .0609     .0698     .0800

Equipment

    Corporate             .0510      .0914          .0731     .0831     .0705

    Noncorporate          .0428      .0784          .0651     .0701     .0620

Structures

    Utilities (15 yrs)    .0822      .0957          .0699     .0856     .0795

    Industrials           .0992      .0965          .0870     .0847     .0787

    Commercial and
    Rental (Noncorp.)     .0618      .0640          .0577     .0568     .0580

Owner—Occupied Housing

    17,500                .0616      .0398          .0548     .0466     .0503

    27,500                .0589      .0395          .0544     .0461     .0498

    40,000               .0539       .0391          .0539     .0442     .0492

    70,000               .0415       .0320         .0443      .0437     .0482

   130,000               .0299      .0249          .0357     .0432      .0472

*Measured as p—d, less 0.025 for corporate assets and noncorporate equipment to
adjust for their assumed greater risk.
                                        —41—


                                       Table 9
                 Reallocation of Capital When Inflation is 5 Percent
                                 (Percentage Change)

                          Treasury I    Treasury II Bradley—     Kemp—
                                                    Gephardt     Kasten

Inventories                    2               2        1              0

Equipment                    —15           —9         —12          —8

Utility                       —9            7          —3              0
Structures

Industrial                     2            9          10          15
Sti utuLe5

Commercial                    —2            5           6              4
Structures
Residential                    9            0           3              0
Structures


Detail on Housing:

Change in Home              .078        —.025       —.001       —.026
Ownership Rate

Percentage Change in

   Rental                    —33            7           2              8

   Owner                      28           —3           4          —4
                                        —42—

                                       Table 10
             Percentage Changes in Capital in Response to an Increase in
                     Expected Inflation from Zero to Ten Percent

                       Current Law Treasury I Treasury II     Bradley      Kemp—
                                                              Gephardt     Kasten

Inventories                —3           —2         —l            -2

Equipment                  —8           —6         —l            —5            1


Utility                    —8         —11          —3            —6
Structures

Industrial                 —4         —12          —3            —3            1
Structures

Commercial                  18          —6         12             9            0
Structures

Housing                     4            8         —1             2            0

di/dTr                   1.48        1.16        1.47          1.28         1.45

Change in Home
Ownership Rate          —.100         .049      —.113         —.058        —.029
                                     —43—
                                                                    23a

                                    Table 11
              Interest Rates Under Alternative Saving Assumptions
                (Rate assumed to be 0.11 in absence of reforms)

                 Fixed Capital                     Constant Real
                 Stock Alloca—                     Tax—Exempt
                 tion Model                        Yield (10 Yr.)

Treasury I          .0800                                .0812

Treasury II         .1012                                .0970

Bradley—            .0911                                .0944
Gephardt

Kemp—               .1106                                .0988
Kasten
