                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       LIFE AND GROWTH

                                           Charles I. Jones

                                        Working Paper 17094
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17094


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




This paper was previously circulated under the title "The Costs of Economic Growth.'' I am grateful
to Raj Chetty, Bob Hall, Peter Howitt, Pete Klenow, Omar Licandro, David Romer, Michele Tertilt,
Martin Weitzman and participants in seminars at Berkeley, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
an NBER EFG meeting, Stanford, UC Irvine, and UCSD for comments, and to the National Science
Foundation for financial support. Arthur Chiang, William Vijverberg and Mu-Jeung Yang provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Life and Growth
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 17094
May 2011
JEL No. E0,I10,O3,O4

                                            ABSTRACT

Some technologies save lives — new vaccines, new surgical techniques, safer highways. Others threaten
lives — pollution, nuclear accidents, global warming, the rapid global transmission of disease, and
bioengineered viruses. How is growth theory altered when technologies involve life and death instead
of just higher consumption? This paper shows that taking life into account has first-order consequences.
Under standard preferences, the value of life may rise faster than consumption, leading society to value
safety over consumption growth. As a result, the optimal rate of consumption growth may be substantially
lower than what is feasible, in some cases falling all the way to zero.


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu
2                                             CHARLES I. JONES



          Certain events quite within the realm of possibility, such as a major as-
          teroid collision, global bioterrorism, abrupt global warming — even cer-
          tain lab accidents— could have unimaginably terrible consequences up
          to and including the extinction of the human race... I am not a Green,
          an alarmist, an apocalyptic visionary, a catastrophist, a Chicken Little,
          a Luddite, an anticapitalist, or even a pessimist. But... I have come to
          believe that what I shall be calling the “catastrophic risks” are real and
          growing...


                                                         — Richard A. Posner (2004, p. v)



1. Introduction

In October 1962, the Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of a nuclear
holocaust. President John F. Kennedy put the chance of nuclear war at “somewhere
between one out of three and even.” The historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., at the time
an adviser of the President, later called this “the most dangerous moment in human
history.”1 What if a substantial fraction of the world’s population had been killed in
a nuclear holocaust in the 1960s? In some sense, the overall cost of the technologi-
cal innovations of the preceding 30 years would then seem to have outweighed the
benefits.
        While nuclear devastation represents a vivid example of the potential costs of
technological change, it is by no means unique. The benefits from the internal
combustion engine must be weighed against the costs associated with pollution
and global warming. Biomedical advances have improved health substantially but
made possible weaponized anthrax and lab-enhanced viruses. The potential bene-
fits of nanotechnology stand beside the threat that a self-replicating machine could
someday spin out of control. Experimental physics has brought us x-ray lithogra-
phy techniques and superconductor technologies but also the remote possibility of
devastating accidents as we smash particles together at ever higher energies. These
    1
        For these quotations, see (Rees, 2003, p. 26).
                                   LIFE AND GROWTH                                      3


and other technological dangers are detailed in a small but growing literature on so-
called “existential risks”; Posner (2004) is likely the most familiar of these references,
but see also Bostrom (2002), Joy (2000), Overbye (2008), and Rees (2003).
   Technologies need not pose risks to the existence of humanity in order to have
costs worth considering. New technologies come with risks as well as benefits.
A new pesticide may turn out to be harmful to children. New drugs may have
unforeseen side effects. Marie Curie’s discovery of the new element radium led
to many uses of the glow-in-the-dark material, including a medicinal additive to
drinks and baths for supposed health benefits, wristwatches with luminous dials,
and as makeup — at least until the dire health consequences of radioactivity were
better understood. Other examples of new products that were intially thought to be
safe or even healthy include thalidomide, lead paint, asbestos, and cigarettes.
   While some new technologies are dangerous, many others are devoted to sav-
ing lives. Lichtenberg (2005), for example, estimates that new pharmaceuticals ac-
counted for perhaps 40 percent of the rise in life expectancy between 1986 and
2000. MRI machines, better diagnostic equipment, and new surgical techniques
as well as anti-lock brakes, airbags, and pollution scrubbers are all examples of life-
saving technologies. How is growth theory altered when technologies involve life
and death instead of just higher consumption?
   Consider what might be called a “Russian roulette” theory of economic growth.
Suppose the overwhelming majority of new ideas are beneficial and lead to growth
in consumption. However, there is a tiny chance that a new idea will be particu-
larly dangerous and cause massive loss of life. Do discovery and economic growth
continue forever in such a framework, or should society eventually decide that con-
sumption is high enough and stop playing the game of Russian roulette? How is this
conclusion affected if researchers can also develop life-saving technologies?
   The answers to these questions turn out to depend crucially on the shape of
preferences. For a large class of conventional specifications, including log utility,
safety eventually trumps economic growth. The optimal rate of growth may be sub-
stantially lower than what is feasible, in some cases falling all the way to zero.
   This project builds on a diverse collection of papers. Murphy and Topel (2003),
4                                  CHARLES I. JONES



Nordhaus (2003), and Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) emphasize a range of
economic consequences of the high value attached to life. Murphy and Topel (2006)
extend this work to show that the economic value of future innovations that reduce
mortality is enormous. Weisbrod (1991) early on emphasized that the nature of
health spending surely influences the direction and rate of technical change. Hall
and Jones (2007) — building on Grossman (1972) and Ehrlich and Chuma (1990) —
is a direct precursor to the present paper, in ways that will be discussed in detail
below. Other related papers take these ideas in different directions. Acemoglu and
Johnson (2007) estimate the causal impact of changes in life expectancy on income.
Malani and Philipson (2011) provide a careful analysis of the differences between
medical research and research in other sectors.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple model that il-
lustrates the main results. The advantage of this initial framework is its simplic-
ity, which makes the basic intuition of the results apparent. The disadvantage is
that the tradeoff between growth and safety is a black box. Section 3 then devel-
ops a rich idea-based endogenous growth model that permits a careful study of the
mechanisms highlighted by the simple model. Section 4 discusses a range of em-
pirical evidence that is helpful in judging the relevance of these results, and Section
5 concludes.



2. A Simple Model

At some level, this paper is about speed limits. You can drive your car slowly and
safely, or fast and recklessly. Similarly, a key decision the economy must make is
to set a safety threshold: researchers can introduce many new ideas without regard
to safety, or they can select a very tight safety threshold and introduce fewer ideas
each year, potentially slowing growth.
    To develop this basic tradeoff, we begin with a simple two period OLG model.
Suppose an individual’s expected lifetime utility is


                        U = u(c0 ) + e−δ(g) u(c), c = c0 (1 + g)                    (1)
                                     LIFE AND GROWTH                                   5


where c denotes consumption, g is the rate of consumption growth, and δ(g) is the
mortality rate so e−δ(g) is the probability an individual is alive in the second period.
A new cohort of young people is born each period, and everyone alive at a point in
time has the same consumption — this generation’s c0 (1 + g) is the next generation’s
c0 .
       To capture the “slow and safely or fast and recklessly” insight, assume δ(g) is an
increasing function of the underlying rate of economic growth. Faster growth raises
the mortality rate. In the richer model in the next section, this “black box” linking
growth and mortality will be developed with much more care. Notice, however, that
this approach incorporates the essential idea behind the Russian roulette example
in the introduction.
       Each generation when young chooses the growth rate for the economy to max-
imize their expected utility in equation (1). The growth rate balances the concerns
for safety with the gains from higher consumption. The first order condition for this
maximization problem can be expressed as


                                    u′ (c)c0 = δ′ (g)u(c).                            (2)


At the optimum, the marginal benefit from higher consumption growth, the left
hand side, equals the marginal cost associated with a shorter life, the right hand
side. This condition can be usefully rewritten as

                                                  ηu,c
                                       1+g =                                          (3)
                                                 δ′ (g)

where ηu,c is the elasticity of u(c) with respect to c.
       To make more progress, assume the following functional forms (we’ll generalize
later):
                                         δ(g) = δg                                    (4)

                                                   c1−γ
                                     u(c) = ū +        .                             (5)
                                                   1−γ
Utility takes the familiar form that features a constant elasticity of marginal utility;
6                                    CHARLES I. JONES



the important role of the constant ū will be discussed momentarily.


2.1. Exponential Growth: 0 < γ < 1

To begin, let’s assume γ < 1 and set ū = 0. In this case, the elasticity of utility with
respect to consumption is ηu,c = 1 − γ, so the solution for growth in (3) is

                                            1−γ
                                     g∗ =       − 1.                                     (6)
                                             δ

As long as δ is not too large, the model yields sustained positive growth over time.
For example, if γ = 1/2 and δ = 1/10, then g∗ = 4 and 1 + g ∗ = 5: consumption
increases by a factor of 5 across each generation. This comes at the cost of a life
expectancy that is less than the maximum, but such is the tradeoff inherent in this
model.
    One can check that this conclusion is robust to letting ū 6= 0. In general, that will
simply introduce transition dynamics into the model with γ < 1. The key elasticity
ηu,c then converges to 1 − γ as consumption gets large, leading to balanced growth
as an asymptotic result.


2.2. The End of Growth: γ > 1

What comes next may seem a bit surprising. We’ve already seen that this simple
model can generate sustained rapid growth for a conventional form of preferences.
What we show now is that in the case where γ is larger than one, the model does not
lead to sustained growth. Instead, concerns about safety lead growth to slow all the
way to zero, at least eventually.
    In this case, the constant ū plays an essential role. In particular, notice that we’ve
implicitly normalized the utility associated with “death” to be zero. For example,
in (1), the individual gets u(c) if she lives and gets zero if she dies. But this means
that u(c) must be greater than zero for life to be worth living. Otherwise, death is
                                                                         c1−γ
the optimal choice at each point in time. With γ > 1, however,           1−γ    is less than
zero. For example, this flow is −1/c for γ = 2. An obvious way to make our problem
                                           LIFE AND GROWTH                                             7



                                 Figure 1: Flow Utility u(c) for γ > 1

                     Utility

                       ū

                                                                              c1− γ
                                                                u(c) = ū +   1−γ
                                                                           for γ > 1




                        0
                                                                      Consumption, c

            Note: Flow utility is bounded for γ > 1. If ū = 0, then flow utility is negative and
            dying is preferred to living.



interesting is to add a positive constant to flow utility. In this case, the flow utility
function is shown in Figure 1. Notice that flow utility is bounded, and the value of ū
provides the upper bound.2
       Assuming γ > 1 and ū > 0, the first order condition in (3) can be written as
                                                                      
                                                                 1          1
                               (1 + g) ūcγ−1
                                          0   (1 + g)γ−1 +                 = .                       (7)
                                                                1−γ         δ

The left-hand side of this expression is increasing in both c0 and in g. As the econ-
omy gets richer over time and c0 rises, then, it must be the case that g declines in
order to satisfy this first order condition. The optimal rate of economic growth slows
along the transition path.
       In fact, one can see from this equation that consumption converges to a steady
state with zero growth. According to the original first order condition in (3), the
   2
    As the figure illustrates, there exists a value of consumption below which flow utility is still neg-
ative. Below this level, individuals would prefer death to life, so they would randomize between zero
consumption and some higher value; see Rosen (1988). This level is very low for plausible parameter
values and can be ignored here. The role of the constant in flow utility is also discussed by Murphy
and Topel (2003), Nordhaus (2003), Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005), and Hall and Jones (2007).
8                                   CHARLES I. JONES



                                       ∗ = δ — that is, the point where the elas-
steady state must be characterized by ηu,c
ticity of the utility function with respect to consumption equals the mortality pa-
rameter. More explicitly, setting g = 0 in (7) reveals that the steady state value of
consumption is given by

                                            1
                              ∗   1 1    1     γ−1
                             c =      +            .                                  (8)
                                  ū δ γ − 1

Because growth falls all the way to zero, mortality declines to zero as well and life
expectancy is maximized.
    To see the intuition for this result, recall the first order condition for growth:
1 + g = ηu,c /δ. When γ > 1 (or when flow utility is any bounded function), the
marginal utility of consumption declines rapidly as the economy gets richer — that
is, ηu,c declines. This leads the optimal rate of growth to decline and the economy
to converge to a steady state level of consumption.
    A crucial implication of the bound on utility is that the marginal utility of con-
sumption declines to zero rapidly. Consumption on any given day runs into sharp
diminishing returns: think about the benefit of eating sushi for breakfast when you
are already having it for lunch, dinner, and your midnight snack. Instead, obtain-
ing extra days of life on which to enjoy your high consumption is a better way to
increase utility.
    This point can also be made with algebra. Consider the following expression:

                            u(ct )       1               1
                                      =      = ūcγ−1
                                                  t   +     .                         (9)
                           u′ (ct )ct   ηu,c            1−γ

The left side of this equation is based on the flow value of an additional period of
life, u(c). We divide by the marginal utility of consumption to value this flow in
units of consumption rather than in utils, so u(c)/u′ (c) is something like the value
of a period of life in dollars. Then, we consider this value of life as a ratio to actual
consumption.
    The right side of this equation shows the value of life as a ratio to consumption
under the assumed functional form for utility. Crucially, for γ > 1, the value of life
                                          LIFE AND GROWTH                               9


rises faster than consumption. As the economy gets richer, concerns about safey
become more important than consumption itself. This is the essential mechanism
that leads the economy to tilt its allocation away from consumption growth and
toward preserving life in the model.


2.3. Generalizing

More generally, it should be clear from equations (9) and (3) that this steady-state
result would obtain with any (well-behaved) bounded utility function: in that case,
the elasticity of utility with respect to consumption falls to zero as consumption
goes to infinity, so the condition ηu,c = δ delivers a steady state.
       Interestingly, this same result obtains with log utility. For γ = 1, we have u(c) =
ū + log c, and therefore ηu,c = 1/u(c). The elasticity of utility still declines to zero
as consumption gets arbitrarily large, leading to constant consumption in the long
run, even though utility is unbounded.
       Alternatively, consider changing the mortality function. If we instead assume
δ(g) = δgθ with θ > 1, then the simple model leads the growth rate to slow to zero,
but only as consumption rises to infinity.3 The implication that consumption will
be constant in the long run, then, seems to be somewhat fragile. The more robust
prediction is that safety considerations may lead consumption growth to slow to
zero.


2.4. Summary of the Simple Model

This simple model is slighty more flexible than the “Russian roulette” example given
in the introduction. Rather than choosing between stagnation and a fixed rate of
growth with a small probability of death, the economy can vary the growth rate and
the associated death rate smoothly. This death rate can be given two different in-
terpretations. It may apply independently to each person in the population, so that
   3
       The first order condition analogous to equation (3) becomes
                                                             ηu,c
                                           g θ−1 (1 + g) =
                                                              δθ
which implies that g → 0 only occurs as ηu,c → 0 when γ > 1.
10                                 CHARLES I. JONES



e−δ(g) is the fraction of the population that survives to old age in each cohort. Alter-
natively, it may represent an existential risk that applies to the entire economy.
     With γ < 1, the optimal tradeoff between growth and mortality leads to sus-
tained exponential growth, albeit with some positive death rate. In the idiosyn-
chratic interpretation of the death rate, life expectancy is simply less than its maxi-
mum but the economy continues forever. In the existential risk interpretation, the
economy grows exponentially until, with probability one, the existential risk is real-
ized and the economy comes to an end.
     A very different result occurs when γ ≥ 1, or more generally when flow utility is
bounded. In this case, the marginal utility of consumption in any period falls rapidly
as individuals get richer. In contrast, each additional year of life delivers a positive
and growing amount of utility. The result is an income effect that favors safety over
growth. The growth rate of the economy eventually falls to zero, life expectancy rises
to its maximum, and consumption may even settle down to a constant. In the exis-
tential interpretation, the economy stops playing Russian roulette and, assuming it
did not get unlucky before reaching the steady state, goes on forever.



3. Life and Growth in a Richer Setting

The simple model in the previous section is elegant and delivers clean results for
the interaction between safety and growth. However, the way in which faster growth
raises mortality is mechanical, and it is simply assumed that the economy can pick
whatever growth rate it desires.
     In this section, we address these concerns by adding safety considerations to a
standard growth model based on the discovery of new ideas. The result deepens our
understanding of the interactions between safety and growth. For example, in this
richer model, concerns for safety can slow the rate of exponential growth from 4%
to 1%, for example, but will never lead to a steady-state level of consumption. While
supporting the basic spirit of the simple model, then, the richer model illustrates
some important ways in which the simple model may be misleading.
     The model below can be viewed as combining the “direction of technical change”
                                          LIFE AND GROWTH                         11


work by Acemoglu (2002) with the health-spending model of Hall and Jones (2007).
That is, we posit a standard idea-based growth model where there are two types of
ideas instead of one: ideas that enhance consumption and ideas that save lives. The
key allocative decisions in the economy are (i) how many scientists to put into the
consumption versus life-saving sectors, and (ii) how many workers to put into using
these ideas to manufacture goods.
   A looser interpretation of the model goes like this. New technologies have con-
sumption properties and life-related properties. Researchers must decide how much
effort to put into each dimension. For instance, a new automobile engine can be
made to be more powerful or to pollute less. Or researchers can spend their time
making a new insulating material either safer or easier to manufacture.


3.1. The Economic Environment

The economy features two main sectors, a consumption sector and a life-saving
sector. On the production side, both sectors are quite similar, and each looks very
much like the Jones (1995) version of the Romer (1990) growth model. In fact, we’ll
purposefully make the production side of the two sectors as similar as possible (i.e.
using the same parameters) so it will be clear where the results come from.
   Total production of the consumption good Ct and the life-saving good Ht are
given by
                         Z       At         α          Z     Bt         α
                                        1/α                           1/α
                  Ct =                 xit di   and Ht =             zit di .    (10)
                              0                             0

Each sector uses a variety of intermediate goods to produce output with the same
basic production function. The main difference is that different varieties — differ-
ent ideas — are used for each sector: At represents the range of technologies avail-
able to produce consumption goods, while Bt represents the range used to produce
life-saving goods. It might be helpful to think of the zit as purchases of different
types of pharmaceuticals and surgical techniques. But we have in mind a broader
category of goods as well, such as pollution scrubbers in coal plants, seatbelts and
airbags, child safety locks, lifeguards at swimming pools, and safety regulations at
construction sites.
12                                     CHARLES I. JONES



     Once the blueprint for a variety has been discovered, one unit of labor can be
used to produce one unit of that variety. The number of people working as labor is
denoted Lt , so the resource constraint for this labor is
                              Z   At          Z   Bt
                                   xit di +   zit di ≤ Lt .                        (11)
                              | 0 {z } | 0 {z }
                                 ≡ Lct      ≡ Lht

     People can produce either goods, as above, or ideas. When they produce ideas,
we call them scientists, and the production functions for new ideas are given by

                                     λ φ                λ φ
                            Ȧt = āSat At and Ḃt = b̄Sbt Bt ,                    (12)


where we assume φ < 1. Once again, notice that we assume the same parame-
ters for the idea production functions in the two sectors; this assumption could be
relaxed but is useful because it helps to clarify where the main results come from.
     The resource constraints on scientists and people more generally are


                                        Sat + Sbt ≤ St                             (13)


and
                                        S t + L t ≤ Nt .                           (14)

That is, Nt denotes the total number of people, who can work as scientists or labor.
In turn, scientists and labor can work in either the consumption sector of the life-
saving sector.
     Next, consider mortality. One component of mortality can be reduced by con-
suming life-saving goods:
                                  δt = h−β
                                        t , ht ≡ Ht /Nt .                          (15)

Purchases of new drugs, better surgical techniques, pollution scrubbers, and seat-
belts can save lives.
     Total mortality is δ̂ + δt , which includes a parameter δ̂ that captures the funda-
mental underlying rate of mortality not susceptible to technological progress (which
                                            LIFE AND GROWTH                                          13


may or may not be zero). We assume an exogenous fertility rate of n̂ and let n̄ ≡ n̂− δ̂
denote the exogenous piece of population growth, apart from δt . Therefore the law
of motion for population is
                                            Ṅt = (n̄ − δt )Nt .                                   (16)

    Finally, expected lifetime utility is given by
                                Z    ∞
                          U=             e−ρt u(ct )Λt dt, Λ̇t = −(δ̂ + δt )Λt                     (17)
                                 0


where
                                                  c1−γ
                                                   t
                                u(ct ) = ū +          , ct ≡ Ct /Nt .                             (18)
                                                  1−γ
Λt is the probability that an individual alive at date zero survives until date t; mortal-
ity reduces this survival probability. Flow utility takes a standard CRRA form, aug-
mented by a constant ū, which is related, as earlier, to the overall value of life versus
death.4


3.2. Allocating Resources

This economic environment features 14 unknowns — Ct , Ht , ct , ht , At , Bt , xit , zit , Sat ,
Sbt , St , Lt , Nt , δt — and 11 equations — equations (10) through (15), including the
definitions for ht and ct (we are not counting lifetime utility and flow utility in this
numeration).
    There are, not surprisingly then, three key allocative decisions that have to be
made in the economy, summarized by three allocative fractions st , ℓt , and σt :
   1. How many scientists make consumption ideas versus life-saving ideas: st ≡
      Sat /St .

   2. How many workers make consumption goods versus life-saving goods: ℓt ≡
      Lct /Lt . (Given the symmetry of the setup, it is efficient to allocate the xit and
      the zit symmetrically across varieties, so we will just impose this throughout
      the paper to simplify things.)
   4
     As usual, ρ must be sufficiently large given growth so that utility is finite. We provide a precise
version of this condition below.
14                                       CHARLES I. JONES



     3. How many people are scientists versus workers: σt ≡ St /Nt .


3.3. A Rule of Thumb Allocation

For reasons that will become clear, it is convenient to begin with a simple “rule of
thumb” allocation, analogous to Solow’s assumption of a fixed saving rate in his
version of the neoclassical growth model.
     In particular, we consider the following rule of thumb allocation: st = s̄, ℓt = ℓ̄,
and σt = σ̄, where each of these new parameters is between 0 and 1. That is, we con-
sider putting a fixed fraction of our scientists in each research sector, a fixed fraction
of our workers in each goods sector, and let a fixed fraction of the population work
as scientists.
     It is straightforward to show the following result:

Proposition 1 (BGP under the Rule of Thumb Allocation): Under the rule of thumb
allocation where st = s̄, ℓt = ℓ̄, and σt = σ̄, all between 0 and 1, there exists an
asymptotic balanced growth path such that as t → ∞, growth is given by5


                                          n∗ = n̄, δ∗ = 0                                         (19)

                                          ∗    ∗        λn̄
                                         gA = gB =                                                (20)
                                                       1−φ
                                                                 αλn̄
                                            ∗
                              gc∗ = gh∗ = αgA     ∗
                                              = αgB = ḡ ≡            .                           (21)
                                                                 1−φ
     This is basically the expected outcome in a growth model of this flavor. With
labor allocated symmetrically within the consumption and life sectors, the produc-
tion functions are Ct = Aαt Lct and Ht = Btα Lht . The idea production functions are
also symmetric in form. For instance,          Ȧt        λ /A1−φ . So along a balanced growth
                                                     = āSat
                                               At             t
       λ and A1−φ must grow at the same rate. Since the growth rate of scientists is
path, Sat     t

pinned down by the population growth rate, this means the growth rate of At (and
Bt ) will be as well. Therefore Bt goes to infinity, which means that the mortality rate
δt falls to zero. And so on...
   5
     These results, and indeed the results throughout the remainder of this paper, are of the following
form: limt→∞ gct = gc∗ , and so on.
                                            LIFE AND GROWTH                                      15


   The rule of thumb allocation suggests that this model will deliver a balanced
growth path with life expectancy rising to its maximum. Moreover, growth is bal-
anced in a particular way: technical change occurs at the same rate in both the
consumption and life sectors, so the relative price of the consumption and life ag-
gregates is constant. And by assumption, a constant fraction of labor and scientists
work in each sector. Of course, we could have altered some of these results simply
by making the elasticity of substitution or the parameters of the idea production
function differ between the two sectors. But that’s not where we wish to go. For the
moment, simply note that everything is nicely behaved and straightforward in the
rule of thumb allocation.



3.4. The Optimal Allocation

Somewhat surprisingly, our rule of thumb allocation turns out not to be a partic-
ularly good guide to the dynamics of the economy under the optimal allocation.
Instead, as suggested by the simple “Russian roulette” model at the start of this pa-
per, there is a sense in which consumption growth is slower than what is feasible
because of a shift in the allocation of resources when diminishing returns to con-
sumption are sufficiently strong.
   There are many interesting questions related to welfare theorems in this type
of model: is a decentralized market allocation efficient? One can imagine various
externalities related to safety, particularly when “existential” risks are under con-
sideration. For now, however, we will put these interesting questions aside. Our
concern instead is with how safety considerations affect the economy even when
resources are allocated optimally.
   The optimal allocation of resources is a time path for ct , ht , st , ℓt , σt , At , Bt , Nt , δt
that solves the following problem:
                                               Z    ∞
                              max U =                   Nt u(ct )e−ρt dt s.t.                  (22)
                            {st ,ℓt ,σt }       0
16                                         CHARLES I. JONES



                                          ct = Aαt ℓt (1 − σt )                                   (23)

                                      ht = Btα (1 − ℓt )(1 − σt )                                 (24)

                                          Ȧt = āsλt σtλ Ntλ Aφt                                 (25)

                                      Ḃt = b̄(1 − st )λ σtλ Ntλ Btφ                              (26)

                                    Ṅt = (n̄ − δt )Nt , δt = h−β
                                                               t                                  (27)

This can be viewed as the problem of maximizing the representative dynasty’s utility
function (e.g. by setting N0 = 1), or it can be viewed as a social welfare function that
gives equal weight to each live person’s flow utility, regardless of age.
     To solve for the optimal allocation, we define the Hamiltonian:


       H = Nt u(ct ) + pat āsλt σtλ Ntλ Aφt + pbt b̄(1 − st )λ σtλ Ntλ Btφ + vt (n̄ − δt )Nt ,   (28)


where ct = Aαt ℓt (1 − σt ) and δt = h−β
                                      t  = (Btα (1 − ℓt )(1 − σt ))−β . The costate variables
— pat , pbt , and vt — capture the shadow values of an extra consumption idea, an
extra life-saving idea, and an extra person to maximized welfare.
     Using the Maximum Principle and solving the first-order necessary conditions
for the optimal allocation, we can derive several results. The most important of
these is given in the next proposition (proofs for this an the remaining propositions
are given in the appendix).


Proposition 2 (Optimal Growth with γ > 1 + β): Assume that the marginal utility
of consumption falls rapidly, in the sense that γ > 1 + β. Then the optimal alloca-
tion features an asymptotic balanced growth path such that as t → ∞, the fraction
of labor working in the consumption sector ℓt and the fraction of scientists making
consumption ideas st both fall to zero at constant exponential rates, and asymptotic
growth is given by
                                                −ḡ (γ − 1 − β)
                               gs∗ = gℓ∗ =                    αλ
                                                                   <0                             (29)
                                             1 + (γ − 1)(1 + 1−φ )

                             ∗      λ(n̄ + gs∗ )    ∗         λn̄    ∗
                            gA =                 , gB = ḡ ≡      > gA                            (30)
                                      1−φ                    1−φ
                                            LIFE AND GROWTH                             17


                                        gδ∗ = −βḡ, gh∗ = ḡ                           (31)
                                                                     αλ
                                                       1 + β(1 +    1−φ )
                    gc∗   =     ∗
                              αgA   + gℓ∗   = ḡ ·                      αλ
                                                                               < ḡ.   (32)
                                                     1 + (γ −   1)(1 + 1−φ )

    This proposition echoes the key result from the simple “Russian Roulette” model
at the start of the paper: if the marginal utility of consumption runs into sufficiently
sharp diminishing returns, safety considerations alter the essential nature of op-
timal growth. While in the toy model, it was possible for consumption growth to
cease, the more micro-founded model given here displays a more subtle result.
    First, the economy optimally settles down to an asymptotic balanced growth
path, but along this path, consumption grows at a rate that is slower than what is
feasible. This can be seen by comparing the consumption growth rates for the rule
of thumb allocation in (21) and the optimal allocation in (32): when γ − 1 > β,
gc∗ < ḡ.
    Second, the proximate cause of this slower growth is an exponential shift in the
allocation of resources. In particular, both the fraction of scientists and the fraction
of workers engaged in the consumption sector — st and ℓt — fall exponentially over
time along the BGP. To see how this slows growth, recall the production functions
for ideas
                   Ȧt = āsλt σtλ Ntλ Aφt and Ḃt = b̄(1 − st )λ σtλ Ntλ Btφ .

The share 1 − st in the life-saving sector converges to one, leading to the expected
             ∗ = λn̄/(1 − φ). However, the share s in the consumption ideas pro-
result that gB                                    t

duction function falls exponentially toward zero. The exponential shift of scientists
out of this sector slows gA relative to gB , ultimately slowing consumption growth as
well.
    A very nice feature of this result is that it makes a clear prediction: we should
see the composition of research shifting over time away from consumption ideas
and toward life-saving ideas if the model is correct and if the marginal utility of
consumption falls sufficiently fast. We will provide empirical evidence on this pre-
diction later on in the paper.
    To understand the underlying reason for this structural change in the economy,
18                                    CHARLES I. JONES



consider the following equation, which is the first-order condition for allocating la-
bor between the consumption and life sectors:

                                     1 − ℓt     δt vt
                                            =β ′                                           (33)
                                       ℓt     u (ct )ct

The left-side of this equation is just the ratio of labor working in the life sector to la-
bor working in the consumption sector. This equation says that the ratio of workers
is proportional to the ratio of what these workers can produce. In the numerator is
the death rate δt multiplied by the value of a life in utils, vt : this is the total value of
what can potentially be gained by making a life-saving good. The denominator, in
contrast, is proportional to what can be gained by making consumption goods: the
level of consumption multiplied by the marginal utility of consumption to put it in
utils, like the numerator.
                                                                                            vt
     In the analysis of this equation, it turns out to be useful to define ṽt ≡        u′ (ct )ct
— the value of a life in consumption units as a ratio to the level of consumption.
The allocation of workers then depends on the product δt ṽt . In fact, as shown in
the appendix, the allocation of scientists depends on exactly this same term — see
equation (42).
     Over time, the fraction of deaths that can potentially be avoided, δt , declines.
However, the value of each life rises. When γ > 1, the value of life rises even as a
ratio to consumption, so ṽt rises. Then, it is a race: δt falls at a rate proportional to
β, while ṽt rises at a rate proportional to γ − 1. Hence the critical role of γ − 1 − β.
In particular, when γ is large, as in the proposition we’ve just stated, the value of
life rises very rapidly, so that δt ṽt rises to infinity. In this case, the optimal allocation
shifts all the labor and scientists into the life sector: the value of the lives that can
be saved rises so fast that it is optimal to devote ever-increasing resources to saving
lives.


3.5. The Optimal Allocation with γ < 1 + β

What happens if the marginal utility of consumption does not fall quite so rapidly?
The intuition is already suggested by the analysis just provided, and the result is
                                        LIFE AND GROWTH                              19


given explicitly in the next proposition.

Proposition 3 (Optimal Growth with γ < 1+β): Assume that the marginal utility of
consumption falls, but not too rapidly, in the sense that γ < 1 + β. Then the optimal
allocation features an asymptotic balanced growth path such that as t → ∞, the
fraction of labor working in the life sector ℓ̃t ≡ 1 − ℓt and the fraction of scientists
making life-saving ideas s̃t ≡ 1 − st both fall to zero at constant exponential rates,
and asymptotic growth is given by

                          ∗         λn̄    ∗   λ(n̄ + gs̃∗ )    ∗
                         gA =           , gB =               < gA
                                   1−φ           1−φ

                                       gc∗ = ḡ, gδ∗ = −βgh∗ ,

and the exact values for gs̃∗ and gh∗ depend on whether γ > 1 or γ ≤ 1.
   In particular, if 1 < γ < 1 + β:

                                               −ḡ (β + 1 − γ)
                               gs̃∗ = gℓ̃∗ =              αλ
                                                               <0                  (34)
                                               1 + β(1 + 1−φ )

                                                             αλ
                                                                    !
                                        1 + (γ − 1)(1 +     1−φ )
                        gh∗   = ḡ ·                    αλ
                                                                        < ḡ.      (35)
                                           1 + β(1 +   1−φ )

While if γ ≤ 1:
                                                    −βḡ
                               gs̃∗ = gℓ̃∗ =                αλ
                                                                   <0              (36)
                                               1 + β(1 +   1−φ )
                                                               !
                                                  1
                              gh∗ = ḡ ·                αλ
                                                                   < ḡ.           (37)
                                           1 + β(1 +   1−φ )

   This proposition shows that when γ < 1 + β, the results flip-flop. That is, there
is still a trend in the allocation of scientists and workers, but the trend is now away
from the health/life sector and towards the consumption sector. In this case, the
death rate falls faster than the value of life rises. Looking back at equation (33), the
denominator u′ (ct )ct rises faster than the numerator: the greater gain is in providing
consumption goods rather than in saving lives. We once again get an unbalanced
growth result, but now it is the consumption sector that grows faster.
20                                        CHARLES I. JONES



3.6. “Interior” Growth when 1 < γ = 1 + β

Proposition 4 (Optimal Growth with 1 < γ = 1 + β): Assume that the marginal
utility of consumption falls rapidly (γ > 1) and assume the following knife-edge con-
dition relating preferences and technology: γ = 1 + β. Then the optimal allocation
features an asymptotic balanced growth path such that as t → ∞, the key allocation
variables ℓt and st settle down to constants strictly between 0 and 1, and asymptotic
growth is given by
                                          ∗    ∗        λn̄
                                         gA = gB =
                                                       1−φ
                                             αλn̄
                               gc∗ = gh∗ =        = ḡ, gδ∗ = −βḡ.
                                             1−φ

     This is the one case where growth is “balanced” in the sense that the consump-
tion and life sectors grow at the same rate and labor and scientists do not all end up
in one sector. But, as stated above, this requires a somewhat arbitrary knife-edge
condition relating technology and preferences.6


3.7. Discussion

The simple toy model at the start of the paper and the richer model developed sub-
sequently lead to slightly different conclusions. In the simple model, consumption
growth falls to zero when the marginal utility of consumption diminishes rapidly,
while in the richer model the growth rate is only slowed by some proportion. Why
the difference?
     The answer turns on functional forms and modeling choices about which we
have relatively little information. In the simple model, the mortality rate depends
on the growth rate of the economy rather than on the level of technology in the life-
saving sector, and this difference is evidently quite important. One can imagine a
more sophisticated version of the simple model that would preserve its stronger re-
sults. For example — along the lines of the Russian roulette example from the intro-
duction — suppose that most ideas are safe, but some ideas are dangerous and kill
   6
     It turns out that even γ = 1 + β is not enough to get balanced growth when γ < 1. In this case, all
the workers and scientists still end up moving to the consumption sector, as in Proposition 3.
                                   LIFE AND GROWTH                                   21


off a fraction of the population. If each idea raises consumption by a constant pro-
portion (as in many Schumpeterian quality-ladder models like Aghion and Howitt
(1992)), it seems likely that growth would optimally cease if the marginal utility of
consumption falls rapidly.
   The general result of this paper, then, is that concerns for safety can slow growth,
with the precise nature of the slowdown depending on modeling details.



4. Empirical Evidence

A useful feature of the main model in this paper is that it makes stark predictions
regarding the composition of research. Depending on the relative magnitudes of
γ − 1 and β, the direction of technical change should shift either toward or away
from life-saving technologies. In particular, if γ is large — so that the marginal util-
ity of consumption declines rapidly — one would expect to see the composition
of research shifting toward life-saving technologies, thereby slowing consumption
growth.
   In this section, we discuss a range of evidence on β, γ, and the composition of
research. While not entirely decisive, the bulk of the evidence is very much consis-
tent with the first case we considered, where there is an income effect for live-saving
technologies and consumption growth is slowed.


4.1. The Composition of Research

One might think the main prediction on the composition of research would be an
easy prediction to test: surely there must be readily-available statistics on research
spending by the health sector of the economy. Unfortunately, this is not the case.
The main reason appears to be because both the spending and performance of
health research is done in several different organizations in the economy: indus-
try, government, non-profits, and academia. Thus, the construction of such num-
bers requires merging the results of different surveys, being careful to avoid double
counting, considering changes in the surveys over time, and so on. Between the
22                                      CHARLES I. JONES




             Figure 2: The Changing Composition of U.S. R&D Spending

          Health Share of R&D (percent)
              30
                                                                  CMMS + NSF Recent
              25


              20

                               NIH estimates
              15
                                                                    CMMS + NSF IRIS

              10


               5
                                    Non−commercial health research (CMMS)

               0
              1960   1965    1970    1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000   2005     2010
                                                                                       Year

         Note: The graph shows the rise in the share of R&D spending in the United States
         that is devoted to health, according to several different measures. See the Data
         Appendix for sources and methodology.



1970s and the early 1990s, the NIH undertook this calculation and reported a health
research number. But, unfortunately, I have not been able to find any other source
that does this for the last twenty years.
     As an imperfect substitute, I have put together some of the numbers myself. I’m
far from an expert on these surveys, so the numbers I discuss below are surely im-
perfect and do not adequately address the concerns outlined above. For this reason,
I do not report a single time series, but rather show results from a number of differ-
ent calculations. Fortunately, these all strongly point in the same direction, so while
we do not end up with a precise time series for health R&D, I think we do end up
with consistent evidence that speaks to the topic of this paper.
     The details of my calculations are discussed in the Data Appendix, and the re-
sults are provided in two figures. Figure 2 documents the changing composition of
R&D spending in the United States. Four different time series are shown, includ-
ing the original NIH estimates and a long time series on non-commercial health
                                      LIFE AND GROWTH                                          23



           Figure 3: The Changing Composition of OECD R&D Spending

         Health Share of R&D (percent)
             22
             20
             18
             16
                              U.S.
             14
             12
             10
                                                   OECD
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0
             1986   1988   1990      1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004     2006
                                                                                      Year

        Note: The trend toward health is apparent in OECD measures of R&D expendi-
        tures as well. The OECD estimate reported here includes data from the United
        States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, and the United Kingdom.
        See the Data Appendix for sources and methodology.




research from the National Health Expenditure Accounts of the Centers for Medi-
care and Medicaid Services (CMMS). The remaining two time series add estimates
of commercial research to the CMMS estimate, using two different collections of
surveys by the National Science Foundation. The fact that the NIH series and the
CMMS+NSF series coincide during overlapping years is somewhat reassuring.
   The message from Figure 2 is quite clear. Whether we look at non-commericial
research or the broader estimates for total research, the composition of R&D ap-
pears to be shifting distinctly toward health over time. For example, the earliest es-
timates from 1960 suggest that the health sector accounted for only about 7 percent
of all R&D, while the most recent estimates from 2007 are around 25 percent.
   Of course, life-saving technologies are invented around the world, not just in the
United States. Figure 3 uses OECD sources to study how the composition of R&D
is changing internationally. This data is only available since 1991 but tells the same
24                                           CHARLES I. JONES



basic story: the composition of research is shifting distinctly toward health. In 1991,
around 9 percent of OECD research spending was on health, and this share rose to
16 percent by 2006. The figure also shows the corresponding share for the United
States (estimated using slightly different assumptions with these OECD sources),
confirming the sharp rise that we saw earlier in Figure 2.
         This evidence on the composition of research is helpful in that it addresses one
of the clear predictions of the model. Of course, this is not an entirely compelling
test of the model, as there are other possible explanations for the changing com-
position of research. For example, perhaps the rise in the share of health spending
in the economy is due to other factors, and health research is simply responding to
these factors as well. Also, health research is an imperfect proxy for efforts devoted
to life-saving technologies; research on pollution scrubbers and highway safety will
not be included, for example.


4.2. Empirical Evidence on β

The parameter β is readily interpreted as the elasticity of the mortality rate with re-
spect to real health expenditures. A plausible upper bound for this parameter can
then be obtained by considering the relative trends in mortality and health spend-
ing: this calculation would attribute all the decline in mortality to health spending,
which is surely an overestimate given the likely importance of other factors.
         According to Health, United States 2009, age-adjusted mortality rates fell at an
average annual rate of 1.2% between 1960 and 2007, while CPI-deflated health spend-
ing rose at an average annual rate of 4.1%.7 The ratio of these two growth rates
gives an estimate of the upper bound for β of 0.291. Hall and Jones (2007) con-
duct a more formal analysis along these lines using age-specific mortality rates,
age-specific health spending, and allowing for other factors to enter. For people
between the ages of 20 and 80, they find estimates for this elasticity ranging from
0.10 to 0.25.


     7
         See Tables 26 and 122 of that publication, available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus.htm.
                                  LIFE AND GROWTH                                  25


4.3. Estimates of γ

Given the upper bound for β just reported, life considerations will dominate in the
model if γ is larger than about 1.3. In the most common way of specifying pref-
erences for macro applications, the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ in our
notation, equals the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Large
literatures on asset pricing (Lucas 1994) and labor supply (Chetty 2006) suggest that
γ > 1 is a reasonable value, and values above 1.5 are quite common in this literature.
   Evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, 1/γ in our notation, is
more mixed. The traditional view, supported by Hall (1988), is that this elasticity
is well below one, consistent with the case of γ > 1.3. This view is supported by
a range of careful microeconometric work, including Attanasio and Weber (1995),
Barsky, Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1997), and Guvenen (2006); see Hall (2009) for a
survey of this evidence. On the other hand, Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003)
and Gruber (2006) find evidence that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is
greater than one, suggesting that γ < 1 could be appropriate.



4.4. Empirical Evidence on the Value of Life

Direct evidence on how the value of life changes with income — another way to
gauge the magnitude of γ — is surprisingly difficult to come by. Most of the em-
pirical work in this literature is cross-sectional in nature and focuses on getting a
single measure of the value of life (or perhaps a value by age); see Ashenfelter and
Greenstone (2004), for example. There are a few studies that contain important
information on the income elasticity, however. Viscusi and Aldy (2003) conduct a
meta-analysis and find that across studies, the value of life exhibits an income elas-
ticity below one. On the other hand, Costa and Kahn (2004) and Hammitt, Liu and
Liu (2000) consider explicitly how the value of life changes over time. These stud-
ies find that the value of life rises roughly twice as fast as income, consistent with
γ > 1.3.
26                                 CHARLES I. JONES



4.5. Evidence from Health Spending

The key mechanism at work in this paper is that the marginal utility of consump-
tion falls quickly if γ > 1, leading the value of life to rise faster than consumption.
This tilts the allocation in the economy away from consumption growth and toward
preserving lives. Exactly this same mechanism is at work in Hall and Jones (2007),
which studies health spending. In that paper, γ > 1 leads to an income effect: as
the economy gets richer over time (exogenously), it is optimal to spend an increas-
ing fraction of income on health care in an effort to reduce mortality. The same
force is at work here in a very different context. Economic growth combines with
sharply diminishing marginal utility to make the preservation of life a luxury good.
The novel finding is that this force has first-order effects on the determination of
economic growth itself.
     What evidence is there for an income elasticity of health spending larger than
one? Figure 4 shows some international evidence. Health spending as a share of
GDP is rising in many countries of the world, not only in the United States. Indeed,
for the 19 OECD countries reporting data in both 1970 and 2006 (many not shown),
all experienced a rising health share.
     Acemoglu, Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2009a) estimate an elasticity of hospi-
tal spending with respect to transitory income of 0.7, less than one, using oil price
movements to instrument local income changes at the county level in the south-
ern part of the United States. While useful, it is not entirely clear that this bears on
the key parameter here, as that paper considers income changes that are temporary
(and hence might reasonably be smoothed and not have a large effect on health
spending) and local (and hence might not alter the limited selection of health in-
surance contracts that are available).


4.6. Growth in Health and Non-Health Consumption

The results from our model suggest that, apart from a knife-edge case, the compo-
sition of research will shift toward either the consumption sector or the life-saving
sector. Moreover, at least insofar as the parameters of the idea production function
                                       LIFE AND GROWTH                                              27



     Figure 4: International Evidence on the Income Effect in Health Spending

            Health share of GDP (percent)
               16

                14                                   United States

                12
                                                                                France
                10
                                                   Germany
                 8                                                   Japan

                 6                                                           U.K.

                 4

                 2
                1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000       2005     2010
                                                                                           Year

     Note: Data are from OECD Health Data 2009 and are reported every 10 years, except for
     the last observation from 2006.




are similar in those two sectors (and we have no real evidence pushing us one way
or the other on this), the sector that sheds its researchers will grow more slowly in
the long run.
   This prediction prompts us to look at the historical evidence on the growth of per
capita consumption for both the health and non-health sectors, respectively. Fig-
ure 5 shows this evidence, taken from the National Income and Product Accounts
for the United States.
   The figure shows two lines for each sector, differing according to which price de-
flators are used. The “official” lines report the results using the official BEA deflators
for health and non-health consumption. These results already suggest faster growth
in health than in consumption, consistent with the evidence on the composition of
research.
   There is ample evidence, however, that serious measurement problems asso-
ciated with quality change plague the construction of these deflators. Triplett and
28                                        CHARLES I. JONES




                              Figure 5: Health and Consumption

         Real quantity per person (1950=100)
             1600
                                                                     Health (pce)
                                                                       4.67%

              800
                                                                      Health (official)
                                                                         3.10%
              400
                                                                          2.05%
                                                                                          1.84%
              200
                                                      Non−health consumption (pce ,official)

              100
                1950         1960        1970         1980         1990           2000        2010
                                                                                            Year

     Note: The plot shows real per capita consumption expenditures for health and non-health
     in the United States. Two different methods are used to deflate nominal expenditures.
     The “official” lines are deflated by the price indices constructed by the BEA, which show
     more rapid price increases in the health sector. The “pce” lines are both deflated by the
     overall deflator for personal consumption expenditures, implicitly assuming that techni-
     cal change in the two sectors occurs at the same rate (a conservative assumption given the
     general empirical evidence reported in this paper).




Bosworth (2000), for example, show that they imply negative labor productivity growth
in the health sector, a finding that rings hollow given the rapid technological ad-
vances in that sector. Many case studies of particular health treatments find that
quality-adjusted prices are actually falling rather than rising relative to the CPI.8
The “pce” measures in Figure 5 therefore deflate both nominal health spending and

   8
     Cutler, McClellan, Newhouse and Remler (1998) find that the real quality-adjusted price for treat-
ing heart attacks declines at a rate of 1.1 percent per year between 1983 and 1994. Shapiro, Shapiro
and Wilcox (1999) examine the treatment price for cataracts between 1969 and 1994. While a CPI-like
price index for cataracts increased at an annual rate of 9.2 percent over this period, their alternative
price index, only partially incorporating quality improvements, grew only 4.1 percent per year, falling
relative to the total CPI at a rate of about 1.5 percent per year. Berndt, Bir, Busch, Frank and Normand
(2000) estimate that the price of treating incidents of acute phase major depression declined in nomi-
nal terms by between 1.7 percent and 2.1 percent per year between 1991 and 1996, corresponding to a
real rate of decline of more than 3 percent (though over a relatively short time period). Lawver (2011)
obtain similar results using a structural model and more aggregate data.
                                   LIFE AND GROWTH                                   29


nominal consumption spending by the overall NIPA deflator for personal consump-
tion expenditures, implicitly assuming rates of technological change are the same
in the two sectors. Of course, given the changing composition of research, even this
correction arguably falls short. Nevertheless, one can see that it suggests a large dif-
ference in growth between the two sectors, with growth in health averaging 4.67%
per year between 1950 and 2009, versus only 1.84% for per capita consumption.
   If the economy were already in steady state, the growth rates reported in Figure 5
would be direct evidence on the magnitude of the “growth drag” associated with life
considerations, and this drag is substantial: 1.84/4.67 ≈ 0.4, for example, suggesting
that consumption growth is reduced to only 40% of its feasible rate because of the
rising importance of life.
   Unfortunately, the evidence on the composition of research suggests the econ-
omy is far from its steady state, since the research share is well below one. This
evidence on the growth drag, then, is only suggestive. However, as the next section
shows, one can calibrate the model to get an estimate of the growth drag that is in
the same ballpark as this historical evidence.




4.7. Calibrating the Growth Drag

We have discussed a range of evidence in this section — the shift in the composi-
tion of research toward health, empirical estimates of β and γ, how the value of life
changes with income, the rise in health spending as a share of GDP, and the histor-
ical evidence on the growth rates of health spending versus non-health consump-
tion. While none is entirely decisive, the evidence suggests that the possibility of an
income effect favoring life-saving technologies should be considered carefully. The
case studied in Proposition 2 where γ − 1 > β may be the relevant one.
   Here, we follow this logic and, using a range of parameter values consistent with
the evidence just discussed, report the magnitude of the “growth drag” that is im-
plied. More precisely, recall that according to Proposition 2, long-run growth rates
30                                        CHARLES I. JONES



in the two sectors are given by

                                                   αλn̄
                                           gh∗ =        = ḡ                                       (38)
                                                   1−φ

                                                           αλ
                                            1 + β(1 +     1−φ )
                           gc∗   = ḡ ·                       αλ
                                                                     < ḡ.                         (39)
                                          1 + (γ   − 1)(1 + 1−φ  )

That is, when γ − 1 > β, the consumption sector grows more slowly than the health
sector — and more slowly than what is feasible — by a factor that is given in the last
equation.
                                                                              αλ
     To estimate this factor, we require estimates of γ, β, and              1−φ .   We’ve already dis-
cussed evidence on the first two of these above. Notice from equation (38) that the
last is just given by the factor by which the long-run growth rate of the health sector
is “marked up” over the rate of population growth. Estimates of this factor for the
economy as a whole are discussed in Jones and Romer (2010); a broad but plausi-
ble range for this factor is [1/2, 2]; larger values would simply make the growth drag
even more dramatic.
     Table 1 reports estimates of the “growth drag” factor in equation (39). These
factors range from a low of 0.33 to a high of 0.79, with the mean value equal to 0.56.
That is, according to the mean value, long-run growth in the consumption sector is
only 56% of its feasible rate in the optimal allocation. It would be feasible to keep
the research shares constant and let consumption grow much faster, but the rising
value of life means this is not optimal.
     This growth drag calculation illustrates a deeper conceptual point about the
model. The standard interpretation of semi-endogenous growth models (like this
one) is that conventional policies cannot affect the long-run growth rate. However,
that is incorrect in this case. Policies that alter the rate at which the consumption
sector sheds researchers can change the magnitude of the growth drag and hence
affect the long-run growth rate of consumption.
                                           LIFE AND GROWTH                                      31



                                      Table 1: The Growth Drag


                                   β = .25                                   β = .10
           αλ
          1−φ             γ = 1.5            γ=2                    γ = 1.5            γ=2
         0.50               0.79             0.55                     0.66             0.46
         1.00               0.75             0.50                     0.60             0.40
         2.00               0.70             0.44                     0.52             0.33

     Note: The table reports the ratio of gc to gh in steady state according to Proposition 2
     for various values of the parameters. That is, it reports the factor by which consump-
     tion growth gets reduced because of the trend in the research share. The factor is
               αλ )
       1+β(1+ 1−φ
                 αλ )
     1+(γ−1)(1+ 1−φ
                        . The mean across the various estimates is 0.56.




4.8. A Future Growth Slowdown?

Close to the balanced growth path, the share of research devoted to health would
be close to one, so that the percentage increases in the health research share would
be small and not contribute significantly to growth. In contrast, the percentage
declines in the consumption research share would be large, significantly slowing
growth in that sector. In recent decades, however, the economy appears to be far
enough from steady state that the opposite is still occuring: a growing health re-
search share boosts growth in that sector. Similarly, the percentage decline in the
consumption share of research is relatively modest, which means that consumption
is growing faster than its long run rate.
   To get a rough sense of the magnitudes involve, recall that the health share of
research in Figure 2 is estimated to have risen from about 7% to about 25% between
1960 and 2007. This corresponds to an average annual growth rate of about 2.7%,
which is large relative to the overall growth rate of R&D. In constrast, the consump-
tion research share has fallen from 93% to 75% over the same period, corresponding
to an average annual growth rate of -0.46%. This is more in line with calibrated val-
ues of the long-run decline in the consumption research share.
32                                 CHARLES I. JONES



     The implication of this argument is that some of the hypothetical growth drag
that we have calculated applies to future growth, particularly in terms of the pro-
duction of life-saving goods. That is, this channel provides a mechanism through
which health spending growth — which makes up an increasing portion of GDP
growth — would be predicted to slow in the future. The magnitudes computed for
the growth drags suggest that this slowdown could be substantial.


4.9. Sustainable Growth and the Environment

This paper is also related to the literature on sustainable growth and the environ-
ment; for example, see Solow (1974), Stiglitz (1974), Gradus and Smulders (1993),
and Aghion and Howitt (1998, Ch. 5). Particularly relevant are Stokey (1998) and
Brock and Taylor (2005), who study the environmental Kuznets curve in which pol-
lution first rises and then falls with economic development. In these papers, pol-
lution enters the utility function as a cost in an additively separable fashion from
consumption. These models feature an income effect for γ > 1 because the utility
from growing consumption is bounded. This leads to a “growth drag” from the en-
vironment: growth is slower than it would otherwise be because of environmental
concerns. While the key issues here are very distinct — the utility costs of pollu-
tion in one case versus the loss of life associated with dangerous technologies in the
other — it is interesting that the curvature of marginal utility plays a central role in
both and can slow growth.
     One of the ways in which pollution has been mitigated in the United States is
through the development of new, cleaner technologies. Examples include scrub-
bers that remove harmful particulates from industrial exhaust and catalytic con-
verters that reduce automobile emissions. Researchers can spend their time mak-
ing existing technologies safer or inventing new technologies. Rising concerns for
safety lead them to divert effort away from new technologies, which may slow growth.
Acemoglu, Aghion, Bursztyn and Hemous (2009b) explore this kind of directed tech-
nical change in a model of growth and the environment.
                                  LIFE AND GROWTH                                 33


5. Conclusion

Technological progress involves life and death, and augmenting standard growth
models to take this into account leads potentially to first-order changes in the the-
ory of economic growth. This paper explores these possibilities, first in a simple
“Russian roulette” style model and then in a richer model in which growth explicitly
depends on the discovery of new ideas. The results depend somewhat on the details
of the model and, crucially, on how rapidly the marginal utility of consumption de-
clines. It may be optimal for consumption growth to continue exponentially despite
the presence of life-and-death considerations. Or it may be optimal for growth to
slow to zero, even potentially leading to a steady-state level of consumption.
   The intuition for the slowing of growth turns out to be straightforward. For
a large class of standard preferences, safety is a luxury good. The marginal util-
ity associated with more consumption on a given day runs into sharp diminish-
ing returns, and ensuring additional days of life on which to consume is a natural,
welfare-enhancing response. When the value of life rises faster than consumption,
economic growth leads to a disproportionate concern for safety. This concern can
be so strong that it is desirable that growth slow down.
   This paper suggests a number of different directions for future research on the
economics of safety. It would clearly be desirable to have precise estimates of the
value of life and how this has changed over time; in particular, does it indeed rise
faster than income and consumption? More empirical work on how safety stan-
dards have changed over time — and estimates of their impacts on economic growth
— would also be valuable. Finally, the basic mechanism at work in this paper over
time also applies across countries. Countries at different levels of income may have
very different values of life and therefore different safety standards. This may have
interesting implications for international trade, standards for pollution and global
warming, and international relations more generally.
34                                     CHARLES I. JONES



A Appendix: Derivations and Proofs

This appendix contains outlines of the proofs of the propositions reported in the
paper.
     As a prelude to these propositions, we first consider the optimal allocation prob-
lem in equations (22) through (27). Using the Hamiltonian in (28) and applying the
Maximum Principle, the first-order necessary conditions for a solution are

                                        1 − st   pbt Ḃt
                                               =                                (FOC: s)
                                          st     pat Ȧt

                                    1 − ℓt           vt
                                           = βδt · ′                             (FOC: ℓ)
                                      ℓt          u (ct )ct

                                 σt      λ(pat Ȧt + pbt Ḃt )
                                      =                                         (FOC: σ)
                               1 − σt   Nt (u′ (ct )ct + βδt vt )
                        "                                               #
                v̇t   1                  Ȧt         Ḃt
             ρ=     +     u(ct ) + pat λ     + pbt λ     + vt (n̄ − δt )        (FOC: N )
                vt vt                    Nt          Nt
                                      "                           #
                            p˙a t   1      ′       ct         Ȧt
                         ρ=       +    Nt u (ct )α    + pat φ                   (FOC: A)
                            pa t pat               At         At
                                        "                        #
                              p˙b t   1         Ḃt           δt
                           ρ=       +     pbt φ     + αβvt Nt                   (FOC: B)
                              pb t pbt          Bt            Bt

plus the three standard transversality conditions.
     It will be convenient, for reasons discussed in the main text, to define

                                                   vt
                                        ṽt ≡    ′
                                                          .
                                                u (ct )ct

This variable denotes the ratio of the value of life to consumption per person.


Proof of Proposition 2. Optimal Growth with γ > 1 + β

     The essence of the result is that the key allocation variables st and ℓt decline
exponentially to zero at a constant rate. This exponential shift of scientists toward
the life sector slows the growth rate of consumption ideas. To derive the result, we
                                       LIFE AND GROWTH                                    35


use the various first order conditions for the optimal allocation.
  1. Look back at the first-order condition characterizing the allocation of scien-
     tists, equation (FOC: s). To solve for this allocation, we need to solve for the
     relative price of ideas, pb /pa . From equations (FOC: A) and (FOC: B), we have

                             αNt u′ (ct )ct /At            αβNt vt δt /Bt
                     pat =                      and pbt =                  .            (40)
                             ρ − gpa t − φgAt             ρ − gpb t − φgBt

     A condition on the parameter values (basically that ρ is sufficiently large) keeps
     the denominators of these expressions positive.

     This means that the relative price satisfies

                                pbt Bt             ρ − gpa t − φgAt
                                       = βδt ṽt ·                  .                   (41)
                                pat At             ρ − gpb t − φgBt

  2. Substituting this expression into (FOC: s) yields

                             1 − st             ρ − gpa t − φgAt gBt
                                    = βδt ṽt ·                 ·    .                  (42)
                               st               ρ − gpb t − φgBt gAt

                                 1−ℓt
     Recall from (FOC: ℓ) that    ℓt    = βδt v˜t , so both of these key allocation variables
     depend on δt ṽt , that is, on the race between the decline in the mortality rate
     and the possible rise in the value of life relative to consumption. The next
     several steps characterize the behavior of δt ṽt , which we will then plug back
     into this expression.

  3. First, we study ṽt . Using (FOC: N ) and (40), we obtain

                                           u(ct )            αλgAt
                                          u′ (ct )ct   +  ρ−gpa t −φgAt
                               ṽt =                          αλβgBt δt
                                                                               .        (43)
                                       ρ − gvt −       nt − ρ−g   pb t −φgBt



     This is a key expression: the value of having an extra person in the economy
     (as a ratio to consumption) depends crucially on the extra utility that person
     enjoys — that’s the first term in the numerator and the one that matters most
     in what follows. The second term in the numerator reflects the additional con-
     sumption ideas that an extra person will generate. The denominator essen-
36                                     CHARLES I. JONES



       tially converts this flow dividend (the numerator) into a present discounted
       value. Notice that the discount rate is reduced by the additional health ideas
       that the person will generate, which lets the person live longer to enjoy more
       utility and produce even more ideas in the future.

     4. Now recall that given our CRRA form for flow utility,

                                     u(ct )                1
                                               = ūcγ−1
                                                    t   +     .
                                    u′ (ct )ct            1−γ

       Since γ > 1, along an asymptotic balanced growth path where ct → ∞,


                                          gṽ = (γ − 1)gc .                              (44)


     5. Now let’s guess that the solution for the asymptotic balanced growth path
       takes the following form: st and ℓt fall toward zero at a constant exponential
       rate, while σt → σ ∗ and nt → n̄. We’ll see that the key condition delivering this
       result will be γ > 1 + β.

     6. Under this proposed solution, consumption growth is


                                    gc = αgA + gℓ = αgA + gs                             (45)


       where the last equality comes from observing that along our proposed asymp-
       totic BGP, gℓ = gs since both st and ℓt are inversely proportional to δt ṽt —
       see (42) above.

     7. A number of other growth rates follow in a straightforward way from the var-
       ious production functions. Most important of these is the growth rate of At .
       Recall Ȧt = āsλt σtλ Ntλ Aφt and Ḃt = b̄(1 − st )λ σtλ Ntλ Btφ . The exponential de-
       cline in st will then crucially distinguish the growth rates of At and Bt , since
       1 − st → 1 will be asymptotically constant, while st falls exponentially. There-
       fore, taking logs and derivatives of these equations, their asymptotic growth
       rates must satisfy
                                       λ(n̄ + gs )           λn̄
                                gA =               and gB =      .                       (46)
                                         1−φ                1−φ
                                  LIFE AND GROWTH                                       37


 8. Combining (44), (45), and (46), gives
                                                                 
                                                 αλ(n̄ + gs )
                             gṽ = (γ − 1)                    + gs .                   (47)
                                                   1−φ


 9. So to get the growth rate of δt ṽt , we now need an expression for gδ . Recall
    δt = (Btα (1 − ℓt )(1 − σt ))−β . Since 1 − ℓt converges to one while σt → σ ∗ ,


                                        gδ = −αβgB .                                   (48)


10. Now, finally, look back at (42) and consider the asymptotic growth rate of each
    side of the equation. Along our proposed balanced growth path, 1 − st con-
    verges to one, so its growth rate converges to zero. The share st falls exponen-
    tially, leading the left side to grow, while the right side of the equation grows
    as δt ṽt . Using our last two results in (47) and (48), taking growth rates of (42)
    gives                                                                
                                                         αλ(n̄ + gs )
                       −gs = −αβgB + (γ − 1)                          + gs .           (49)
                                                           1−φ
    Solving for gs then gives

                                         −αgB (γ − 1 − β)
                                gs =                    αλ
                                                             .                         (50)
                                       1 + (γ − 1)(1 + 1−φ )

    Under our key assumption that γ > 1 + β, this solution for gs is negative, as we
    conjectured earlier.

11. For completeness, one can also solve for σ ∗ , the share of the population that
    becomes scientists. Using (FOC: σ) and making some natural substitutions,
    we find
                                   σ∗         αλgB
                                      ∗
                                        =                                              (51)
                                  1−σ     ρ − gpb − φgB
    where, from (40), gpb = n̄ − gs + (γ − 1)gc > 0. This means that for the denom-
    inator in (51) to be positive, we require


                            ρ − n̄ + gs − (γ − 1)gc − φgB > 0,                         (52)
38                                    CHARLES I. JONES



       which, given the solutions for gs , gc , and gB implicitly provides the condition
       on ρ needed for utility to be finite and for this general problem to be well-
       defined.


Proof of Proposition 3. Optimal Growth with γ < 1 + β

     The first part of the proof follows exactly what we did earlier in proving Proposi-
tion 2. In particular, steps 1 through 3 are identical.

     4. Here things start to change, depending on whether γ ≤ 1 or 1 < γ < 1 + β.
       Notice that
                                     u(ct )                1
                                               = ūcγ−1
                                                    t   +     .
                                    u′ (ct )ct            1−γ
       If γ ≤ 1, this ratio (the value of a year of life relative to consumption) will
       converge to a constant as ct → ∞, whereas if γ > 1, the ratio will grow to
       infinity. This turns out not to matter very much in what follows. In particular,
       we will focus on the γ > 1 case below, so that


                                         gṽ = (γ − 1)gc .                           (53)


       (To consider the case where γ < 1, simply replace the (γ − 1) terms below with
       a zero, reflecting the appropriate value of gṽ .)

     5. Now we guess that the solution for the asymptotic balanced growth path takes
       the following form: s̃t ≡ 1 − st and ℓ̃t ≡ 1 − ℓt fall toward zero at a constant
       exponential rate, while σt → σ ∗ and nt → n̄. That is, the allocation of scientists
       and workers shifts away from life and toward the consumption sector.

     6. Under this proposed solution, consumption growth is


                                             gc = αgA                                (54)


       while growth of the life-saving aggregate is


                                   gh = αgB + gℓ̃ = αgB + gs̃ .                      (55)
                                   LIFE AND GROWTH                                        39


    The last inequality comes from noting that gℓ̃ = gs̃ from step 2 in the proof of
    Proposition 2; see the discussion surrounding equation (42) above. In fact, it
    is helpful to repeat that equation here, written in terms of the tilde variables:

                             s̃t               ρ − gpa t − φgAt gBt
                                   = βδt ṽt ·                 ·    .                   (56)
                           1 − s̃t             ρ − gpb t − φgBt gAt

 7. A number of other growth rates follow in a straightforward way from the var-
    ious production functions. Most important of these is the growth rate of Bt .
    Recall Ȧt = ā(1 − s̃t )λ σtλ Ntλ Aφt and Ḃt = b̄s̃λt σtλ Ntλ Btφ . The exponential de-
    cline in s̃t will then crucially distinguish the growth rates of At and Bt , since
    1 − s̃t → 1 will be asymptotically constant, while s̃t falls exponentially. There-
    fore, taking logs and derivatives of these equations, their asymptotic growth
    rates must satisfy
                                      λn̄          λ(n̄ + gs̃
                              gA =        and gB =            .                         (57)
                                     1−φ            1−φ

 8. Combining (53), (54), and (57), gives


                                        gṽ = (γ − 1)ḡ.                                (58)


 9. So to get the growth rate of δt ṽt , we now need an expression for gδ . Recall
    δt = (Btα ℓ˜t (1 − σt ))−β . Therefore, gδ = −β(αgB + gℓ̃ ). Using this and the fact
    that gℓ̃ = gs̃ gives                                        
                                              αλ(n̄ + gs̃ )
                                gδ = −β                     + gs̃ .                     (59)
                                                1−φ
    Combining (58) and (59) leads to
                                                                       
                                                                   αλ
                       gδ + gṽ = −(1 + β − γ)ḡ − βgs̃        1+           .           (60)
                                                                  1−φ

10. Now, look back at (56) and consider the asymptotic growth rate of each side of
    the equation. Along our proposed balanced growth path, 1 − s̃t converges to
    one, so its growth rate converges to zero. The share s̃t falls exponentially, while
    the right side of the equation grows with δt ṽt . Using our last several results
40                                         CHARLES I. JONES



       in (58), (59), and (60) gives
                                                               
                                                             αλ
                            gs̃ = −(β + 1 − γ)ḡ − βgs̃ 1 +       .                   (61)
                                                            1−φ

       Solving for gs̃ then gives
                                                   −ḡ (β + 1 − γ)
                                           gs̃ =              αλ
                                                                   .                  (62)
                                                   1 + β(1 + 1−φ )

       Under our key assumption that γ < 1 + β, this solution for gs̃ is negative, as we
       conjectured earlier.

 11. Substituting this result into (55) then gives the growth rate of the life-saving
       aggregate:                                                         !
                                                                   αλ
                                             1 + (γ − 1)(1 +      1−φ )
                              gh∗ = ḡ ·                        αλ
                                                                              < ḡ.   (63)
                                                   1 + β(1 +   1−φ )



Proof of Proposition 4. Optimal Growth with 1 < γ = 1 + β

     The proof here is straightforward and follows from the earlier proofs. For exam-
ple, since γ = 1 + β, one can see from equation (50) that gs = 0. The key growth
rates of the economy are then equal to ḡ immediately.


B Data Appendix

This appendix describes the construction of the data on the fraction of R&D expen-
ditures associated with health. Two separate efforts are made, one using U.S. data
and the other using OECD data. These are discussed in turn.


B1. United States

Several main sources are used to construct the US data underlying Figure 2. A
spreadsheet available from the data section of my web page called NSF-AllYears-IndustrialRND.xls
contains the detailed calculations.
     First, for the years 1971 to 1993, various issues of the NIH Data Book report a
time series for the key variable in which we are interested: the fraction of R&D re-
                                 LIFE AND GROWTH                                 41


lated to health. In particular, we use the NIH Data Books for 1982, 1989, and 1994,
splicing together these series during overlapping years to construct our first mea-
sure of health R&D. Unfortunately, these data do not appear to be available online,
so I used physical copies of the data books.
   Our other measures are obtained from a more involved calculation using the
following sources:
   • Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure Ac-
     counts, 1960–2009. This data source provides an extensive account of health
     expenditures, including a “research” category. However, because the purpose
     is to provide an accounting of health expenditures, the research category only
     includes non-commercial research. As stated on page 26 of National Health
     Expenditure Accounts: Definitions, Sources, and Methods 2009,

          Research shown separately in the NHEA is that of non-profit or gov-
          ernment entities. Research and development expenditures by drug
          and medical supply and equipment manufacturers are not shown
          in this line, as those expenditures are treated as intermediate pur-
          chases under the definitions of national income accounting; that is,
          the value of that research is deemed to be recouped through product
          sales.

   • National Science Foundation IRIS data, 1953–1998, Table H-25. From this
     source, we obtain “Company and other (except Federal) funds for industrial
     R&D performance, by industry” for 1953–1998. In particular, we sum three in-
     dustries to get commercial health research: “drugs and medicines” (SIC 283),
     “health services” (SIC 80), and then a fraction of “optical, surgical, photo-
     graphic, and other instruments” (SIC 384-387). This fraction is equal to 0.569,
     which is obtained by using the average ratio of health R&D on “medical equip-
     ment and supplies” for 1997 and 1998 (the two overlapping years) from our
     next source.

   • National Science Foundation, Research and Development in Industry, vari-
     ous issues (2000, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005). This source reports “Company and
42                                 CHARLES I. JONES



       other nonfederal funds for industrial R&D performance” for various years us-
       ing the NAICS industry classification. We sum three industries to get commer-
       cial health research: Pharmaceuticals and medicines (3254), Medical equip-
       ment and supplies (3391), and Health care services (621-623). Raymond Wolfe
       kindly provided the 2006 and 2007 versions of this data.

     • Finally, total spending on R&D is obtained from the National Science Founda-
       tions, National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2008 Data Update, which reports
       data for 1953–2008.
     Notice that our measures of commericial/industry R&D exclude federal funds
but do include non-profit or state and local funding for R&D. This may result in
some double counting. The comparison of the NIH Data Book numbers to those
that I construct from the NSF sources suggests that this is not a large problem —
see Figure 2 in the paper.


B2. OECD

The OECD (and US) data underlying Figure 3 are taken from the OECD iLibrary. A
spreadsheet available from the data section of my web page called STAN-HealthRND.xls
contains the detailed calculations.
     Two sets of data from the OECD iLibrary are used:
     • Government budget appropriations or outlays for RD: This source provides
       government spending on R&D for health and overall from 1981 to 2007 in cur-
       rent PPP-adjusted US dollars.

     • STAN R&D Expenditure in Industry (ISIC Rev. 3) ANBERD ed2009: This source
       provides spending on R&D by industry. Because of a relatively limited industry
       breakdown, our health measure is the sum of spending in the pharmaceutical
       industry (C2423) and 0.5 times the spending in the “medical, precision and
       optical instruments” industry (C33); this weight of 0.5 is obviously arbitary
       but was suggested by calculations using the U.S. sources discussed earlier.
     From this data, we calculate the health share of R&D for both the United States
and for a set of OECD countries. For government R&D, our OECD aggregate in-
                                     LIFE AND GROWTH                                      43


cludes the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and
Canada. For some reason, the industry data for France and the United Kingdom are
not available, so these countries are not included in the industry component.



References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies, October 2002,
  69 (4), 781–810.

  , Amy Finkelstein, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Income and Health Spending: Evidence
  from Oil Price Shocks,” 2009. MIT working paper.

   and Simon Johnson, “Disease and development: the Effect of Life Expectancy on Eco-
  nomic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (6), 925–985.

  , Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous, “The Environment and Di-
  rected Technological Change,” 2009. MIT working paper.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
  Econometrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

  and    , Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Michael Greenstone, “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the
  Value of a Statistical Life,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2004, 112 (1), S226–
  S267. Part 2.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with In-
  tertemporal Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 1995, 103 (6), 1121–1157.

Barsky, R.B., F.T. Juster, M.S. Kimball, and M.D. Shapiro, “Preference Parameters and Be-
  havioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 537–579.

Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares, “The Quantity and Quality of Life
  and the Evolution of World Inequality,” American Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1),
  277–291.
44                                   CHARLES I. JONES



Berndt, Ernst R., Anupa Bir, Susan H. Busch, Richard G. Frank, and Shaon-Lise T. Normand,
  “The Medical Treatment of Depression, 1991–1996: Productive Inefficiency, Expected
  Outcome Variations, and Price Indexes,” 2000. NBER Working Paper No. 7816.

Bostrom, Nick, “Existential Risks,” Journal of Evolution and Technology, March 2002, 9.

Brock, William and M. Scott Taylor, “Economic Growth Theory and the Environment: A
  Review of Theory and Empirics,” Handbook of Economic Growth, 2005, pp. 1749–1821.

Chetty, Raj, “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion,” American Economic Review, De-
  cember 2006, 96 (5), 1821–1834.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn, “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940–1980,” Journal of
  Risk and Uncertainty, September 2004, 29 (2), 159–180.

Cutler, David M., Mark B. McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler, “Are Medi-
  cal Prices Declining? Evidence from Heart Attack Treatments,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, November 1998, 113 (4), 991–1024.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Hiroyuki Chuma, “A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value of
  Life Extension,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1990, 98 (4), 761–782.

Gradus, Raymond and Sjak Smulders, “The Trade-off between Environmental Care and
  Long-Term GrowthPollution in Three Prototype Growth Models,” Journal of Economics,
  1993, 58 (1), 25–51.

Grossman, Michael, “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,” Journal
  of Political Economy, March/April 1972, 80 (2), 223–255.

Gruber, Jonathan, “A Tax-Based Estimate of the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution,”
  2006. NBER Working Paper 11945.

Guvenen, Fatih, “ReconcilinG Conflicting Evidence on the Elasticity of Intertemporal Sub-
  stitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53 (7),
  1451–1472.

Hall, Robert E., “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of Political Economy,
  April 1988, 96 (2), 339–357.

  , “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the Marginal Prod-
  uct of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (2), 281–323.
                                     LIFE AND GROWTH                                     45


  and Charles I. Jones, “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending,” Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, February 2007, 122 (1), 39–72.

Hammitt, James K., Jin-Tan Liu, and Jin-Long Liu, “Survival is a Luxury Good: The Increas-
  ing Value of a Statistical Life,” July 2000. Harvard University mimeo.

Jones, Charles I., “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy,
  August 1995, 103 (4), 759–784.

  and Paul M. Romer, “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human
  Capital,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2010, 2 (1), 224–245.

Joy, Bill, “Why the World Doesn’t Need Us,” Wired Magazine, April 2000, 8 (4).

Lawver, Daniel, “Measuring Quality Increases in the Medical Sector,” 2011.           A.S.U.
  manuscript.

Lichtenberg, Frank, “The Impact of New Drug Launches on Longevity: Evidence from Lon-
  gitudinal, Disease-Level Data from 52 Countries, 1982–2001,” International Journal of
  Health Care Finance and Economics, January 2005, 5 (1), 47–73.

Lucas, Deborah, “Asset Pricing with Undiversifiable Risk and Short Sales Constraints: Deep-
  ening the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1994, 34 (3), 325–342.

Malani, Anup and Tomas J. Philipson, “Can Medical Progress be Sustained? Implications
  of the Link Between Development and Output Markets,” Working Paper 17011, National
  Bureau of Economic Research May 2011.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, “The Value of Health and Longevity,” Journal of
  Political Economy, October 2006, 114 (5), 871–904.

   and Robert Topel, “The Economic Value of Medical Research.” In Measuring the Gains
  from Medical Research: An Economic Approach Murphy and Topel, eds (2003).

   and    , eds, Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach,
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Nordhaus, William D., “The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to
  Living Standards.” In Murphy and Topel, eds (2003) pp. 9–40.

Overbye, Dennis, “Gauging a Collider’s Odds of Creating a Black Hole,” New York Times,
  April 2008.
46                                     CHARLES I. JONES



Posner, Richard A., Catastrophe: Risk and Response, Oxford University Press, 2004.

Rees, Martin, Our Final Century, London: William Heinemann, 2003.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, Octo-
  ber 1990, 98 (5), S71–S102.

Rosen, Sherwin, “The Value of Changes in Life Expectancy,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
  1988, 1, 285–304.

Shapiro, Irving, Matthew D. Shapiro, and David W. Wilcox, “Measuring the Value of Cataract
  Surgery,” 1999. University of Michigan mimeo.

Solow, Robert M., “Intergenerational Equity and Exhaustible Resources,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 1974, pp. 29–45.

Stiglitz, Joseph, “Growth with Exhaustible Natural Resources: Efficient and Optimal Growth
  Paths,” Review of Economic Studies, 1974, pp. 123–137.

Stokey, Nancy L., “Are there Limits to Growth?,” International Economic Review, 1998, pp. 1–
  31.

Triplett, Jack E. and Barry P. Bosworth, “Productivity in the Services Sector,” 2000. Brookings
  Institution mimeo.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market
  Estimates throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2003, 27, 5–76.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette and Orazio P. Attanasio, “Stock-Market Participation, Intertem-
  poral Substitution, and Risk-Aversion,” American Economic Association Papers and Pro-
  ceedings, May 2003, 93 (2), 383–391.

Weisbrod, Burton A., “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological Change,
  Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment,” Journal of Economic Literature, June
  1991, 29, 523–552.
