                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ON THE ORIGINS OF GENDER ROLES:
                                 WOMEN AND THE PLOUGH

                                           Alberto F. Alesina
                                            Paola Giuliano
                                             Nathan Nunn

                                         Working Paper 17098
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17098


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2011




We thank Samuel Bowles, David Clingingsmith, Esther Duflo, Raquel Fernandez, Nicole Fortin, Oded
Galor, Pauline Grosjean, Judith Hellerstein, Edward Miguel, Rohini Pande, Louis Putterman, John
Wallis, as well as seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, Brown University, Harvard University,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, MIT, New York University, Sciences Po, UCLA
Kaler Meeting, University of Oklahoma, Washington University St. Louis, World Bank, WAEHS,
Stanford’s SITE Conference, Coevolution of Behaviors and Institutions Conference, AEA Annual
Meetings, Brooking Africa Growth Forum, NBER Political Economy Meeting, NBER Cohort Studies
Meeting, and the IZA/Science Po Workshop on Trust, Civic Spirit and Economic Performance for
valuable comments. We also thank Eva Ng for excellent research assistance. Giuliano gratefully acknowledges
support from the UCLA Senate. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alberto F. Alesina, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough
Alberto F. Alesina, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn
NBER Working Paper No. 17098
May 2011
JEL No. D03,J16,N30

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper seeks to better understand the historical origins of current differences in norms and beliefs
about the appropriate role of women in society. We test the hypothesis that traditional agricultural
practices influenced the historical gender division of labor and the evolution and persistence of gender
norms. We find that, consistent with existing hypotheses, the descendants of societies that traditionally
practiced plough agriculture, today have lower rates of female participation in the workplace, in politics,
and in entrepreneurial activities, as well as a greater prevalence of attitudes favoring gender inequality.
We identify the causal impact of traditional plough use by exploiting variation in the historical geo-climatic
suitability of the environment for growing crops that differentially benefited from the adoption of the
plough. Our IV estimates, based on this variation, support the findings from OLS. To isolate the importance
of cultural transmission as a mechanism, we examine female labor force participation of second-generation
immigrants living within the US.


Alberto F. Alesina                                    Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Harvard University                                    Harvard University
Littauer Center 210                                   1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Cambridge, Ma 02138
and IGIER                                             and NBER
and also NBER                                         nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
aalesina@harvard.edu

Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu
1. Introduction

The gender division of labor varies significantly across societies. In some cultures women actively

participate in employment outside of the home, while in others there is a clear specialization of

tasks along gender lines: women tend to remain within the home and do not participate in

activities outside of the domestic sphere. These differences are most clearly illustrated by the vast

differences in female labor force participation (FLFP), which in 2000 ranged from 16.1% (Pakistan)

to 90.5% (Burundi).1

   Many determinants of these differences have been well-studied, including per capita income

and the specialization of the economy in female-friendly industries (e.g., Goldin, 1995, Ross,

2008, Iversen and Rosenbluth, 2010). However, even controlling for these determinants there

remain important time-invariant differences in gender roles.2 A number of studies have provided

evidence that these persistent differences may be explained by differences in cultural beliefs about

the appropriate role of women in society (Fortin, 2005, Fernandez, 2007, Fernandez and Fogli,

2009, Borck, 2011). However, this then raises the natural question of the origins of these differences

in norms and beliefs.

   This study tests the hypothesis, originally put forth by Ester Boserup (1970), that gender role

differences have their origins in different forms of agriculture practiced traditionally. In particular,

Boserup identifies important differences between shifting cultivation and plough cultivation.

Shifting cultivation, which uses hand-held tools like the hoe and the digging stick, is labor

intensive and women actively participate in farm-work. Plough cultivation, by contrast, is much

more capital intensive, using the plough to prepare the soil. Unlike the hoe or digging stick,

the plough requires significant upper body strength, grip strength, and burst of power, which are

needed to either pull the plough or control the animal that pulls it. Because of these requirements,

when plough agriculture is practiced, men have an advantage in farming relative to women

(Murdock and Provost, 1973).3 Also reinforcing this gender-bias in ability is the fact that when the

plough is used, there is less need for weeding, a task typically undertaken by women and children

(Foster and Rosenzweig, 1996). In addition, child care, a task almost universally performed by

women, is most compatible with activities that can be stopped and resumed easily and do not
  1 Data  are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
  2 In Section 4, we provide evidence that these difference have persisted for centuries.
   3 See Pitt, Rosenzweig and Hassan (2010) for evidence from Bangladesh and the USA on the very different

distributions of grip strength for men and women.


                                                    1
put children in danger. These are characteristics that are satisfied for hoe agriculture, but not for

plough agriculture, particularly since large animals are typically used to pull the plough.

   The result, according to Boserup, is that societies that traditionally practiced plough agriculture

– rather than shifting cultivation – developed a specialization of production along gender lines.

Men tended to work outside of the home in the fields, while women specialized in activities

within the home.4 This division of labor then generated norms about the appropriate role of

women in society. Societies characterized by plough agriculture, and a resulting gender-based

division of labor, developed the belief that the natural place for women is within the home.

These cultural beliefs tend to persist even if the economy moves out of agriculture, affecting the

participation of women on activities performed outside of the home, such as market employment,

entrepreneurship, or participation in politics.5

   To test Boserup’s hypothesis, we combine pre-industrial ethnographic data, reporting whether

societies traditionally used plough agriculture, with contemporary measures of individuals’

views about gender roles, as well as measures of female participation in activities outside of

the home. Our analysis examines variation across countries, ethnic groups, and individuals.

Consistent with Boserup’s hypothesis, we find a strong and robust negative relationship between

historical plough-use and unequal gender roles today. Traditional plough-use is positively corre-

lated with attitudes reflecting gender inequality and negatively correlated with female labor force

participation, female firm ownership, and female participation in politics.

   Although these findings support Boserup’s hypothesis, they are also consistent with other

interpretations. For example, we would observe the same relationships if societies with attitudes

favoring gender inequality were more likely to adopt the plough historically and if these attitudes

continue to persist today. To better understand whether past plough use did have a causal impact

on subsequent cultural norms, we instrument historical plough-use using specific geo-climatic
   4 Prior   to Boserup, anthropologists and ethnographers had recognized a relationship between traditional gender
roles and the use of the hoe (e.g., Baumann, 1928). However, we focus our discussion here on Boserup’s analysis since
she was the first to argue for the importance of agricultural technology on the subsequent evolution of norms and
values, and their importance for the development process.
   5 Boserup (1970), in her analysis, most strongly argues for a relationship between traditional plough use and gender

norms when she hypothesizes that the use of the veil may be associated with the use of the plough in agriculture.
She writes that plough cultivation “shows a predominantly male labor force. The land is prepared for sowing
by men using draught animals, and this. . . leaves little need for weeding the crop, which is usually the women’s
task. . . Because village women work less in agriculture, a considerable fraction of them are completely freed from
farm work. Sometimes such women perform purely domestic duties, living in seclusion within their own homes only
appearing in the street wearing a veil, a phenomenon associated with plough culture and seemingly unknown in
regions of shifting cultivation where women do most of the agricultural toil.” (pp. 13–14)




                                                          2
conditions of a society’s historical location which affected the relative benefits of adopting the

plough. As Pryor (1985) shows, the benefit of the plough depends on the crop being cultivated.

The plough is more beneficial for crops that require large tracts of land to be prepared in a

short period of time (e.g., due to multiple-cropping), and can only be grown in soils that are

not shallow, sloped, or rocky.6 These crops, which Pryor refers to as ‘plough-positive’, include

teff, wheat, barley, rye and wet rice. These can be contrasted to ‘plough-negative’ crops, such as

maize, sorghum, millet and various types of root and tree crops, which require less land to be

prepared over a longer period of time, and/or can be cultivated on thin, sloped or rocky soils,

where using the plough is difficult. Unlike plough-positive crops, plough-negative crops benefit

much less from the adoption of the plough.

   Using data from the FAO, we identify the geo-climatic suitability of finely defined locations for

growing plough-positive cereals (wheat, barley and rye) and plough-negative cereals (sorghum

and millet). We then use the relative differences in ethnic groups’ geo-climatic conditions for

growing plough-positive and plough-negative cereals as instruments for historical plough use.

We find that the IV estimates provide results consistent with the OLS estimates. Traditional

plough use is associated with attitudes of gender inequality, as well as less female labor force

participation, female firm-ownership, and female participation in politics.

   Our analysis then considers potential underlying mechanisms. It is possible that the long-term

effect of the plough reflects persistent cultural beliefs. However, it is also possible that part of the

long-term impact arises because historical plough-use promoted the development of institutions,

policies and markets that are less conducive to the participation of women in activities outside of

the home.7 To distinguish these two channels we exploit the fact that cultural norms and beliefs

– unlike institutions, policies and markets – are internal to the individual. Therefore, when indi-

viduals move, their beliefs and values move with them, but their external environment remains

behind. Exploiting this fact, we examine variation in cultural heritage among second-generation

immigrants living in the US. All individuals born and raised in the US have been exposed to

the same institutions and markets. In effect, the analysis holds external factors constant, while
   6 For a recent study documenting the link between soil type and plough-use in modern India see Carranza (2010).

In particular, she shows that in contemporary India plough technology is more likely to be adopted with deep loamy
soils rather than shallow clay soils. She also shows that plough use is associated with less participation of women in
agriculture.
   7 See the recent studies by Alesina, Algan, Cahuc and Giuliano (2010), Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2008b) and

Tabellini (2008) that investigate feedback effects between culture and institutions.




                                                          3
examining variation in individuals’ internal beliefs and values. We find that women from cultures

that historically used the plough have lower rates of labor force participation in the US. This

provides evidence that part of the importance of the plough arises through its impact on internal

beliefs and values.

   Our focus on a historical determinant of gender roles is not meant to imply that other factors,

particularly factors that can change significantly over time, are unimportant. A number of

existing studies have examined other important determinants, including economic development,

medical progress, and the production structure of the economy (e.g., Iversen and Rosenbluth,

2010, Goldin, 2006, Ross, 2008, and Albanesi and Olivetti, 2007, 2009). As we show in section

4, even accounting for these important factors, there remains a strong persistent impact of the

plough on gender norms today.

   Our analysis complements a number of descriptive studies from history, anthropology and

sociology that also examine the long-term impacts of traditional plough use on gender norms

(Goody, 1976, Whyte, 1978 and Braudel, 1998). A particularly interesting example is Fernand

Braudel’s (1998) description of how gender relations, culture, and society were impacted by the

adoption of the plough in Mesopotamia between 4,000 and 6,000 BC. He writes: “Until now,

women had been in charge of the fields and gardens where cereals were grown: everything

had depended on their tilling the soil and tending the crop. Men had been first hunters, then

herdsmen. But now men took over the plough, which they alone were allowed to use. At a

stroke, it might seem that the society would move from being matriarchal to patriarchal: that

there would be a shift away from the reign of the all-powerful mother goddesses. . . and towards

the male gods and priests who were predominant in Sumer and Babylon. . . and was accompanied

with a move towards male domination of society and its beliefs” (p. 71).

   Our results also add to a recent line of research that has emphasized the relevance of cultural

norms and beliefs as important factors underlying the persistent differences in gender roles across

societies (Alesina and Giuliano, 2010, Fernandez, 2007, Fernandez and Fogli, 2009, and Fortin,

2005, 2009). Although the link between gender norms and female labor force participation is well-

established, little is known about the origin of these cultural differences. Our findings suggest that

an important determinant of these differences can be found in traditional farming practices. More

generally, our findings provide additional evidence showing that historical factors can shape the

evolution and persistence of norms and beliefs. Thus, they contribute to an emerging literature


                                                  4
that examines the historical determinants of various cultural characteristics today (e.g., Guiso,

Sapienza and Zingales, 2008a, Grosjean, 2010a,b, Becker, Boeckh, Hainz and Woessman, 2010,

Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011).

   In the next section, we begin our analysis by first documenting that in societies that tradition-

ally used plough agriculture women did in fact participate less in farm-work and other activities

outside of the domestic sphere. In section 3, we then explain the procedure used to link the

historical use of the plough, which is measured at the ethnicity level, to contemporary data on

gender norms or female labor force participation, measured either at the country or individual

level. Sections 4 and 5 report OLS and IV estimates of the relationship between traditional plough

use and gender outcomes today, examining variation across individuals and countries. In section

6, we then turn to mechanisms, using second-generation US immigrants to test for persistent

impacts of the plough through cultural transmission. Section 7 offers concluding thoughts.


2. The historical impacts of traditional plough use

We begin our analysis by first confirming that societies that traditionally used plough agriculture

had lower female participation in agricultural activities. We also check whether plough use was

associated with differences in other activities within and outside of the domestic sphere.

   Our analysis relies on information on pre-industrial plough use taken from the Ethnographic

Atlas, a world wide ethnicity-level database constructed by George Peter Murdock that contains

ethnographic information for 1,267 ethnic groups around the world. Information for societies

in the sample have been coded for the earliest period for which satisfactory ethnographic data

are available or can be reconstructed. The earliest observation dates are for groups in the Old

World where early written evidence is available. For the parts of the world without a written

history the information is from the earliest observers of these cultures. For some cultures the first

recorded information is from the early 20th century. However, even for these observations, the

data should capture, to the maximum extent possible, the characteristics of the ethnic group prior

to European contact. For all groups in the dataset, the variables are taken from the societies prior

to industrialization.

   The database contains a measure of the historical use of plough agriculture. Groups are

classified into one of three mutually exclusive categories: (i) the plough was absent, (ii) the

plough existed at the time the group was observed but it was not aboriginal, and (iii) the plough

                                                 5
was aboriginal and found in the society prior to contact. There are data on plough use for 1,158

of the 1,267 societies in the database. There is no evidence of groups switching from one form of

agriculture to another and then back again. In other words, the use of the plough, once adopted,

remains stable over time. Using the categorization, we construct an indicator variable for plough

use which equals one if the plough was present (whether aboriginal or not) and zero otherwise.

   It is possible that the plough has a larger impact on gender norms if it was adopted early.

However, because of data limitation, we are unable to test for this. From the database we only

know the rough date of adoption if it occurred after European contact. For other plough users

we do not have any information on the timing of adoption. Given this, our estimates should be

interpreted as the average effect of having adopted the plough among all ethnic groups that did

so prior to industrialization. There may be heterogeneity within the group of adopters (e.g. based

on date of adoption), but we are only able to estimate an average effect.

   We measure traditional female participation in agriculture using information on the gender

division of labor in agriculture reported in the Ethnographic Atlas. Ethnicities are grouped into one

of the following five categories measuring gendered participation in agriculture: (1) males only,

(2) males appreciably more, (3) equal participation, (4) female appreciably more, and (5) females

only.8 Using this information, we construct a variable that takes on integer values ranging from 1

to 5 and is increasing in female specialization in agriculture.9

   When examining the relationship between the gender division of labor in agriculture and

plough use, we are careful to control for a number of characteristics of ethnic groups which may

be correlated with plough use and gender roles. We control for the presence of large domesti-

cated animals, a measure of economic development, and a measure of political complexity. All

measures are from the Ethnographic Atlas.10 The presence of domesticated animals is measured

with an indicator variable that equals one if domesticated bovine or equine animals were present.

Economic development is measured using the density of ethnic groups’ settlements. Ethnicities

are grouped into the following categories: (1) nomadic or fully migratory, (2) semi-nomadic, (3)

semi-sedentary, (4) compact but not permanent settlements, neighborhoods of dispersed family
   8 The original classification in the Ethnographic Atlas distinguishes between “differentiated but equal participation”

and “equal participation”. Since this distinction is not relevant for our purposes, we combine the two categories into
a single category of equal participation.
   9 For 232 ethnic groups agriculture was not practiced and therefore there is no measure of female participation in

agriculture. For an additional 315 ethnic groups information for the variable is missing. These ethnic groups (547 in
total) are omitted from the analysis.
  10 Full details are provided in the paper’s appendix.




                                                           6
homesteads, (5) separate hamlets, (6) forming a single community, (7) compact and relatively

permanent settlements and (8) complex settlements.         With this information, we construct a

variable that takes on integer values, ranging from 1 to 8, and is increasing in settlement density.

Political complexity is measured by the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies in the society.

   We also control for two measures of the geographic conditions of ethnic groups. For each eth-

nicity we know the geographic coordinates of the centroid of the group. Using this information,

we calculate the fraction of land within a 200 kilometer radius of the centroid that is defined

as suitable for the cultivation of crops. The crop suitability data are from the FAO’s Global

Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2002 database (Fischer, van Nelthuizen, Shah and Nachtergaele,

2002), which reports suitability measures for 5 arc minute by 5 arc minute (approximately 56 km

by 56 km) grid-cells globally. The suitability of the environment for agriculture is potentially

correlated with the use of the plough and may independently affect the gender division of labor.

We also use the same procedure to control for the proportion of land within the 200 kilometer

radius that is defined as being tropical or subtropical.

   OLS estimates examining the impact of the historical plough use on past female participation

in agriculture are reported in column 1 of Table 1. The specification includes the five controls

variables. The estimates identify a negative relationship between plough use and participation

of women in agriculture. The use of the plough is associated with a reduction in the female

participation in agriculture variable of 0.86, which is large given that the standard deviation of

the variable is 1.0.

   A natural question that arises is the exact nature of this decline in female participation in

agriculture; specifically, whether the decline is in all agricultural tasks or is it focused on only

a few. Unfortunately, the Ethnographic Atlas does not provide similar information for specific

tasks within agriculture. We therefore complement our analysis by using Murdock and White’s

(1969) Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS) which does contain this information. The SCCS

contains ethnographic information on 186 societies, intentionally chosen to be representative of

the full sample and for each ethnicity to be historically and culturally independent from the

other ethnic groups in the sample. The database was constructed by first grouping the 1267

societies from the Ethnographic Atlas into 186 clusters of closely related cultures. A particularly

well-documented and representative ethnic group was then chosen for each cluster and these

constitute the observations in the SCCS.


                                                  7
      Table 1: Historical plough use and female participation in agriculture and other activities.
                                       Panel	  A.	  Dependent	  variables:	  Female	  par.cipa.on	  in	  the	  following	  (agriculture-­‐related)	  tasks:
                                                                                                Soil	  
                                Par.cipa.on	  in	  agriculture       Land	  clearance prepara.on                    Plan.ng         Crop	  tending       Harves.ng
                                      (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)                       (5)                 (6)                  (7)
 Historical	  plough	  use    -­‐0.861***          -­‐1.133***          -­‐0.414**      -­‐1.164***               -­‐1.244***         -­‐1.033***           -­‐0.770**
                                    (0.217)              (0.272)             (0.200)          (0.355)                   (0.341)             (0.367)              (0.308)
 Ethnographic	  controls           yes                  yes                  yes                  yes                  yes                 yes                  yes
 Observa.ons                        660                  124                  129                  124                  131                 122                  131
 R-­‐squared                        0.14                 0.22                 0.15                 0.13                 0.13                0.19                 0.19

                                            Panel	  B.	  Dependent	  variables:	  Female	  par.cipa.on	  in	  the	  following	  (addi.onal)	  tasks:
                                Caring	  for	   Caring	  for	                                                                                                Burden	  
                               small	  animals large	  animals            Milking             Cooking          Fuel	  gathering Water	  fetching            carrying
                                     (8)               (9)                    (10)                  (11)                 (12)            (13)                      (14)
 Historical	  plough	  use      0.296             0.173                    0.318               -­‐0.006           -­‐0.813*         -­‐0.166               -­‐1.138***
                                 (0.574)           (0.285)                  (0.736)             (0.128)              (0.420)          (0.246)                    (0.374)
 Ethnographic	  controls           yes                  yes                  yes                  yes                  yes                 yes                  yes
 Observa.ons                         88                   95                   48                  173                  159                 154                  135
 R-­‐squared                        0.04                 0.05                 0.09                 0.04                 0.05                0.05                 0.16
 Notes: The unit of observa.on is ethnic group. In column 1 ethnic groups are from the Ethnographic Atlas and in columns 2-­‐14 they are from the
 Standard Cross Cultural Sample. Each dependent variable measures female par.cipa.on in a par.cular ac.vity (e.g., agriculture). The variables
 take on integer values between 1 and 5 and are increasing in female par.cipa.on. Coeﬃcients are reported with robust standard errors in
 brackets. In column 1, we report Conley standard errors adjusted for spa.al correla.on (assuming a window that is sixty degrees la.tude and sixty
 degrees	  longitude).	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.




    Using the SCCS data, we first replicate the regression reported in column 1 that uses the

Ethnographic Atlas data. As shown in column 2, we find similar results. Plough use is associated

with a decline in female participation in agriculture of 1.13, which is equal to a one standard

deviation change in the dependent variable. In columns 3–7, we estimate the association between

plough use and female participation in the following agricultural tasks: land clearance, soil

preparation, planting, crop tending and harvesting. The estimates show that plough use is

associated with less female participation in all agricultural tasks, with the largest declines in

soil preparation, planting and crop tending.

    In columns 8–14, reported in panel B of Table 1, we consider the relationship between plough

use and female participation in non-agricultural activities: care of small and large animals,

milking, cooking, fuel gathering, water fetching and burden carrying.11 We find that the plough

is associated with less female participation in fuel gathering, water fetching, and burden carrying

(although the coefficient for water fetching is small and not statistically different from zero). We

do not find evidence that the plough is associated with a statistically significant increase in the
  11 If an activity is not present in a society, then the dependent variable is coded as missing. This accounts for the

varying number of missing observations in each regression.




                                                                                   8
other activities: caring for large or small animals, milking or cooking. For these activities, with

the exception of cooking, the estimated coefficients are positive, but insignificant.

   Overall, the ethnographic evidence confirms that women participated less in farm activities

in societies that historically practiced plough agriculture. This is consistent with the analysis of

Boserup (1970), as well as the observations of anthropologists like Baumann (1928) and Whyte

(1978). There is some evidence that the reduced participation coincided with an increase in some

activities like milking. However, the increases are not statistically significant.


3. Linking the past to the present: Data and methodology

We next turn to an examination of the long-term impact of historical plough use. To do this,

we link historical plough-use, measured at the ethnicity level, with current outcomes of interest,

measured at the location-level (either countries or districts within countries) today. This requires

an estimate of the geographic distribution of ethnicities across the globe today. We construct this

information using the 15th edition of the Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Gordon, 2005), a

data source that maps the current geographic distribution of 7,612 different languages, each of

which we manually matched to one of the 1,267 ethnic groups from the Ethnographic Atlas. The

Ethnologue provides a shape file that divides the world’s land into polygons, with each polygon

indicating the location of a specific language. We also use the Landscan 2000 database, which

reports estimates of the world’s population for 30 arc-second by 30 arc-second (roughly 1 km by

1 km) grid-cells globally.12 We combine the Ethnologue shape file with the Landscan raster file

to obtain an estimate of the global distribution of language groups across the globe today. This

information is used to link the historical ethnicity-level data to our current outcomes of interest,

measured at the location-level.

   We illustrate our procedure with the example of Ethiopia. Figure 1a shows a map of the land

inhabited by different ethnic groups, i.e. groups speaking different languages. Each polygon

represents the approximate borders of a group (from Ethnologue). One should not think of the

borders as precisely defined boundaries, but rather as rough measures indicating the approxi-

mate locations of different language groups. The map also shows the Landscan estimate of the

population of each cell within the country. A darker shade indicates greater population.
 12 The Landscan 2000 database was produced by Oakridge Laboratories in cooperation with the US Government and

NASA.



                                                      9
   From the Ethnographic Atlas we know whether each ethnic group used the plough.                  We

define Ieplough to be a variable equal to one if ethnic group e used plough agriculture and zero

otherwise. We first match each of the 7,612 Ethnologue language groups to one of the 1,267

Ethnographic Atlas ethnic groups for which we have traditional plough-use information. After

the matching procedure, we know for each language group whether their ancestors engaged in

plough agriculture. This information is shown in Figure 1b.

   We then use information on the location of modern district and country boundaries to con-

struct district-level and country-level averages of the historical plough measure. The procedure is

shown visually for the district-level averages in Figures 2a and 2b. Intuitively, the procedure

creates a population-weighted average plough measure for all grid-cells within a district (or

country). This provides an estimate of the fraction of the population currently living in a district

(or country) with ancestors that traditionally engaged in plough agriculture.

   To be more precise, let Ne,i,d,c denote the number of individuals of ethnicity e living in grid-cell

i located in district d in country c. We then construct a population-weighted average of Ieplough for

all ethnic groups living in a district d. The district-level measure of the fraction of the population

with ancestors that traditionally used the plough, Ploughd,c , is given by:

                                                         Ne,i,d,c plough
                                 Ploughd,c =   ∑∑         Nd,c
                                                                 · Ie                               (1)
                                                e   i

where Nd,c is the total number of people living in district d in country c. The same procedure is

used to construct a country-level measure Ploughc as well, except that an average is taken over

all grid-cells in country c.

   Figure 3a shows the global distribution of languages based on the Ethnologue data, as well as

historical plough use for each group. (The figure also shows uninhabited land in dark grey.) One

shortcoming of the Ethnologue data is that information is missing for some parts of the world.

This is due to uncertainty or a lack of information about the boundaries of language groups

in that location. As it is apparent from the map, this primarily occurs in South America. We

undertake three strategies to address this issue. The first is to ignore the missing languages

and calculate country and district measures using the data that exist. This is the strategy that

has been undertaken by other studies using the Ethnologue language data (e.g., Michalopoulos,

2008). Our second strategy is to assume that all inhabitants in the unclassified territories speak

the national language of the country. The spatial distribution of historical plough use using this


                                                    10
                                                                    Legend
                                                                 Ethnologue languages




                                                                         4
                       (a) Population density and language groups




                                                                      Legend
                                                               Ethnologue languages
                                                                   Plough not used
                                                                   Plough used




                                                                         4
         (b) Population density, language groups and their traditional plough use

Figure 1: Populations, language groups, and historical plough-use within Ethiopia.


                                              11
                                                                      Legend
                                                               District boundaries
                                                                    District boundaries
                                                               Ethnologue languages
                                                                    Plough not used
                                                                    Plough used




                                                                          4
(a) Population density, language groups their traditional plough use, and districts today




                                                                       Legend
                                                                Historic plough use
                                                                    0.00-0.01
                                                                    0.01-0.39
                                                                    0.39-0.76
                                                                    0.76-0.94
                                                                    0.94-1.00




                                                                          4
            (b) District averages of plough use among inhabitants’ ancestors

        Figure 2: Traditional plough-use across districts within Ethiopia


                                              12
Legend
Plough use: No imputation
      Missing plough data

      No plough use

      Plough use, not indigenous

      Indigenous plough use

Missing language data
      Unpopulated land

      Populated but no Ethnologue data




                                                   (a) Missing language information not imputed




Legend
Plough use: imputed with nat'l language
      Missing plough data

      No plough use

      Plough use, not indigenous

      Indigenous plough use

Missing language data
      Unpopulated land

      Populated but no Ethnologue data




                                   (b) Missing language information imputed using the country’s official language




Legend
Plough use: imputed with GREG
      Missing plough data

      No plough use

      Plough use, not indigenous

      Indigenous plough use

Missing language data
      Unpopulated land

      Populated but no Ethnologue data




                                         (c) Missing language information imputed using GREG ethnic groups

                Figure 3: Historical plough use among the ethnic/language groups globally
                                                    13
imputation procedure is reported in Figure 3b. Our third strategy is to impute the missing data

using information on the spatial distribution of ethnic groups from the Geo-Referencing of Ethnic

Groups (GREG) database (Weidmann, Rod and Cederman, 2010). Like the Ethnologue, the GREG

database provides a shape file that divides the world’s land into polygons, with each polygon

indicating the location of a specific ethnicity. The shortcoming of the GREG database is that

ethnic groups are much less finely identified relative to the Ethnologue database. The GREG

database identifies 1,364 ethnic groups, while the Ethnologue identifies 7,612 language groups.13

The spatial distribution of historical plough use using this procedure is shown in Figure 3c.

   In Figures 4a–4c, we report population weighted country-level averages of historical plough

use for each of the three strategies used to address the missing language data. In our analysis,

we use the plough variable that was constructed without missing values imputed as our baseline

measure. Our results are robust to the use of either variable that imputes the missing language

data. This robustness is explained by the high correlation among the three plough measures. At

the country-level, the correlation between: (i) our baseline variable and the measure with missing

languages imputed using the country’s national language is 0.89; (ii) our baseline measure and

the measure imputed using ethnic groups from the GREG database is 0.91; and (iii) the two

variables with imputed values is 0.99.14


4. OLS estimates

Having constructed country- and district-level measures of traditional plough use, we are able to

examine the relationship between historical plough use and the role of women in societies today.

We begin by examining variation at the country level.


A. Country-level estimates

We test Boserup’s hypothesis by estimating the following equation:

                                   yc = α + β Ploughc + XcC Γ + XcH Π + εc                                         (2)

where y is an outcome of interest, c denotes countries, Ploughc is our measure of the historical

use of the plough among the ancestors of the citizens in country c, and XcC and XcH are vectors
  13 An alternative strategy is to rely only on the coarser GREG classification and map. Our results are robust to this
procedure as well.
  14 Descriptive statistics for the three measures are reported in Appendix Table A1.



                                                          14
Legend
Historic plough use
     0.000000 - 0.024938
     0.024939 - 0.133554
     0.133555 - 0.233165
     0.233166 - 0.323672
     0.323673 - 0.569498
     0.569499 - 0.821691
     0.821692 - 0.889259
     0.889260 - 0.943730
     0.943731 - 0.985092
     0.985093 - 1.000000




                                           (a) Missing language information not imputed




Legend
Historic plough use
     0.000000 - 0.061609
     0.061610 - 0.251907
     0.251908 - 0.403964
     0.403965 - 0.573113
     0.573114 - 0.676111
     0.676112 - 0.783906
     0.783907 - 0.874715
     0.874716 - 0.928645
     0.928646 - 0.981442
     0.981443 - 1.000000




                           (b) Missing language information imputed using the country’s official language




Legend
Historic plough use
     0.000000 - 0.043163
     0.043164 - 0.133554
     0.133555 - 0.323672
     0.323673 - 0.629320
     0.629321 - 0.803035
     0.803036 - 0.870872
     0.870873 - 0.908499
     0.908500 - 0.953173
     0.953174 - 0.985101
     0.985102 - 1.000000




                               (c) Missing language information imputed using GREG ethnic groups

                  Figure 4: Average historical plough use among the ancestors of each country
                                                                 15
of current controls and historical ethnographic controls, all measured at the country level. XcC

includes the natural log of a country’s real per capita GDP measured in 2000, as well as the

variable squared. These controls are important given the well-established non-linear U-shaped

relationship between economic development and female labor force participation (Goldin, 1995).

We also include an indicator variable that equals one if the country was formerly communist,

since these regimes implemented policies to eliminate gender differences in the economy.15

The historical ethnographic controls XcH are based on the ethnographic characteristics used as

controls in the ethnicity-level regressions: the presence of domesticated bovine or equine animals,

economic development measured by the density of settlement, levels of political authority in the

society, agricultural suitability, and the presence of a tropical climate. We construct country-level

versions of these variables using the same procedure that is used to construct the historical plough

use variable. Thus, the ethnographic controls capture the historical characteristics of a location’s

ancestors.

   Table 2 reports country-level OLS estimates. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is a

country’s female labor force participation rate (FLFP) in 2000.16 In columns 3–6, we examine

women’s participation in more narrowly specified activities outside of the domestic sphere:

entrepreneurship (measured by the share of firms with owners or managers that are female) and

national politics (measured by the proportion of seats held by women in national parliament).17

The even numbered columns include controls for continent fixed effects, while the odd numbered

columns do not. The estimates show that in countries with a tradition of plough use, women are

less likely to participate in the labor market, are less likely to own or manage firms, and are less

likely to participate in politics.18 All coefficients are negative and statistically significant.

   The partial correlation plots for historical plough use are show in Figures 5a–5c (for columns
  15 Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln (2007) show how the impact of a communist regime on individual beliefs can be

long lasting.
  16 FLFP is taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. The variable is measured as the percentage of

women aged 15 to 64 that are in the labor force.
  17 The share of a country’s firms with some female ownership is measured as the percentage of surveyed firms with

a woman among the principal owners. The data are from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys. The proportion of seats in
national parliament is measured as the percent of parliamentary seats, in a single or lower chamber, held by women.
The variable, measured in 2000, is taken from the United Nations’ Women’s Indicators and Statistics Database.
  18 Because female participation in national politics may be affected by the type of government, we also control for

each country’s level of democracy in 2000 when this outcome is examined. Democracy is measured using the ‘polity2’
measure from the Polity IV database, which takes on integer values and ranges from −10 (high autocratic) to +10
(highly democratic). Many countries have introduced quotas to increase the participation of women in politics. We
have checked the robustness of our results excluding countries with gender quotas. For the restricted sample of 86
countries, the estimated coefficient is −4.85 with a standard error of 2.68.



                                                         16
                                                                            Table 2: Country level OLS estimates.
                                                                                                                                   Dependent	  variable:
                                                           Female	  labor	  force	                    Share	  of	  ﬁrms	  with	  some	  
                                                               parDcipaDon                                  female	  ownership                      Females	  in	  poliDcs      Average	  eﬀect	  size	  (AES)
                                                           (1)                  (2)                         (3)                     (4)              (5)                   (6)       (7)                    (8)
Historical	  plough	  use                         -­‐16.506***              -­‐15.417***              -­‐11.052**              -­‐11.540**     -­‐5.606***           -­‐4.245*   -­‐0.849***         -­‐0.796***
                                                        (3.547)                   (3.561)                   (4.287)                  (5.152)         (2.128)            (2.218)        (0.140)             (0.137)
Historical	  controls:
   Agricultural	  suitability                             yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
   DomesDcated	  animals                                  yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
   Tropics                                                 yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
   PoliDcal	  hierarchies                                 yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
   Economic	  complexity                                  yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
Contemporary	  controls:
  ln	  income,	  ln	  income2                           yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
  Communism	  indicator                                   yes                      yes                       yes                      yes           yes                  yes         yes                  yes
  Polity                                                   no                       no                        no                       no            yes                  yes         no                   no
ConDnent	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects                                 no                       yes                       no                       yes            no                  yes          no                  yes
                                                                                                                                                                                            a
ObservaDons                                               159                      159                       105                      105            125                 125          135                  135a
R-­‐squared                                               0.41                     0.43                      0.15                     0.21           0.28                0.32
Notes: OLS esDmates are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. The unit of observaDon is a country. ***, ** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.	  aThis	  is	  the	  average	  number	  of	  observaDons	  in	  the	  regressions	  for	  the	  three	  outcomes.	  




1, 3 and 5). From the figures it is clear that the coefficient for traditional plough use is not being

influenced by a small number of countries. Further, the plots also show that the coefficient

estimates are not only identified from broad differences across regions, but also from finer

within-region variation. For example, we observe African countries in the Northwest corner (e.g.,

Rwanda, Madagascar) and in the Southeast corner (e.g., Eritrea, Mauritania, Ethiopia, etc). This

is confirmed by the fact that the point estimates controlling for region fixed effects are essentially

identical to the estimates without the fixed effects (comparing the odd numbered columns to the

even numbered columns in Table 2).

     Not only are the coefficient estimates statistically significant, but they are also economically

meaningful. Based on the estimates from column 1, a one-standard-deviation increase in historical

plough use (0.474) is associated with a reduction of female labor force participation (FLFP) of 7.82

percentage points (16.506 × 0.474), which is equal to 15.1% of the sample average for FLFP and

47% of its standard deviation. The impact on the share of firms with some female ownership

(based on the column 3 estimates) is a reduction of 5.23 percentage points, which is 16% of the

outcome’s mean and 38% of its standard deviation. The reduction on the participation of women

in politics (using the column 5 estimates) is 2.66 percentage points, which is 22% of the outcome’s

mean and 30% of its standard deviation.19
  19 See       Appendix Table A1 for the means and standard deviations of the variables.




                                                                                                                          17
                    40
                                                     BWA                          THA
                                                                                       VUT
                                                       RWA         TZA
                                                          MDG      KEN      CHN      LAO
                                                       AGO GIN   UGA                            LSO
                                              ISL    BHS
                                                    KAZ      BDI                            PNG
                                                   COM  ZWEJAM BFA          BOL GAB MOZ
                                                                                     VNM       KHM
                                                      AZE PER          DJI              PRTBRN
                                                                                          URY
                                                               GMB             BRA MNG
                                                                                    AUS  DOMSWZ




        e(FLFP | X)
                                                  HTI NAM VCTSEN     ZAFNZL
                                                                         RUSCHECAN FIN
                                                                                    LTU
                                                                                      DNK
                                                                                      PHLMYS                  MRT
                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                  GHA          SGP
                                                           TTO ARG       VEN  BLR  SVK
                                                                                  CYP
                                                                                   EST
                                                                                  CZE
                                                                                 USA
                                                                                  COG
                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                       BIH ISR
                                                            LCA                    POLGBR
                                                                                      NLDTKM  BGDCAF
                                                                                                 A LB
                                                                 UZB
                                                                          KWT
                                                                     PANNCLZMB SVN
                                                                             FRA
                                                                                    LVA GRC MWI
                                                                                        ARM
                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                        PRY
                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                    ETH




            0
                                                                CPV BENBLZ CMRAUT      BGR MDA GEO      NPL
                                                          ECU            TCD JPN  LBR
                                                                                   UKR
                                                                                  HRV                    DZA
                                                  KGZ                GUYGTM
                                                                         MEX   DEU    IRL
                                                                                       SLV
                                                                      FJI TGO
                                                                           ARE CIV
                                                                           CRISLE
                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                ITA       BTN
                                                                                        PRI
                                                                                         HND LKA
                                                                  CHL          IRN MKD
                                                                               COL
                                                                                 SUR
                                                                              OMN TUN     TUR              LBY
                                                                              GNBGNQ            MAR       ERI
                                                         NIC    NGA                LUXLBN               EGY
                                                                            SAU                  IND
                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                    SDN                          SYR
                                                                                           TJK
                                                                        NER
                                                                        MLI                    SLB
                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                           YEM
                    ï40



                                   ï1                                            0                                  1
                                                                   e(Historical plough use | X)
                                   (coef = ï16.51, s.e. = 3.55, N = 159)


                                                 (a) Female labor force participation
                    40




                                                                                      PHL



                                                       KGZ                             VNM
                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                  CIV
                                                                                     BRA
                                                                                    LBR PRTMDA
        e(Female Ownership | X)




                                                           MDG
                                                                                          MNG

                                                    BWARWA                   BLR
                                                                           TCD        VUTIDN
                                                                                      URY
                                                          NIC         KEN              TUR
                                                                                 POL
                                                                                   LAO
                                                                                 COL
                                                                      FJI         LVA
                                                                                UKR
                                                           NAMBDI UGA      BOL GHAIRL
                                                                                    ESPPRY     GEO
                                                                   UZBBEN ZMB SVNHUNLBNHND        ETHEGY
                                                                       CHL
                                                                     TZA             SLV
                                                                           TGO    LTUBTNTJK
                                                                                         SWZ
                                                        KAZ       ARG                MKD             NPL
             0




                                                                      PAN        EST
                                                              SEN
                                                                GIN                  BGR
                                                                                  GAB
                                                                                HRV  GRC
                                                            PERGMB ZAFRUS             ARM
                                                                                    BIH
                                                                          GTM GNB COG
                                                            JAMCPV
                                                           AGO            NER
                                                                         MLI     SVK MOZ
                                                         ECU    BFA       MEX                LSO
                                                             AZENGA             CZE         MWI
                                                                                          BGD SYR
                                                                                               JOR
                                                                                             MAR
                                                                               DEU      MYSKOR
                                                                                                         DZA MRT
                                                                                CMR
                    ï20




                                                                                             IND ALB
                                                                                           PAK
                                                                                         YEM              ERI
                                                                             SLE

                                   ï1                                            0                                  1
                                                                   e(Historical plough use | X)
                                   (coef = ï11.05, s.e. = 4.29, N = 105)


                                          (b) Female ownership or managing of firms

                                                                                    SWE
                                                                           ZAF
                    20




                                                                                       VNM
                                                                                    FIN TKM
                                                                   ARG                DNK
                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                   NORLAO
                                                           NAM                   CHN
                                                                     UGANZL
                                                                             DEU
        e(Women in Politics | X)




                                                          RWA
                                                                  GUY                                   ERI
                                                             AZE
                                                           ZWE     TZA
                                                          ECU
                                                          AGO                      AUTESP
                                                                                        DOM
                                                                         CRI         AUS
                                                                       MEX         SLV PRT
                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                  ESTPHL
                                                                                   LTU
                                                                       MLI BOLBEL LVA           SYR
                                                             SEN          CHECOG
                                                       KAZ                ZMB  COL
                                                                              CAN           BGDIND
                                                               BFA FJI
                                                           JAMGIN          VEN  IRN URY  MDA  KHM
                                                                              GHACZEHND                     MRT
                0




                                                          NIC
                                                          MDG    UZB
                                                                  CHL      SLE    SVK   MNG
                                                                                      BGR
                                                                                 POL
                                                                                   GBR    MWI
                                                    HTI TTO BDI     KENGTM CMR    UKR BTN LKA
                                                                                 THA         CAFLSO
                                                                                               GEO
                                                                                                     NPL DZA
                                                                        RUS    GAB    MKD             EGY
                                                                  BEN        BLR                 ALB
                                                              GMB        TCDBRA
                                                                        NER
                                                                         DJI    GNQ TJK  TUR
                                                                                          YEM
                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                            SLB ETH
                                                      KGZ                        HUN PNG
                                                                           FRA
                                                                             USA PRY   GRC
                                                                                      ARM
                                                                             SVN
                                                                              ITACYP
                                                                                   IRL     ISR
                                                                                             SGP
                                                                            KWT             KOR
                                                                         ARE
                                                                              JPN
                    ï20




                                   ï1                                            0                                  1
                                                                   e(Historical plough use | X)
                                   (coef = ï5.61, s.e. = 2.13, N = 125)


                                                  (c) Female participation in politics

Figure 5: Partial correlation plots for historical plough use, Ploughc .


                                                                             18
   Columns 7 and 8 report the estimated average effect size (AES) for the three dependent

variables examined in columns 1–6. We computed the AES following Kling, Liebman, Katz and

Sanbonmatsu (2004). Let β k indicate the estimated plough coefficient for outcome variable k and
                                                                                                          βk
σ k the standard deviation of outcome k. Then, the average effect size is equal to            1
                                                                                              K   ∑K
                                                                                                   k =1   σk
                                                                                                             ,   where

K is the total number of outcome variables. To properly calculate the sample variance of the AES,

the coefficients β k are jointly estimated in a seemingly unrelated regression framework.20 The AES

estimates confirm the findings when examining the outcomes individually: historical plough use

is associated with less female participation in activities outside of the home today. As well,

the implied magnitudes are similar. According to the AES estimate, a one-standard-deviation

increase in plough use is associated with an average decrease (for the three outcomes) of 0.40

standard deviations.

   An alternative way to assess the magnitude of the estimates is to calculate the proportion of

the total variation they explain. By this metric as well, historical plough use explains a sizable

proportion of differences in gender roles across countries. When female labor force participation

is the dependent variable (column 1 of Table 2), the inclusion of the historical plough use variable

increases the R-squared by 0.086 (from 0.326 to 0.412). Therefore, traditional plough use accounts

for 8.6% of the total variation in FLFP and 12.8% of the residual variation in FLFP unaccounted

for by the control variables.21 For the share of firms with female ownership, traditional plough

use accounts for 5% of the total variation and 6% of the residual variation. For the participation of

women in politics, historical plough use explains 3% of the total variation and 4% of the residual

variation.

   Although we do not report them explicitly in here, we find that the estimated coefficients

for the control variables are generally as expected.22 For example we find evidence of a U-

shaped relationship between per capita income and female labor force participation, as well as the

other outcomes. This is consistent with previous studies that also find this same non-monotonic

relationship (Goldin, 1995). We also find that countries that experience a period of communism

have higher rates of female labor force participation.
 20 SeeClingingsmith, Khwaja and Kremer (2009) for an alternative application and further details.
 21 Thisis calculated as: (0.412 − 0.326)/(1 − 0.326) = 0.128 or 12.8%.
 22 The estimates for the controls are available upon request.




                                                       19
Robustness to alternative plough measures

Using either of the two methods for imputing missing language data yields estimates that are

qualitatively identical to the estimates using our baseline variable. As reported in Appendix Table

A2, the alternative measures yield nearly identical point estimates that are highly significant.

As a final check to ensure that our findings are not being driven by measurement error, we

omit 17 countries that have a significant proportion of missing language data. The countries

include Australia, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala,

Honduras, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela. The

estimates, reported in Appendix Table A3, show that the impact of the plough remains robust

to this check.


The persistence of female labor force participation

To this point, we have shown that historical plough use is associated with less female participation

in agriculture historically and with less female participation in the labor force today. These

two correlations suggest long-term persistence in female participation in activities outside of

the home. As a check for this, we regress female labor force participation today on the measure

of women’s historical participation in agriculture constructed from the Ethnographic Atlas. The

regression also controls for our full set of covariates from equation (2) above.         The partial

correlation plot, showing the relationship between historical female participation in agriculture

and FLFP today, is shown in Figure 6. As is apparent from the figure, there is strong persistence

over time. Female labor force participation today and female participation in agriculture in the

past are very strongly correlated.

   In light of existing studies, this persistence is perhaps surprising. In fact, Goldin and Sokoloff

(1984) document that within the Northeastern United States, the low relative productivity of

women and children in agriculture (and hence their low participation) spurred industrialization

and their active participation in the manufacturing sector. In their setting, female labor force

participation in agriculture was inversely related to participation in manufacturing, suggesting

a lack of continuity of female labor force participation overtime as industrialization occurs.

However, our results show that this example does not appear to be general. Instead, areas with

low female participation in agriculture and plough use historically (because of the persistence of



                                                      20
                          40
                                                                          THA
                                                                            VUT                  BWA
                                                                                          TZA          RWA
                                                                                   KAZKEN  MDG
                                                         GIN     LAO ISL PNG  CHN               UGA     LSO
                                                         BHS                                  AGO
                                                                         JAMBFABOL BDI          GAB
                                      AZE     MNG                                    MOZ
                                                                                     ZWE
                                                                                   PER
                                                           BRA VNM URY  PRT KHM COM  BRN
                                                   MRT GMB                 FIN                           SWZ
                                                          CAN NZLDOM          DNK CHE




                     e(FLFP | X)
                                                                    LTU  VCTNOR
                                                                           SWE
                                                                           ARG
                                                                         GHA                       ZAF
                                                                                                  VEN            NAM
                                            ISR          SEN            RUS
                                                               HTI EST TTO         MYS   SGP
                                                                                         PHL
                                                      USA                 LCAGBR
                                                                         BLR NLD
                                                                              CYP   IDN SVKCZE
                                                                                           COG
                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                        BIH
                                                                                              CAF MWI
                                                            PAN TKM               ALB
                                                                      BGD UZB DZAFRA
                                                                    LVA                    POL
                                                                                             ZMB           NCL
                                           ARM       PRY                                    SVN
                                                                                             GRC



                         0
                                                    ETH GEO              ESP AUT
                                                                       CPV      TCD KGZ
                                   SLV GTM
                                                          BLZ
                                                             JPN NPL GUY     IRL
                                                                            LBRECU    BGR CMR
                                                MDA MEX                 UKR
                                                                         DEU
                                                                           CIV
                                                                                   BEN
                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                   TGO    HRV
                                           HND         LBY        FJI HUNCRI
                                                                         PRI ARE
                                                                              COL      BTN        ITA
                                                               IRN
                                                                LKA          SLE        MKD
                                                  CHL
                                                TUR                                            SUR
                                               GNB       ERI MARSAU       OMN                   GNQ
                                                               EGY               LUX
                                               LBN                  NGA                                   NIC
                                                  JOR         IND
                                                          SYR                            SDN
                                                                 TJK NER
                                                                       SLB
                                                    MLI
                                                   PAK
                          ï40




                                   ï2                                       0                                    2
                                                     e(Historical female participation in agriculture | X)
                                   (coef = 4.69, s.e. = 1.38, N = 154)




             Figure 6: Historical female participation in agriculture and current FLFP.


norms and beliefs) today continue to have low levels of female participation in activities outside

of the home, even after the economy moves out of agriculture and into industry.


Controlling for alternative hypotheses

We now test the robustness of our estimates to alternative determinants of gender roles that

have been suggested by various scholars. A prominent alternative explanation for the origins

of gender role differences was proposed by Frederick Engels (1902). He argued that gender

inequality arose as a result of the intensification of agriculture, which resulted in the emergence

of private property, which was monopolized by men. The control of private property allowed men

to subjugate women and to introduce exclusive paternity over their children, replacing matriliny

with patrilineal descent, making wives even more dependent on husbands and their property. As

a consequence, women were no longer active and equal participants in community life.

   We account for this potential mechanism by controlling for a variable that measures the

proportion of a country’s ancestors practicing intensive agriculture. We also control for the

proportion of a country’s population with ancestors without land inheritance rules, which we

take as an indicator for the absence of property rights in land. Lastly, we control for two variables

that capture the proportion of a country’s ancestors with patrilocal post-marital residence rules

and with matrilocal rules. These capture the extent to which societies were matrilineal versus



                                                                          21
patrilineal. All of the controls are constructed using the Ethnographic Atlas and in the same

manner as the historical plough use and other ethnographic control variables.23

   Columns 1–3 of Table 3 report estimates of equation (2) with the additional controls included.

For brevity, we only report estimates with female labor force participation as the dependent

variable. (The estimates for the other outcomes variables are also robust to the inclusion of

the additional controls.) The estimated impact of traditional plough use remains robust to the

inclusion of the additional controls: the coefficient remains negative and statistically significant,

and its magnitude changes little from the baseline value of 16.5.

   It has been hypothesized that cultures with large-extended families typically have more hi-

erarchical and less egalitarian structures, and since hierarchies tend to be dominated by men,

this results in a subordinate status of women (Engels, 1902, Boserup, 1970, Barry, Bacon and

Child, 1957).24 We control for the potential impact of family structures by controlling for the

proportion of a country’s ancestors that lived in nuclear or extended families.25 Estimates with

these additional controls are reported in column 4. The estimate for historical plough use remains

robust.

   It is possible that the status of women is also affected by the extent to which a society

participates in certain non-agricultural activities, which are less suitable to female involvement.

Likely candidates include the hunting and herding of large animals, which may require significant

strength. We construct measures of the proportion of subsistence activities accounted for by

hunting and by the herding of large animals.26 As shown in column 5, the inclusion of these

controls has little impact on the estimated effect of past plough use.

   A potentially important determinant of differences in gender roles is religion. We check the

robustness of our estimates by controlling for five variables that measure the proportion of a

country’s population that is: Catholic, Protestant, other Christian, Muslim, and Hindu.27 As

shown in column 6, the estimated impact of the plough remains robust to controlling for current

religion.
  23 The  controls are derived from variables v12, v28 and v75 from the Ethnographic Atlas. Full details of their
construction are provided in the paper’s appendix.
  24 A similar but different theory stresses competence rather than authority. In large families with many adults, a

gender division of labor can more easily develop. In nuclear families with only a husband and a wife, it is more likely
that either adult will need to substitute for the other. Therefore, the wife will be involved in activities ordinarily done
by men (Whyte, 1978).
  25 The information is taken from variable v8 of the Ethnographic Atlas.
  26 The variables are constructed from variables v2 and v4 of the Ethnographic Atlas.
  27 The data are taken from McCleary and Barro’s (2006) Religion Adherence dataset.



                                                            22
                                    Table 3: Robustness of OLS estimates to alternative controls.
                                                                                                   Dependent	  variable:	  FLFP
                                                                         (1)             (2)          (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
 Historical	  plough	  use                                         -­‐14.734***   -­‐16.814***   -­‐17.073***     -­‐14.570***    -­‐15.417***     -­‐12.041***
                                                                         (4.856)        (3.769)        (3.568)          (3.568)         (3.692)          (3.967)
 Prac@ces	  intensive	  agriculture                                      yes
 Absence	  of	  private	  property                                                    yes
 Patrilocal	  society,	  matrilocal	  society                                                       yes
 Nuclear	  family,	  extended	  family                                                                                yes
 Propor@on	  of	  subsistence	  from:	  hun@ng,	  herding                                                                           yes
 Prop	  of	  pop	  belonging	  to	  ﬁve	  major	  religions                                                                                         yes
 Baseline	  historical	  and	  contemporary	  controls                 yes            yes            yes               yes             yes             yes
 Observa@ons                                                               159            156            159              159             159              157
 R-­‐squared                                                               0.41           0.41           0.42             0.46            0.43             0.57
                                                                            (7)            (8)            (9)             (10)            (11)             (12)
 Historical	  plough	  use                                         -­‐16.435***   -­‐15.767***   -­‐18.474***     -­‐16.467***    -­‐16.519***     -­‐15.375***
                                                                         (3.536)        (3.538)        (4.112)          (3.564)         (3.592)          (3.844)
 Oil	  produc@on	  per	  capita                                         yes
 Trade/GDP                                                                               yes
 Agric.,	  manuf.	  and	  services	  share	  of	  GDP                                            yes
 Years	  of	  civil	  conﬂicts	  (1816-­‐2007)                                                                       yes
 Years	  of	  interstate	  conﬂicts	  (1816-­‐2007)                                                                                  yes
 Frac@on	  of	  European	  descent                                                                                                                    yes
 Baseline	  historical	  and	  contemporary	  controls              yes              yes           yes               yes            yes              yes
 Observa@ons                                                            157              159           157               157            157              151
 R-­‐squared                                                            0.43             0.42          0.42              0.41           0.41             0.42
 Notes: OLS es@mates are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. The unit of observa@on is a country. Each regression includes the full set of
 control	  variables	  (historical	  and	  contemporary).	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.




    Ross (2008) challenges the view that religion – particularly Islam – has an important impact

on gender roles. He argues instead for the importance of a country’s endowment of oil reserves.

According to his hypothesis, oil causes a country’s domestic currency to strengthen, making

exports less competitive and causing a decline in light manufacturing, a sector particularly well-

suited for female employment. We account for this possibility by controlling for per capita oil

production and the trade-to-GDP ratio, both measured in 2000. We also control for the economic

structure of each country by including three variables that capture the share of GDP accounted for

by agriculture, manufacturing and services.28 Estimates with the additional controls are reported

in columns 7–9. The impact of the plough remains robust.

    Differences in gender roles could potentially be influenced by differences in the prevalence of

warfare across societies. However, a priori, the direction of the effect is unclear (see Whyte, 1978).

Involvement in warfare may cause societies to become more hierarchical and male dominated,

suggesting a negative relationship between conflict and female work outside the home. On the

other hand, being involved in warfare can generate a greater need for female involvement outside

of the home. We control for the potential impacts of warfare, by calculating, for each country, the
  28 The    data are from the World Development Indicators, except for the oil production data which is from BP Oil (2006).



                                                                                    23
number of years since 1816 (the first year data are available) that the country was involved in

either internal or interstate warfare.29 The results, reported in columns 10 and 11, show that the

impact of plough use robust to controlling for warfare.30

   The last factor that we consider is motivated by the fact that country-level ancestral plough

use is affected by historical European migration. European ancestry may have an effect on female

labor force participation independent of historical plough use. We address this possibility by

controlling for the fraction of each country’s population in 2000 with ancestors that came from

Europe.31 As reported in column 12, the estimates remain robust to controlling for European

ancestry.32

   Overall, the estimated impact of the plough remains highly robust across the various specifi-

cations reported in Table 3. The coefficient is always negative and statistically significant, and the

point estimates remain stable, ranging from −0.12 to −0.18.


B. Individual-level estimates

We now turn to our specification that examines variation across individuals, linking them to a

tradition of plough agriculture using the district they live in. The analysis relies on data from the

World Value Survey (WVS), a compilation of national individual-level surveys on a wide variety

of topics, including attitudes and preferences, as well as information on standard demographic

characteristics, such as gender, age, education, labor market status, income, religion, etc.33 Using

the WVS we construct, for females, an indicator variable that equals one if she is in the labor

force, which is defined as full-time, part-time or self-employment. Women are not in the labor

force if they report being retired, a housewife or a student.34

   We also examine two measures of individuals’ attitudes (male and female) about the appropri-

ate role of women in society. The first measure is based on each respondent’s view of the following
  29 The  data are from version 4 of the Correlates of War Database.
  30 In  Table 3, we control for the two types of warfare separately. Including both controls simultaneously does not
alter the conclusion. In this case the coefficient is equal to −16.512 with a standard error of 3.578.
   31 The measure is taken from Nunn and Puga (2011), who calculate the variable using Putterman and Weil’s (2010)

World Migration Matrix.
   32 An alternative, more brut-force strategy, is to omit all European and the neo-European countries (Australia, New

Zealand, Canada, the US) from the sample. As reported in Appendix Table A4, the results also remain robust to this
check.
   33 Five waves of the WVS were carried out between 1981 and 2007. In our analysis, we use the four most recent waves

of the survey, since the first wave does not contain information on the district in which the respondent lives. Because
regional classifications often vary by wave, we use the wave with the most finely defined location data.
   34 The results are qualitatively identical if we exclude retired women and students from the sample.




                                                          24
statement: “When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women”. The

respondents are then asked to choose between agree, disagree, neither or don’t know. We omit

observations for which the respondents answered ‘neither’ or ‘don’t know’, and code ‘disagree’

as 0 and ‘agree’ as 1.35 Therefore, the constructed variable is increasing in the extent to which a

respondent’s view is characterized by gender inequality.

   We also consider a second variable derived from a survey question based on the following

statement: “On the whole, men make better political leaders than women do”. Respondents are

then asked to choose between ‘strongly disagree’, ‘disagree’, ‘agree’, ‘agree strongly’, or ‘don’t

know’. We omit observations in which the respondent answered ‘don’t know’ and create a

variable that takes on the value of 1 for ‘strongly disagree’, 2 for ‘disagree’, 3 for ‘agree’ and

4 for ‘agree strongly’. This variable, like the first, is increasing in the respondent’s view of gender

inequality.

   An appealing aspect of the two subjective belief-based variables is that they provide measures

of the values that form the foundation of the objective outcome variables from the cross-country

analysis. The first question reflects differences in individual beliefs about whether women should

have equal access to jobs, which likely affect observed differences in female labor force partici-

pation rates across countries. The second question reflects values about the ability of women to

take on roles of leadership and responsibility, which likely affects observed differences in female

participation in politics and female firm ownership and management. Therefore, there is a close

link between the objective measures from the country-level analysis and the subjective measures

in the individual-level analysis.

   Examining the three outcomes – female participation in the labor force, attitudes about female

employment, and attitudes about female leadership – we estimate the following individual-level

equation:

                          yi,d,c = αr (c) + β Ploughd + XcC Γ + XdH Π + Xi Φ + εi,d,c                             (3)

where i denotes an individual, d denotes a district within a country c, and r (c) denotes the

continent of country c. Ploughd is our measure of traditional plough use among the ancestors

of individuals living in district d. XcC are the same contemporary country-level controls as in
  35 We omit observations that respond ‘neither’ because it is ambiguous whether this represents an intermediate view

or whether they have chosen not to answer the question or whether they do not know their answer. If we interpret
this response as reflecting an intermediate position and code a variable that takes on the values 0, 1, and 2, then we
obtain qualitatively identical results to what we report here.



                                                         25
                                                   Table 4: Individual-level OLS estimates.

                                                                                                      Dependent	  variables:
                                                                                            When	  jobs	  are	          Men	  be_er	   Average	  eﬀect	  size	  
                                                                       FLFP                    scarse                    poliJcal	  leaders      (AES)
                                                                        (1)                      (2)                           (3)                 (4)
 Historical	  plough	  use	                                    -­‐0.214***                0.245***                       0.397***            0.451***
                                                                      (0.034)                 (0.029)                        (0.075)             (0.063)

 Individual	  controls                                                yes                           yes                          yes                           yes
 Contemporary	  country	  controls                                   yes                           yes                          yes                           yes
 Historical	  district	  controls                                    yes                           yes                          yes                           yes
 ConJnent	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects                                            yes                           yes                          yes                           yes

 ObservaJons                                                        38,832                        71,656                        59,288                       65,472
 R-­‐squared                                                         0.19                          0.21                          0.18
Notes: The table reports OLS esJmates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. Individual controls are age, age
squared, educaJon, gender (for gender aXtudes only), marital status, and income. Contemporary country controls include ln
income, ln income squared and a communism indicator variable. Historical district controls include agricultural suitability,
domesJcated animals, tropical areas, poliJcal hierarchies, and economic complexity. The AES reported in column 4 is for the
two	  subjecJve	  belief	  measures	  from	  columns	  2	  and	  3.	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.




equation (2), and XdH includes the same historical ethnographic variables as in equation (2), but

measured at the district level rather than the country level. Xi denotes current individual-level

controls: age, age squared, as well as fixed effects for marital status, educational attainment,

and income levels. The equation also includes continent fixed effects, denoted αr (c) . To be as

conservative as possible, we cluster the standard errors at the country level.

    Table 4 reports OLS estimates of equation (3). Consistent with the country-level estimates, we

find a negative relationship between historical plough use and female labor force participation

today, and a positive relationship between historical plough use and current attitudes reflecting

gender inequality. In terms of the magnitude of the effects, they are similar to the cross-country

estimates. A one-standard-deviation increase in the plough variable implies a reduction in female

labor force participation of 0.09 or 9 percent (which is roughly equal to 16% of the sample average)

and an increase in the female employment and female leadership gender attitudes variables of

0.10 and 0.21, respectively. These are 21% and 8% of the sample averages.


5. IV estimates

There is a number of concerns with the OLS estimates reported to this point. One is that locations

that historically had attitudes prone to less equal gender roles may have been more likely to invent


                                                                                      26
or adopt the plough. This would bias our OLS estimates away from zero. It is also possible that

locations that were economically more developed were more likely to have adopted the plough.

Since these areas today are richer and more prone to attitudes about gender role equality, this

would tend to bias our OLS towards zero.

   Our first strategy to address these, and related, concerns is to control for observable character-

istics. This is done in the previous section. In this section, we pursue an alternative strategy using

instrumental variables. As instruments we exploit one determinant of historical plough use that

has been emphasized in the anthropological literature: the type of crops grown in a particular

location (Pryor, 1985).

   The primary benefit of the plough is that it facilitates the cultivation of larger amounts of

land over a shorter period of time. This capability is more advantageous for crops that require

specific planting conditions that are only met during narrow windows of time or for crops that

require larger tracts of land to cultivate a given amount of calories. The benefit of the plough

is also reduced for crops grown in swampy, sloped, rocky, or shallow soils, all of which make

the plough less efficient or impossible to use. Taking these factors into consideration, Pryor

(1985) has classified crops into those whose cultivation benefits greatly from the adoption of the

plough – he calls these plough positive crops – and those whose cultivation benefits less – called

plough-negative crops. Plough-positive crops, which include wheat, teff, barley and rye, tend to

be cultivated on large expanses of land (per calorie of output) that is flat, deep, with soil that

are not too rocky or swampy, and have shorter growing seasons. Plough negative crops, which

include sorghum, maize, millet, roots and tubers, and tree crops, tend to yield more calories per

acre, have longer growing seasons, and can be cultivated on more marginal land (Pryor, 1985, p.

732).

   Because the cultivation of plough-positive and plough-negative crops is an endogenous out-

come, we do not use this as our instrument. Instead, we measure geo-climatic conditions that

are unaffected by human actions, but which impact the suitability of a location for growing both

types of crops. Our strategy uses two instruments. The first is a measure of the average suitability

of the location of each observation’s ancestors for cultivating plough positive cereal crops – wheat,

barley and rye. The second is the same measure of ancestral suitability, but for cultivating millet

and sorghum, which are plough-negative cereal crops. We intentionally choose to consider this

set of crops because they are similar in many other dimensions except for the extent to which


                                                 27
they benefit from the use of the plough. Both sets of crops are cereals that have been cultivated in

the Eastern Hemisphere since the Neolithic revolution (Mazoyer and Roudart, 2006, pp. 71–99).

Both sets of crops require similar preparations for consumption, all being used for flour, porridge,

bread or in beverages (Recklein, 1987). Both sets also produce similar yields and therefore neither

clearly dominates the other in terms of the population it can support (Pryor, 1985, p. 732).

   We obtain information on the suitability of a location for cultivating the plough-positive and

plough-negative cereal crops from the FAO’s Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2002 database

(Fischer et al., 2002). The database reports suitability for the cultivation of numerous crops for 5

arc minutes by 5 arc-minute grid-cell globally. The measures are constructed from measures of the

geo-climatic characteristics of a location: precipitation, frequency of wet days, mean temperature,

daily temperature range, vapor pressure, cloud cover, sunshine, ground-frost frequency, wind

speed, soil slope, and soil characteristics. The data are then combined with the specific growing

requirements of crops to produce a measure of whether the crop can be grown in a location, and

if so, how productively. It is important to note that the models of crop growth are based solely

on previously established technical requirements and constraints for crop growth. The model’s

parameters, and the final measures, are not affected by where crops are actually cultivated. As

well, the final estimates are not simple functions of the geographic characteristics used, but are

based on precise, highly non-linear crop-specific models of evapotranspiration, water-balance,

temperature profiles, temperature growing periods, length of growing period, thermal regimes,

etc. This last point is particularly important as it allows us to check the robustness of our IV results

to controlling for important geo-climatic characteristics which may be different in plough-positive

and plough-negative environments.36

   We construct the instruments by first identifying the land traditionally inhabited by each ethnic

group in the Ethnographic Atlas. We continue to use all land within 200 kilometers of an ethnic

group’s centroid and measure the amount of land within this area that can grow each of the cereal

crops that comprise the instruments.37 Let xw    b    r    s        m
                                            e , xe , xe , xe , and xe be the amount of land that can

cultivate wheat, barley, rye, sorghum and millet, respectively. Further, let xall be the amount of

land that could grow any crop (i.e., the amount of arable land). The ethnicity-level measures of

suitability for plough-positive crops is given by: Areapos
                                                       e   = 13 (xw    b    r     all
                                                                  e + xe + xe ) /xe . While ethnicity-

  36 Fora detailed discussion of the data and its use in a different application see Nunn and Qian (2011).
  37 The GAEZ database measures suitability as a proportion of maximum attainable yield. We define locations that
obtain at least 40% of the maximum yield as suitable. The results are robust to the use of other thresholds.


                                                       28
level measure of suitability for plough-negative crops is: Areaneg
                                                               e   = 12 (xse + xm     all
                                                                                e ) /xe . Intuitively,

the instruments measure the average suitability for each type of crop, normalized by the overall

suitability for cultivation in general.38

   Using the procedure explained in equation (1), we then construct district- and country-level

averages of our plough-positive and plough-negative instruments. Intuitively, the instruments

measure the proportion of the population with ancestors that had a climate that could grow

plough-positive cereals (wheat, barley and rye) and the proportion that could grow plough

negative cereals (sorghum and millet).

   To provide the reader with a better sense of the instruments, Figure 7 shows the parts of the

world that are classified as being suitable for the cultivation of the plough positive cereals – wheat,

barley and rye – while Figure 8 shows suitability for the plough-negative cereals – millet and

sorghum. A number of facts are apparent from the maps. First, there are many parts of the world

that can grow plough-positive crops, but not plough-negative crops and vice versa. This provides

an indication that the instruments may have variation independent from each other and therefore

some predictive power. Second, relative to plough-positive crops, plough-negative crops appear

to be relatively better suited for tropical and subtropical climates and plough-positive crops better

suited for temperate climates. If these differences in climate affect gender attitudes today through

channels other than past plough use, then the exclusion restriction will not be satisfied. Recall

that the controls already include the proportion of land, historically inhabited by an ethnic group,

that was tropical or subtropical. As well, in the analysis below we explicitly address this concern

by exhaustively controlling for additional geographic characteristics that may be correlated with

the suitability instruments.39
  38 Our  procedure assumes that the GAEZ data provide an unbiased measure of historical suitability. In a different
context, Nunn and Qian (2011) provide evidence of the validity of this assumption by showing that the GAEZ
suitability measure for potatoes is highly correlated with historical potato production.
  39 An important final point arises from the fact that the plough-positive and plough-negative cereals used in the

construction of our instruments were all originally grown in the Eastern hemisphere and were not cultivated in the
Americas until after 1500. This is not a concern to identification, but it is a fact that makes the first stage relationship
weaker than it would be otherwise. For the large proportion of the population in the Americas whose ancestors are
from the Eastern hemisphere, the instrument will provide predictive power. It is only for the indigenous populations
of the Americas that the instrument will not affect plough adoption. This should be kept in mind when interpreting
the IV estimates as a local average treatment effect (LATE). In other words, the estimates are an average effect among
the ethnic groups whose plough adoption was affected by the geo-climatic suitability for growing the cereal crops.




                                                            29
      Wheat
               Not suitable
               Suitable



                                      (a) Wheat suitability




      Barley
               Not suitable
               Suitable



                                      (b) Barley suitability




      Rye
               Not suitable
               Suitable



                                       (c) Rye suitability

Figure 7: Maps displaying the global suitability of plough-positive crops, wheat, barley and rye.


                                                 30
     Millet
              Not suitable
              Suitable



                                     (a) Millet suitability




     Sorghum
              Not suitable
              Suitable



                                   (b) Sorghum suitability

Figure 8: Maps displaying the global suitability of plough-negative crops, millet and sorghum.




                                                31
                                                                 Table 5: Country level IV estimates.
                                                                                                        Panel	  A.	  Second	  stage.	  Dependent	  variable:
                                                       Femal	  labor	  force	               Share	  of	  ﬁrms	  with	  some	  
                                                          parLcipaLon                               female	  ownership                           Females	  in	  poliLcs                 Average	  eﬀect	  size	  (AES)
                                                      (1)                   (2)                     (3)                     (4)                   (5)                    (6)                  (7)                    (8)
Historical	  plough	  use	  (2SLS)           -­‐25.853**          -­‐26.423**               -­‐19.939*              -­‐26.274*            -­‐16.820*             -­‐23.089*          -­‐1.451***            -­‐1.946***
                                                   (10.051)              (12.465)               (11.932)                (14.439)                (9.243)              (12.331)               (0.467)                (0.635)
Historical	  plough	  use	  (LIML)              -­‐27.099               -­‐28.25              -­‐28.761               -­‐43.12               -­‐16.826            -­‐23.16
p-­‐value                                              0.01                   0.03                   0.03                   0.02                    0.05                0.03
CLR	  intervals                              [-­‐54.88,	  -­‐7.02] [-­‐66.24,	  -­‐3.47] [-­‐71.65,	  -­‐2.70] [-­‐142.60,	  -­‐6.77] [-­‐47.06,	  0.29] [-­‐75.07,	  -­‐2.55]
Historical	  controls                               yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                   yes                    yes                  yes                   yes
Contemporary	  controls                             yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                   yes                    yes                  yes                   yes
ConLnent	  FEs                                       no                    yes                    no                     yes                    no                    yes                  no                    yes
ObservaLons                                          157                    157                   104                     104                   124                    124                  133                   133
R-­‐squared                                          0.39                   0.43                  0.01                    0.13                  0.17                   0.05
                                                                                                    Panel	  B.	  First	  stage.	  Dep	  var:	  Historical	  plough	  use
Plough-­‐posiLve	  environment                  0.412***               0.377***               0.656***                0.561***                  0.401***              0.340***
                                                  (0.119)                (0.101)                (0.150)                     (0.143)                  (0.140)            (0.117)
Plough-­‐negaLve	  environment                    -­‐0.120              -­‐0.079               -­‐0.017                     0.001                   -­‐0.032            -­‐0.026
                                                  (0.091)                (0.075)                (0.101)                     (0.075)                  (0.103)            (0.087)

Equality	  of	  coeﬃcients	  (p-­‐value)          0.00                   0.00                  0.00                    0.00                  0.00                   0.01
F-­‐stat	  (excluded	  instruments)	             10.76                   7.90                 11.68                    7.71                  5.63                   4.54
Hausman	  test	  (p-­‐value)                       0.15                   0.19                  0.44                    0.29                  0.18                   0.09
Notes: IV esLmates are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. The unit of observaLon is a country. Historical controls include agricultural suitability, domesLcated
animals, tropics, poliLcal hierarchies and economic complexity. Contemporary controls include ln income, ln income squared, a communism indicator, and polity (in columns 5
and 6 only). The number of observaLons for the AES esLmates is the average number observaLons in the regressions for each outcome. ***, ** and * indicate signiﬁcance at
the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.




A. Country-level estimates

Table 5 reports IV estimates of the specifications from Table 2. The first stage estimates are

reported in the lower panel and the second stage estimates are in the top panel. The first stage

estimates show that the historical suitability for the cultivation of plough-positive cereals is always

positively correlated with the adoption of the plough, while suitability for the cultivation of

plough-negative cereals is generally negatively correlated with plough use. In all specifications,

the difference between the two coefficients is statistically significant. The F -test for joint signif-

icance of the two instruments is also reported in the table. The F -statistics range from about

5–11, suggesting that for some specifications there is a potential concern about weak instruments.

For this reason we also report conditional likelihood ratio (CLR) confidence intervals and LIML

estimates in addition to the regular 2SLS estimates.

    The IV estimates, reported in panel A of the table, confirm the OLS estimates. Historical

plough use is associated with less female labor force participation, less female ownership of firms,

and less female participation in politics. The magnitude of the IV coefficients are consistently

greater than the OLS estimates.                                              This is potentially explained by selection arising from the

endogeneity of plough adoption. All else equal, historically advanced societies were more likely


                                                                                                          32
to adopt the plough. Further, they are more likely to also be advanced today with higher per

capita incomes and more female participation in the labor market. Therefore, selection introduces

a positive relationship between historical plough use and female labor force participation today,

biasing the negative OLS estimates towards zero.

  The IV estimates rest on the assumption that holding overall agricultural suitability constant,

the specific type of cereal crop that a location could grow only impacts long-term gender attitudes

through the past adoption of the plough.                   There are a number of potential concerns with

this assumption. The first is that the difference between plough-positive and plough-negative

environments may be correlated with geographic features that affect gender attitudes today

through channels other than the plough. We check the robustness of our results to this concern

by controlling for geographic characteristics that are potentially correlated with the suitability

of the environment for plough-positive and plough-negative crops. Our controls include terrain

slope, soil depth, average temperature and average precipitation of locations inhabited by each

country’s ancestors. Slope is measured as percent (i.e., rise over run). The soil depth control

is the fraction of land that has no, few or slight soil depth constraints for cultivation. Average

temperature is the average daily temperature (measured in degrees Celsius) between 1950 and

1959. Precipitation is the average monthly rainfall (in mm) over the same time period.

  As reported in Table 6, the IV estimates remain robust to the inclusion of these geo-climatic

characteristics. In columns 1–4, we control for each of the four measures individually. The point

estimates remain positive and significant across each specification. In column 5, we control for

all four controls simultaneously. Column 6 allows for the possibility of non-linear effects by

also controlling for the square of each variable, while column 7 allows for interaction effects

by also including all pairwise interactions of the controls. In each of the specifications, the

points estimates remain robust, with magnitudes that are positive, significant and very similar in

magnitude to the baseline estimate of 25.9.

  We also check the robustness of the IV estimates to controlling for the additional covariates

from Table 3. The results, which are reported in Table 7, show that the IV estimates, like the OLS

estimates, remain robust to these additional controls.40
 40 The   results are similarly robust for the other outcome variables as well.




                                                            33
                        Table 6: Robustness of IV estimates to additional geographic controls.
                                                                                       Dependent variable: FLFP
                                               (1)              (2)                 (3)         (4)            (5)                                 (6)         (7)
Historical plough use                    -33.573***          -25.539**        -27.842***           -18.427**          -25.089***           -26.076**        -26.245**
                                           (11.777)           (10.371)          (8.841)              (9.068)            (9.300)             (12.533)         (10.696)
Terrain slope                                yes                                                                          yes                 yes              yes
Soil depth                                                      yes                                                       yes                 yes              yes
Average temperature                                                                yes                                    yes                 yes              yes
Average precipitation                                                                                   yes               yes                 yes              yes
Quadratic terms                                                                                                                               yes
Linear interactions                                                                                                                                            yes
Baseline controls                            yes                yes                yes                 yes                 yes                 yes             yes
Observations                                 157                154                157                 157                 157                 157             157
R-squared                                    0.29               0.38               0.38                0.38                0.44                0.44            0.44
Notes : OLS estimates are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. The unit of observation is a country. ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.




                                  Table 7: Robustness of IV estimates to alternative controls.
                                                                            Second	  stage	  IV	  esImates:	  Dependent	  variable:	  FLFP
                                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)                  (5)         (6)
Historical	  plough	  use                                      -­‐42.454*        -­‐25.563**        -­‐28.014***        -­‐28.969***       -­‐25.332***    -­‐18.269**
                                                                  (22.737)            (10.317)            (10.584)            (10.861)           (9.250)         (9.003)
Intensity	  of	  agriculture                                        yes
Absence	  of	  private	  property                                                    yes
Patrilocal	  and	  matrilocal	  socieIes                                                                yes
Nuclear	  and	  extended	  families                                                                                         yes
ProporIon	  of	  subsistence	  from:	  hunIng,	  herding                                                                                       yes
FracIon	  of	  major	  religious	  denomin.                                                                                                                    yes
Baseline	  historical	  and	  contemporary	  controls             yes                yes                 yes                  yes               yes            yes
ObservaIons                                                          157                 154                 157                 157               157            155
R-­‐squared                                                          0.27                0.41                0.38                0.38              0.40           0.55
                                                                      (7)                 (8)                 (9)                (10)              (11)           (12)
Historical	  plough	  use                                      -­‐21.806*        -­‐25.974***        -­‐25.606**         -­‐25.362**        -­‐25.578**    -­‐25.834**
                                                                  (11.188)             (10.014)            (9.303)             (9.930)           (10.072)       (10.602)
FracIon	  of	  European	  descent                                  yes
Oil	  producIon                                                                        yes
Trade/GDP                                                                                                  yes
Agric.,	  manuf.	  and	  services	  share	  of	  GDP                                                                     yes
Years	  of	  civil	  conﬂicts	  (1816-­‐2007)                                                                                                   yes
Years	  of	  interstate	  conﬂicts	  (1816-­‐2007)                                                                                                          yes
Baseline	  historical	  and	  contemporary	  controls          yes                 yes                 yes                yes                   yes         yes
ObservaIons                                                        148                 157                 156                149                   155         155
R-­‐squared                                                        0.44                0.40                0.40               0.43                  0.40        0.40
Notes: IV esImates are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. The unit of observaIon is a country. Each regression includes the full set of
control	  variables	  (historical	  and	  contemporary).	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.




                                                                                   34
                                                Table 8: Individual-level IV estimates.

                                                                            Panel	  A.	  Second	  stage.	  Dependent	  variable:
                                                                                     When	  jobs	  are	       Men	  be.er	   Average	  eﬀect	  size	  
                                                              FLFP                      scarce                 poli2cal	  leaders      (AES)
                                                               (1)                        (2)                        (3)                 (4)
       Historical	  plough	  use	                      -­‐0.585**                   0.576**                    1.383***            1.328***
                                                             (0.242)                   (0.229)                     (0.362)             (0.386)

       Historical	  plough	  use	  (LIML)                 -­‐0.611                    0.576                      1.418
       p-­‐value                                                0.00                      0.00                       0.00
       CLR	  intervals                               [-­‐0.700,	  -­‐0.524]        [0.501,	  0.652]          [1.308,	  1.531]
       Individual	  controls                                  yes                           yes                      yes                      yes
       Contemporary	  country	  controls                     yes                           yes                      yes                      yes
       Historical	  district	  controls                      yes                           yes                      yes                      yes
       Con2nent	  FE                                          yes                           yes                      yes                      yes

       Observa2ons                                          36,370                        67,347                    55,454                   61,400
       R-­‐squared                                           0.15                          0.17                      0.11
                                                              Panel	  B.	  First	  stage.	  Dependent	  variable:	  Historical	  plough	  use

       Plough-­‐posi2ve	  environment                    0.273***                      0.242***                   0.338***
                                                            (0.073)                      (0.079)                     (0.088)
       Plough-­‐nega2ve	  environment                     -­‐0.075*                      -­‐0.041                  -­‐0.094*
                                                            (0.044)                      (0.040)                     (0.055)
       Equality	  of	  coeﬃcients	  (p-­‐value)             0.00                          0.00                       0.00
       F-­‐stat	  (excluded	  instruments)	                 7.13                          4.74                       7.29
       Hausman	  test	  (p-­‐value)                          0.00                          0.03                       0.00
       Notes: The table reports IV es2mates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The instruments are plough-­‐
       posi2ve climate and plough-­‐nega2ve climate. Individual controls are age, age squared, educa2on, gender (for gender
       actudes only), marital status, and income. Current country controls include ln income, ln income squared and a communism
       indicator variable. Historical district controls include agricultural suitability, domes2cated animals, tropical areas, poli2cal
       hierarchies, and economic complexity. The AES reported in column 4 is for the two subjec2ve belief measures from columns
       2	  and	  3.	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.




B. Individual-level estimates

Table 8 reports IV estimates of equation (3), which examines variation across individuals in the

WVS. Consistent with the individual-level OLS estimates, the IV estimates also identify persistent

impacts of historical plough use.                      We estimate a negative effect of past plough use on the

participation of women in the labor force, and a positive effect on the prevalence of attitudes

of gender inequality. Like the country-level estimates, we find that the IV estimates are larger

than the OLS estimates.


6. Cultural transmission as a mechanism: Evidence from US immigrants

We now turn to an examination of the causal mechanisms underlying our results. Although our

focus is on the evolution and persistence of cultural norms, it is possible that part of the long-term


                                                                                35
effect of the plough may have arisen because it led to the development of institutions and markets

which are less conducive to the participation of women in activities outside of the domestic

sphere. Through this channel, the plough causes less female participation in market activities

because it affects the costs and benefits of these activities, not because it affects individuals’

beliefs about whether these are appropriate activities for women.

   Our individual-level estimates, showing an impact of the plough on gender-role attitudes,

provide evidence that the plough has impacted beliefs and values. However, these effects may

have resulted from differences in external factors (e.g., institutions, policies, markets, etc), which

in turn shape individual beliefs. To better isolate the causal impact of the plough on individual

beliefs and values, we examine variation among second-generation immigrants – a group of

individuals from diverse cultural backgrounds with different histories of ancestral plough use,

but facing the same external environment, including markets, institutions and policies. Using

data from the March Supplement of the Current Population Survey (CPS), we examine whether

women with an ancestry of plough agriculture are less likely to be in the labor force today.41

We identify the ancestry of women in the sample using their parents’ country-of-birth, measured

using either the mother’s country of birth, the father’s country of birth, or both parents’ country

of birth (after restricting the sample to those with parents that have the same country of birth).

One benefit of the different definitions of ancestry is that it allows us to examine whether cultural

transmission is stronger from the father to the daughter, the mother to the daughter, or when

both occur together.

   Our analysis examines two samples of women, one that includes all women aged 15 to 64 and

another that only includes married women in the same age group. When we examine married

women only, we are able to also examine the impact of traditional plough use working through

the husband’s lineage. We identify a tradition of plough use among the husband’s ancestor using

either his father’s country of birth, his mother’s country of birth, or both.

   We estimate the impact of the plough on immigrant populations using the following equation:

                            yi,s,c = αs + β Ploughc + XcC Γ + XcH Π + Xi Φ + εi,s,c                               (4)

where i denotes a second-generation woman currently living in state s, whose country of origin

is country c. As in equation (2), Ploughc denotes the historical plough-use of those in country
  41 Starting in 1994, the CPS asks individuals about their country of origin and their parents’ country of origin. We
use all the years available since 1994.


                                                         36
c. αs denote state fixed effects. The dependent variable, yi,s,c , is an indicator variable that equals

one if individual i is in the labor market. XcC and XcH denote the same vectors of covariates as

in equation (2), which include current and historical ethnographic controls. Xi indicates a vector

of individual level controls, which includes dummies for education, a quadratic for age, real

personal income, marital status, fixed effects for whether the person lives in a metropolitan or

rural area, and fixed effects for the year of the survey. When we use the sample of married women

we also include controls for characteristics of the husband: a quadratic of the husband’s age, the

husband’s education, and his income. Because our variable of interest Ploughc only varies at the

country of origin-level, we cluster all standard errors at this level.

   The OLS estimates are reported in Table 9. Columns 1–3 report estimates using the full sample

of women. Column 1 identifies the women’s ancestry by her father’s country of birth, while

column 2 uses the mother’s country of birth. In column 3, we restrict the sample to women

whose parents were both born in the same country. For all three specifications, we estimate a

negative relationship between a tradition of plough-use in the home country and the women’s

participation in the labor force. IV estimates of the same specifications, reported in columns 1–3

of Table 10, yield nearly identical results.

   Columns 4–9 of Tables 9 and 10 report OLS and IV estimates using the sample of married

women. Columns 4–6 reproduce the estimates of columns 1–3 for the sample of married women,

when we identify ancestry using the wife’s parents. We continue to find a negative impact

of traditional plough use on female labor force participation, although we now find a smaller

estimated impact when we identify ancestry using the father’s country of birth. The impact is

roughly 50% lower for both the OLS and IV estimates. This provides evidence that, at least for

the subsample of married women, the transmission of values and beliefs (originating from the

plough) is stronger from mothers to daughters than from fathers to daughters.

   We next consider the possibility that a married woman’s participation in the labor market may

be influenced by her husband’s beliefs and values, which were transmitted from his parents and

their cultural background. Columns 7–9 of Tables 9 and 10, reproduce the estimates of columns

4–6 from the same tables, when we identify ancestry using the husband’s parents rather than the

wife’s parents. The estimates provide evidence for an impact of a history of plough use among

the husband’s ancestors on the wife’s participation in the labor market. Differentiating between

the husband’s parent’s and their ancestry, we find a weaker estimate when we use the husband’s


                                                  37
                                                                                                 Table 9: Immigrant OLS regressions.
                                                                                                                            Dependent	  variable:	  Labor	  force	  parQcipaQon	  indicator
                                                                                         All	  women                                                                                        Married	  women
                                                                                     Women's	  ancestry                                                 Women's	  ancestry                                                   Husband's	  ancestry

                                                                      Father's	           Mother's	        Parents	  same	            Father's	            Mother's	         Parents	  same	            Father's	           Mother's	         Parents	  same	  
                                                                      country	             country              country                  country               country               country                   country                country              country
                                                                         (1)                   (2)                  (3)                        (4)                   (5)                   (6)                       (7)                  (8)                  (9)
     Historical	  plough	  use                                   -­‐0.042***           -­‐0.047***          -­‐0.065***                  -­‐0.015             -­‐0.043*             -­‐0.044*                  -­‐0.027            -­‐0.049**           -­‐0.047**
                                                                       (0.011)               (0.012)              (0.013)                 (0.021)                (0.022)               (0.024)                  (0.018)                 (0.024)              (0.022)




38
     Individual	  controls                                             yes                    yes                   yes                      yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     Husband	  controls                                                n/a                    n/a                   n/a                      yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     Historical	  country	  controls                                  yes                    yes                   yes                      yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     Contemporary	  country	  controls                                yes                    yes                   yes                      yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     State	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects                                            yes                    yes                   yes                      yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     ObservaQons                                                     48,910                 47,219                27,550                    8,864                 8,261                  5,832                    9,505                 8,886                  7,211
     R-­‐squared                                                      0.37                   0.38                  0.40                     0.37                  0.37                   0.39                     0.37                  0.37                   0.38
     Notes: OLS esQmates are reported with standard errors clustered at the country level. An observaQon is a US second generaQon immigrant woman. Individual controls include age, age
     squared, educaQon, marital status and income. Husband controls include husband's age, age squared, educaQon and income. Historical country controls include the origin country's
     historical agricultural suitability, domesQcaQon of animals, tropics, poliQcal hierarchies and economic complexity. Contemporary country controls include ln income, ln income squared,
     and	  a	  communism	  indicator	  variable.	  All	  regressions	  also	  control	  for	  state,	  year	  and	  metropolitan	  area	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects.	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.
                                                                                                  Table 10: Immigrant IV regressions.

                                                                                                                   Panel	  A.	  Second	  Stage.	  Dep	  var:	  Labor	  force	  parQcipaQon	  indicator
                                                                                         All	  women                                                                                        Married	  women
                                                                                     Women's	  ancestry                                                 Women's	  ancestry                                                    Husband's	  ancestry

                                                                      Father's	           Mother's	         Parents	  same	           Father's	            Mother's	         Parents	  same	             Father's	          Mother's	         Parents	  same	  
                                                                      country	              country              country                 country                 country             country                    country               country              country
                                                                         (1)                    (2)                  (3)                       (4)                   (5)                   (6)                      (7)                   (8)                  (9)
     Historical	  plough	  use                                   -­‐0.045***             -­‐0.040**          -­‐0.058***                 -­‐0.026             -­‐0.064**            -­‐0.060*                -­‐0.050**            -­‐0.079**           -­‐0.068**
                                                                       (0.013)                (0.016)              (0.019)                (0.025)                  (0.029)             (0.031)                    (0.025)               (0.034)              (0.030)
     Individual	  controls                                              yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     Husband	  controls                                                 n/a                   n/a                    n/a                     yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     Historical	  country	  controls                                   yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     Contemporary	  country	  controls                                 yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                    yes                   yes




39
     State	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects                                             yes                   yes                    yes                     yes                    yes                   yes                     yes                    yes                   yes
     ObservaQons                                                      48,908                47,075                 27,550                   8,863                  8,245                 5,832                    9,503                 8,870                 7,209
     R-­‐squared                                                       0.37                  0.38                   0.40                    0.37                   0.37                  0.39                     0.37                  0.37                  0.38
                                                                                                                                Panel	  B.	  First	  stage.	  Dep	  var:	  Historical	  plough	  use
     Plough-­‐posiQve	  environment                                1.195***              1.160***               1.297***               1.211***                  1.223***               1.27***             1.194***                1.205***              1.241***
                                                                      (0.168)              (0.176)                 (0.176)                  (0.164)                  (0.170)              (0.173)               (0.152)                 (0.150)               (0.149)
     Plough-­‐negaQve	  environment                                 -­‐0.370*              -­‐0.360              -­‐0.421*              -­‐0.402**               -­‐0.372**           -­‐0.444**            -­‐0.361**              -­‐0.348**            -­‐0.394**
                                                                      (0.212)              (0.222)                 (0.227)                  (0.188)                  (0.187)              (0.186)               (0.186)                 (0.180)               (0.187)
     Equality	  of	  coeﬃcients	  (p-­‐value)                         0.00                  0.00                   0.00                    0.00                     0.00                 0.00                  0.00                    0.00                  0.00
     F-­‐stat	  (excluded	  instruments)                              60.02                 48.16                  65.80                   64.45                    54.43                61.82                 66.47                   71.19                 85.44
     Hausman	  test	  (p-­‐value)                                      0.73                  0.50                   0.54                    0.64                     0.34                 0.46                  0.21                    0.19                  0.22
     Notes: IV esQmates are reported with standard errors clustered at the country level. An observaQon is a second generaQon US immigrant woman. Individual controls include age, age
     squared, educaQon, marital status and income. Husband controls include husband's age, age squared, educaQon and income. Historical country controls include the origin country's
     historical agricultural suitability, domesQcaQon of animals, tropics, poliQcal hierarchies and economic complexity. Contemporary country controls include ln income, ln income squared,
     and	  a	  communism	  indicator	  variable.	  All	  regressions	  also	  control	  for	  state,	  year	  and	  metropolitan	  area	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects.	  ***,	  **	  and	  *	  indicate	  signiﬁcance	  at	  the	  1,	  5	  and	  10%	  levels.
father’s country of birth than the husband’s mother’s country of birth. Like the case for the

women’s parents, these estimates identify weaker transmission from the father than from the

mother. In other words, the transmission of beliefs about gender appears stronger from mothers

(than fathers), whether it is from the wife’s mother to the wife or the husband’s mother to the

husband.

  It is also interesting that, in every specification, the estimated impact of the plough transmitted

through the husband’s parents is stronger than the impact of the plough transmitted through the

wife’s parents (i.e., compare columns 4–6 with 7–8). This suggests that the beliefs of the husband

are at least as important, if not more important, than the beliefs of the wife in determining

whether she enters the labor force.     This result is consistent with the previous findings of

Fernandez and Fogli (2009).

  Comparing the magnitude of the immigrant estimates with the country-level estimates allows

us to glean some evidence of the relative importance of cultural transmission, relative to other

channels, in explaining the relationship between historical plough use and female labor force

participation. The impact of the plough on US second-generation immigrant women is much

smaller than the estimated impact from the country-level regressions. Consider the estimated

impact on female labor force participation from a one-unit change in historical plough use (i.e.,

an increase zero to one). Using the country-level OLS estimates (column 1 of Table 2), this is

associated with an increase in FLFP by 16 percentage points. The individual-level estimates

(column 1 of Table 4) suggest impacts of a similar magnitude: 21 percentage points. However, the

magnitudes based on the immigrant-level estimates are much smaller in magnitude, ranging from

4 to 6 percentage points (columns 1–9 of Table 9). Although one must interpret these findings

with caution, the relative magnitudes suggest that internal norms (identified in the immigrant

regressions) account for approximately a quarter to a third of the overall impact of the plough on

gender roles.


7. Conclusions

Social anthropologists have long-considered the use of shifting hoe cultivation vs. plough cultiva-

tion as an important determinant of the evolution and persistence of traditional gender roles and

norms. We formally test this hypothesis by combining ethnographic data on traditional plough



                                                40
use, measured at the ethnicity level, with contemporary data measuring gender attitudes and

female participation outside of the domestic sphere.

   Our findings provide evidence that current differences in gender attitudes and female behavior

have indeed been shaped by historical differences in agricultural systems. Specifically, we have

shown that individuals, ethnicities and countries whose ancestors used the plough have beliefs

that exhibit greater gender inequality today and have less female participation in non-domestic

activities, like market employment, entrepreneurship, and politics. In an effort to identify a chan-

nel of cultural persistence, we examined variation across second-generation female immigrants

born and living in the US, but from different cultural backgrounds. We find that even among

this group of individuals, who face the same labor market, institutions, and policies, a history of

plough use is associated with less female labor force participation.



References

Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti, “Gender Roles and Technological Progress,” Working
  Paper 13179, NBER June 2007.

   and , “Home Production, Market Production and the Gender Wage Gap: Incentives and
  Expectations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2009, 12, 80–107.

Alesina, Alberto and Nicola Fuchs-Schundeln, “Good-Bye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect of Com-
  munism on People’s Preferences,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4), 1507–1528.

   and Paola Giuliano, “The Power of the Family,” Journal of Economic Growth, June 2010, 15 (2),
  93–125.

  , Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Paola Giuliano, “Family Values and the Regulation of Labor,”
  2010. NBER Working Paper 15747.

Barry, H., M. Bacon, and I. Child, “A Cross-Cultural Survey of Some Sex Differences in Social-
  ization,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1957, 55, 327–332.

Baumann, Hermann, “The Division of Work According to Sex in African Hoe Culture,” Africa:
  Journal fo the International African Institute, 1928, 1 (3), 289–319.

Becker, Sasha O., Katrin Boeckh, Christa Hainz, and Ludger Woessman, “The Empire is Dead!
  Long Live the Empire,” 2010. Mimeo, University of Stirling.

Borck, Rainald, “Adieu Rabenmutter – The Effect of Culture on Fertility, Female Labor Supply,
  the Gender Wage Gap and Childcare,” 2011. CESIFO Working Paper No. 3337.

Boserup, Ester, Woman’s Role in Economic Development, London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd.,
  1970.

BP Oil, “Quantifying Energy,” 2006. BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2006.

Braudel, Fernand, Mediterranean in the Ancient World, London: Allen Lane, 1998.

                                                41
Carranza, Eliana, “Soil Endowments, Production Technologies and Missing Women in India,”
  2010. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Kremer, “Estimating the Impact of the
  Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009,
  124 (3), 1133–1170.

Engels, Frederick, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, Chicago: Charles H. Kerr
  & Company Cooperative, 1902.

Fernandez, Raquel, “Women, Work and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2007, 5 (2–3), 305–332.

   and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 146–177.

Fischer, Gunther, Harrij van Nelthuizen, Mahendra Shah, and Freddy Nachtergaele, Global
  Agro-Ecological Assessment for Agriculture in the 21st Century: Methodology and Results, Rome:
  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2002.

Fortin, Nicole, “Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour Market Outcomes of Women Across
  OECD Countries,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 2005, 21, 416–438.

  , “Gender Role Attitudes and Women’s Labor Market Participation: Opting-Out, AIDS, and the
  Persistent Appeal of Housewifery,” 2009. Mimeo, University of British Columbia.

Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig, “Comparative Advantage, Information and the
  Allocation of Workers Tasks: Evidence from an Agricultural Labour Market,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 1996, 63 (3), 347–374.

Goldin, Claudia, “The U Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development,” in
 T. Paul Schultz, ed., Investment in Women Human Capital, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
 1995, pp. 61–90.

  , “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment Education and Family,”
  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2006, 96 (2), 1–23.

   and Kenneth Sokoloff, “The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of Industrialization: The
  American Case, 1820 to 1850,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1984, 99 (3), 461–487.

Goody, Jack, Production and Reproduction, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1976.

Gordon, Raymond G., Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 15th Edition, SIL International, 2005.

Grosjean, Pauline, “The Determinants of Cultural Integration: A Gravity Approach,” 2010.
 Mimeo, University of San Francisco.

  , “A History of Violence: Testing the “Culture of Honor” in the US South,” 2010. Mimeo,
  University of San Francisco.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Long-Term Persistence,” 2008. Mimeo.

  , , and , “Social Capital as Good Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008,
  6 (2-3), 295–320.

Iversen, Torben and Francis Rosenbluth, Women, Work, and Politics: The Political Economy of
  Gender Inequality, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010.

                                                 42
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, Lawrence Katz, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, “Moving to Oppor-
  tunity and Tranquility: Neighborhood Effects on Adult Economic Self-Sufficiency and Health
  from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,” 2004. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Mazoyer, Marcel and Laurence Roudart, A History of World Agriculture: From the Neolithic Age to
 the Curren Crisis, New York: Monthly Review Press, 2006.

McCleary, Rachel M. and Robert J. Barro, “Religion and Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
 tives, 2006, 20 (2), 49–72.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity: Theory and Evidence,” 2008.
 Mimeo, Tufts University.

Murdock, George Peter and Caterina Provost, “Factors in the Division of Labor by Sex,” Ethnol-
 ogy, 1973, 12 (4), 203–225.

   and Douglas R. White, “Standard Cross-Cultural Sample,” Ethnology, October 1969, 8 (4),
  329–369.

Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga, “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2011, p. forthcoming.

   and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Slave Trade and Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American
  Economic Review, 2011, p. forthcoming.

   and Nancy Qian, “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence from
  an Historical Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, p. forthcoming.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan, “Human Capital Investment and the
  Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy,” 2010. Mimeo.

Pryor, Frederic, “The Invention of the Plow,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 1985, 27
  (4), 727–743.

Putterman, Louis and David N. Weil, “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run Determi-
  nants of Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2010, 125
  (4), 1627–1682.

Recklein, John C., A Profile of Economic Plants, Oxford: Transaction Books, 1987.

Ross, Michael L., “Oil, Islam and Women,” American Political Science Review, 2008, 102 (1), 107–
  123.

Tabellini, Guido, “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2008, 123 (3), 905–950.

Weidmann, Nils B., Jan Ketil Rod, and Lars-Erik Cederman, “Representing Ethnic Groups in
 Space: A New Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research, 2010, 47 (4), 491–499.

Whyte, Martin King, The Status of Women in Pre-Industrial Societies, Princeton, N.J.: Princetone
 University Press, 1978.




                                                43
