                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FINANCIAL LITERACY AROUND THE WORLD:
                                    AN OVERVIEW

                                         Annamaria Lusardi
                                         Olivia S. Mitchell

                                        Working Paper 17107
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17107


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




The research reported herein was conducted pursuant to a grant from Netspar. Additional support was
provided by the Pension Research Council and Boettner Center at the Wharton School of the University
of Pennsylvania. The authors thank participants at the December 2010 Financial Literacy around the
World conference at Collegio Carlo Alberto, Turin, Italy for suggestions and comments. They also
thank Audrey Brown for editorial support. Opinions and errors are solely those of the authors and
not of the institutions with which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Financial Literacy around the World: An Overview
Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 17107
June 2011
JEL No. D14,D91

                                              ABSTRACT

In an increasingly risky and globalized marketplace, people must be able to make well-informed financial
decisions. Yet new international research demonstrates that financial illiteracy is widespread when
financial markets are well developed as in Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, Japan, Italy, New Zealand,
and the United States, or when they are changing rapidly as in Russia. Further, across these countries,
we show that the older population believes itself well informed, even though it is actually less well
informed than average. Other common patterns are also evident: women are less financially literate
than men and are aware of this shortfall. More educated people are more informed, yet education is
far from a perfect proxy for literacy. There are also ethnic/racial and regional differences: city-dwellers
in Russia are better informed than their rural counterparts, while in the U.S., African Americans and
Hispanics are relatively less financially literate than others. Moreover, the more financially knowledgeable
are also those most likely to plan for retirement. In fact, answering one additional financial question
correctly is associated with a 3-4 percentage point higher chance of planning for retirement in countries
as diverse as Germany, the U.S., Japan, and Sweden; in the Netherlands, it boosts planning by 10 percentage
points. Finally, using instrumental variables, we show that these estimates probably underestimate
the effects of financial literacy on retirement planning. In sum, around the world, financial literacy
is critical to retirement security.


Annamaria Lusardi
George Washington School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu

Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                                                   1



       Rising life expectancies and falling fertility rates are straining employer-sponsored

pensions and Social Security systems around the world. In response, several countries have

transformed their retirement schemes by remaking their traditional defined benefit (DB) pensions

into individual-account defined contribution (DC) schemes. This transformation shifts many of

the decisions about financing retirement away from institutions – firms and governments –

toward individuals, imposing on workers the responsibility to save, invest, and spend wisely over

the lifecycle. In some ways, this transition has wrought change for the better. For instance, when

the labor force is mobile, pensions must be portable – and DC plans are more flexible than

conventional DB plans that discourage labor mobility. Yet DC flexibility also presents the

possibility that individuals might not do the right thing: they can undersave, fail to invest wisely,

and run out of money in old age due to longevity risk (Mitchell, 2011; Poterba et al. 2008). For

this reason, the new financial era will impose a much heavier burden on workers and their

households than in the past to become financially literate – to learn how to process economic

information and make informed decisions about household finances.

       In other work, we have shown that financial literacy is closely tied to retirement planning

and retirement wealth accumulation (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a, 2008a, 2009, 2011; Behrman

et al. 2010). Yet many people are often woefully unaware of basic economics and finance,

shortfalls that may lead them to make serious and often irreversible mistakes. The majority of

research on these topics to date has focused on the level and extent of financial illiteracy in the

United States (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a, 2009, 2011). In this paper, we report on an

international project on financial literacy patterns in other seven countries which, like the United

States, have added the financial literacy questions originally designed for the U.S. Health and

Retirement Study (HRS) to national surveys. In what follows, we discuss how to measure
                                                                                                                 2


financial literacy, as well as the links between financial literacy and financial behavior. We also

draw out key lessons and research questions that emerge from this international project on

financial literacy around the world.



Measuring financial literacy

        While it is important to assess how financially literate people are, in practice it is difficult

to explore how people process economic information and make informed decisions about

household finances. Perhaps because of this, relatively few researchers prior to 2000

incorporated financial literacy into theoretical models of saving and financial decision-making.

Our effort, in the context of designing financial literacy measures for the US HRS, was to

measure financial literacy keeping in mind four key principles:

    1) Simplicity. We aimed to measure basic financial concepts, akin to the notions of the

    rudimentary ABC’s for reading literacy.

    2) Relevance. Questions had to relate to concepts pertinent to peoples’ day-to-day financial

    decisions over the life cycle; moreover, they had to capture general rather than context-

    specific ideas.1

    3) Brevity. Few representative surveys can devote much time to financial literacy topics, so

    the number of questions had to be kept to a minimum in order to secure widespread adoption.

    4) Capacity to differentiate. We needed questions that can differentiate between financial

    knowledge levels, so as to compare people in terms of their scores on a common set of

    questions.


1
  Relatedly, we sought a small number of questions that would be relevant across ethnic/cultural groups rather than
focus on any specific market. For example questions focusing on the US mortgage market (Moore 2003) would be
difficult to translate to an international context.
                                                                                                3


       Our questions were designed to be included in an experimental financial literacy module

for the 2004 Health and Retirement Study. In doing so, we relied on economic models of saving

and portfolio choice to identify three economic concepts that individuals should have some

understanding of, if they are to use them when making financial decisions: i) interest

compounding; ii) inflation; and iii) risk diversification. To keep these concepts simple in the

context of telephone or face-to-face interviews, we did not require respondents to engage in

complicated calculations; rather, we simply evaluated whether people could carry out elementary

calculations related to these concepts. To this end, we designed three questions which have now

become the benchmark by which a wide variety of analysts measure financial literacy:

1) Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?
           More than $102
           Exactly $102
           Less than $102
           Do not know
           Refuse to answer

2) Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2%
per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account?
           More than today
           Exactly the same
           Less than today
           Do not know
           Refuse to answer

3) Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. “Buying a single company’s stock
usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.”
           True
           False
           Do not know
           Refuse to answer

       The first question measures numeracy or the capacity to do a simple calculation related to

compounding of interest rates. Of course complex interest compounding is also important, but

we elected to focus instead on whether individuals could get the general idea of calculations
                                                                                                                       4


relating to interest rates. Our second question measures understanding of inflation, again in the

context of a simple financial decision. The third question gauges knowledge of risk

diversification; it is a joint test of knowledge about “stocks” and “stock mutual funds,” and of

risk diversification, since the answer to this question depends on knowing what a stock is and

that a mutual fund is composed of many stocks. In view of the fact that employees are

increasingly asked to select their pension investment portfolios, it is important to ask questions

related to risk diversification.2

         It will also be noted that, when structuring these questions, we also specified the list of

possible answers, to make it easier for people to simply select a preferred response. Moreover,

respondents could indicate they did not know the answer or chose to refuse to answer, if they

wished. This procedure prevented respondents from being forced to pick a numeric answer, and

it also enables us to differentiate across different levels of financial knowledge.

         After implementing these questions in the 2004 HRS module for a sample of over 1200

respondents age 50+ (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011), they were then thoroughly tested in other

datasets using respondents from different age groups and time periods, and using different data

collection methods. For instance, they were added to wave 11 of the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY) for 2007-08 covering respondents age 23-28 (Lusardi et al. 2010).

These questions were also added to a module in the American Life Panel in 2008, an internet-

based panel data set (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007b). Finally, these questions were added to the

2009 Financial Capability Study (FINRA, 2010) which included both phone interviews with a

representative sample of the U.S. population, and an internet survey of about 500 respondents in

each state (Lusardi, 2010). Across the board, these variables do a good job of characterizing

2
  When the Enron Corporation filed for bankruptcy in 2004, it turned out that a large number of now-jobless
employees had also invested their entire pension assets into their company’s now-worthless stock. It is therefore of
interest to assess whether employees have learned from that event.
                                                                                                    5


peoples’ levels of financial knowledge; moreover, they also strongly correlate with financial

behaviors, as will be detailed later.

Other efforts to measure financial literacy. A few prior studies have sought to get at related

concepts with different measures, though all have limitations. For instance the HRS ‘core’ had a

handful of questions measuring numeracy (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a), and the same numeracy

questions were asked (sometimes slightly modified) in the England Longitudinal Survey of

Ageing (ELSA; Banks and Oldfield, 2007), and the Survey of Health Ageing, and Retirement in

Europe (SHARE; Christelis et al. 2010). While numerical ability is no doubt important,

particularly for younger persons, we believe that mature adults also need the ability to make

sound financial decisions. Moreover, it may be difficult to enhance numeracy in the older adult

population, whereas it may be easier to boost knowledge of a few financial concepts fundamental

for making financial decisions. Hilgert et al. (2003) and Moore (2003) developed a rather

lengthy set of questions and were stand-alone financial literacy surveys, rather than brief

questions offered as part of a larger socioeconomic data collection effort. The National Council

on Economic Education (NCEE, 2005) measured financial knowledge among children and adults,

but that survey did not gather ancillary information to evaluate whether financial literacy affects

behavior. In our view, short financial literacy modules are best included in national surveys

(rather than fielding surveys on financial literacy only), because financial literacy responses can

then be linked to other causes and effects. The OECD report (2005) provides an overview of

financial literacy questions in several countries. While providing very useful information, it is

not possible to perform international comparisons as the questions differ a lot across countries.

Measurement error issues. Despite best efforts, any measure of financial literacy is likely to be

affected by measurement error. On the one hand, people may simply guess the answers at
                                                                                                 6


random, and on the other hand, people may misunderstand question, especially when they listen

to questions over the telephone. To evaluate these potential problems, we inverted the question

wording in some cases, randomly asking two groups of respondents the same question but with

inverted wording. For example when asking about risk diversification, we asked half the group

using format (a) and the other half format (b):

(a) Buying a company stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund. True or

false?

(b) Buying a stock mutual fund usually provides a safer return than a company stock. True or

false?

         We learned that the answers do appear sensitive to how the question is worded in both the

U.S. American Life Panel (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007b) and the Dutch DNB Household Survey

(DHS) (Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011). For example, in the DHS, few people answer

correctly when the question is whether “buying a stock mutual fund usually provides a safer

return than a company stock;” correct responses double the same question is asked in inverted

order: “buying a company stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.” This is

not simply due to people using a crude rule of thumb such as always picking the first option as

correct, since this would lead to a lower rather than higher percentage of correct answers for

version (a). In other words, some respondents do not understand the questions and do not know

what stocks, bonds, and mutual funds are. Accordingly some correct answers are the result of

guessing, implying that empirical analysis to the advanced financial literacy questions should

take into account that these measures can be noisy proxies of true financial knowledge levels.



Does financial literacy matter?
                                                                                                                     7


        Of course ultimately we seek to learn not just how much people know, but also how

financial literacy matters over the life cycle. Intertemporal economic choice models posit that

people formulate assumptions about their lifetime resources and make consumption decisions on

those anticipated resources, rather than simply based on current income. Some degree of

forward-looking perspective is required, so that people can save to smooth consumption over

their lifetime. Yet implementing such life cycle model would require taking a stand on a host of

assumptions about preferences and risk aversion as well as discount rates, expectations about

lifetime income streams and capital market returns, borrowing possibilities, and income shocks

(Chai et al. 2010), most of which are not particularly easily measured in empirical data. 3

Accordingly, rather than imposing specific preferences and constraint structures, we instead

focus on a behavioral outcome consistent with life-cycle behavior, namely whether people plan

for retirement.

        Several prior studies have shown that people who plan for retirement do, in fact,

accumulate more retirement saving. For instance Lusardi (1999) showed that a 1992 HRS

question asking people how much they thought about retirement (a lot, some, a little or hardly at

all) was a strong predictor of retirement wealth. In addition, the impact was quantitatively

important for the HRS respondents in their mid-50s: those who thought about retirement had

double the wealth of those who had not thought about retirement. Similar findings were

measured in the 2004 HRS (Lusardi and Beeler, 2007). A different question in the 2004 HRS

experimental module asked whether people had even tried to calculate how much they needed to



3
  Even if people are not financially literate, they might consult others in making financial decision so their own
knowledge might not matter. Similarly, some people could make good financial decisions because there are simple
rules of thumb that could approximate optimal financial behavior. For instance, Deaton (1992) showed that optimal
outcomes from a very complex model of saving under uncertainty with liquidity constraints could be approximated
by simple saving rules, such as saving a certain percent of income above a certain subsistence level. Ongoing
research is attempting to differentiate between these different approaches to saving behavior.
                                                                                                   8


save for their retirement to measure planning (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011). This question has

also been used in the Retirement Confidence Survey (Yakoboski and Dickemper, 1997) as a

means of assessing whether individuals are forward-looking and attempt to calculate how much

they need to save as the life cycle model implies. Results showed that those who planned for

retirement accumulated three times as much wealth as those who did not (Lusardi and Mitchell,

2011). Planning has also been associated with higher wealth even among the better educated

(Ameriks et al. 2003). It is also of interest that planning is important for the young and middle

aged, as shown in the American Life Panel (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009). Moreover, the nexus

of causality goes from retirement planning to wealth, and not the other way around (Lusardi and

Mitchell, 2009; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a).

       The next question is why people fail to plan, and we argue that a key reason is because

they are financially unsophisticated. Obviously planning requires making calculations, many of

which are facilitated by financial literacy. For example, less sophisticated individuals who do

not have a good grasp of interest compounding may engage in high-cost credit-card borrowing,

or they may be more likely to pay high fees when using financial services. Lusardi and Tufano

(2009) found that low literacy individuals are more likely to carry high-cost debt and to have

problems with debt. More financially literate individuals tend to include stocks in their portfolios,

as they better understand the principle of risk diversification (Van Rooij et al. 2011; Christelis et

al. 2010). There are also other channels via which financial literacy operates. For example higher

literacy individuals may be more likely to choose funds with lower fees or be more savvy about

fund expenses; for instance there is a strong correlation between financial literacy and

investment in lower cost funds (Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton, 2008; Hastings et al. 2010;

Hastings and Mitchell, 2011).
                                                                                                              9


        All in all, what this review suggests is that there is a potentially important role of

financial literacy in shaping retirement planning. How strong this relationship is an empirical

question and the evidence across eight countries can teach us about this important relationship.



Financial literacy around the world

        In collaboration with several other teams from a wide range of countries, we have started

to explore how the 2004 module HRS financial literacy questions work in the international

context, as well as how they relate to patterns of retirement planning.4 Results are reported in

more detail in the remainder of this volume; here we outline several key lessons. First, financial

illiteracy is widespread even when financial markets are well developed as in Germany, the

Netherlands, Sweden, Italy, Japan, and New Zealand. Thus observed low levels of financial

literacy in the U.S. are prevalent elsewhere, rather than specific to any given country or stage of

economic development. Second, there are notable differences across countries. For example,

where people score high on math and science tests, they also tend to score high also on questions

measuring numeracy. As examples, respondents in Sweden and the Netherlands do well on math

tests (e.g. the Programme for International Student Assessment; OECD, 2005) and they also

score high on numeracy. Third, people are more knowledgeable about inflation if their country

has experienced it recently. For example, Italians are more likely to answer the question on

inflation correctly. Conversely, in a country like Japan that experienced deflation, many fewer

people answer the inflation question correctly. Fourth, people are more knowledgeable about risk



4
 We first piloted these questions using the Dutch Central Bank Household Survey (DHS) and we showed that these
questions seem well adapted (van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2011). Several countries have also undertaken to
measure “financial capability,” which is meant to focus not only on financial knowledge but also on ability to
undertake particular financial behaviors. The United Kingdom was among the first to field a survey on financial
capability in 2005, and related efforts were undertaken in New Zealand, Australia, Ireland, Canada, and the
Netherlands (Atkinson et al. 2006, 2007).
                                                                                                  10


diversification if the country recently experience pension privatization, as in Sweden. By contrast,

Russians and people born in East Germany know less about risk diversification. It is notable,

however, that even in countries with very developed financial markets, many respondents state

they do not know about risk diversification; for example in the U.S, as many as one-third of

respondents say they do not know how to answer the risk diversification question.

           The studies in this international project also indicate that financial literacy differs by

population subgroup. Age patterns are notable, in that financial knowledge follows an inverted

U-shaped pattern, being lowest for the young and the older groups, but peaks in the middle of the

life cycle. In a single cross-section we cannot distinguish between age and cohort effects, but we

hypothesize that the pattern is consistent with knowledge rising with experience and decaying at

older ages.

           Another remarkable finding has to do with persistent international sex differences in

financial literacy: in most cases, women are less financially knowledge than are men.5 Moreover,

women are not only less likely to answer the questions correctly, but they are more likely to state

they do not know the answers, compared to men. This is a systematic and persistent difference

between men and women in financial literacy. In Russia and for residents of East Germany, there

are no sex differences in financial knowledge – and both women and men are equally financial

illiterate. But when comparing East versus West Germans, those living in the West are most

financially knowledgeable, and financial knowledge in the West is sharply worse for women

than for men. Thus it seems that women have more difficulty catching up with economic and

financial market development, than do men.

           In all countries, higher educational attainment is strongly correlated with financial

knowledge, but even at the highest level of schooling, financial literacy tends to be low.
5
    This confirms US findings in Lusardi and Mitchell (2008a).
                                                                                                 11


Moreover, education is not a good proxy for financial literacy. That is, when education and

financial literacy are included in multivariate regression models, both tend to be statistically

significant, indicating that financial literacy has an effect above and beyond education. Financial

literacy is also higher among those who are working, and in some countries among the self-

employed, compared to those who do not work. This difference may in part result from financial

education programs offered in the workplace (as in the United States); it could also be the effect

of learning from colleagues or skills acquired on the job.

       Some countries report interesting patterns along other dimensions. For example, in the

U.S., there are large racial/ethnic differences in financial knowledge: Whites and Asians are

consistently more likely to be financially knowledgeable compared to African Americans and

Hispanics. Moreover, there are large geographic differences in financial literacy. For instance,

financial literacy in Italy is higher in the Northern and Central regions than the Southern regions,

though not all of the Northern regions show high levels of financial knowledge. There are also

urban/rural differences: people living in urban areas in Russia tend to be more financially literate

than those living in rural areas. This is may well be due to differential exposure to the modern

financial sector in the last few decades. There are also notable differences in financial knowledge

among people with different religious beliefs; in the Netherlands, those of other religion (which

includes Muslims and other smaller religious groups) are less likely to be financially

knowledgeable.

       Not only are there interesting patterns in measured financial literacy, but we also can

compare what people actually know with their self-assessed financial literacy. Across countries

we tend to see that younger people know very little and acknowledge it. By contrast, older

people consistently rate themselves as very knowledgeable despite the fact that they are actually
                                                                                                   12


less literate than average. There are also important international differences in self-reports: in the

U.S., for instance, a majority of respondents gives themselves high scores, whereas in Japan

people score themselves quite low.

       The international studies of financial literacy also explore how financial literacy relates to

retirement planning. In the majority of the countries studied, those who are more financially

literate are more likely to plan for retirement, even after accounting for a large set of economic

characteristics and economic circumstances. Given the many differences in pension schemes,

privatization of pensions, and generosity of the pension system across countries, this is a

remarkably consistent result. While some may argue that financial literacy is itself a choice

variable so that the association between financial literacy and retirement planning may not be

causal, the studies reported herein find little evidence that people invest much in financial

knowledge. Indeed, it is unclear how people could improve their financial knowledge even if

they wished to, given the paucity of adult education programs in several of the countries

reviewed here.

       In addition, the country studies also allow the authors to control for unobservable factors

that would otherwise make results difficult to interpret in terms of causation. For example, in the

Netherlands, information about financial literacy and retirement planning was collected at two

different time periods, with the panel feature of the data permitting the analysts to control for

unobservables such as cognitive skills, intelligence, or interest in financial matters. In some cases

researchers can also examine whether financial literacy at one point is correlated with retirement

planning at some future point. More generally, the nexus of causality can be explored with an

instrumental variables (IV) approach, to examine whether exogenous factors correlated with

financial literacy but uncorrelated with retirement planning can shed light on the relationship
                                                                                                  13


between these factors. (IV is also useful when financial literacy is measured with error, as noted

above). Several different IV approaches are used. One is to assert that a respondent might not be

in a position to influence the behavior of others. In the Netherlands, for example, we find that

people whose oldest siblings are in worse financial condition than the respondent’s and whose

parents have low understanding of financial matters are more likely to display high financial

literacy. In Germany, the fraction of people voting for market-oriented parties is used to proxy

for having well-informed peers. Here the results indicate that those having more informed peers

are more likely to have higher financial knowledge.

       Last, but certainly not least, the conclusions from the country studies examined herein

show that financial literacy is an important predictor of retirement planning, for both

instrumented and non-instrumented empirical models. Answering one additional financial

question correctly is associated with a 3 to 4 percentage point higher probability to plan for

retirement in countries as diverse as Germany, the United States, Japan and Sweden. The effect

of literacy is highest in the Netherland, where answering an additional financial literacy question

is associated with a 10 percentage point higher probability of planning for retirement. Thus,

around the world, we uncover the same finding, financial literacy makes people plan more

enabling them to be more financially secure in their retirement.



Concluding remarks

       Fielding the same questions to measure financial knowledge across eight countries has

provided a deeper understanding of the causes and consequences of financial illiteracy. We

conclude that financial literacy is very low around the world, irrespective of the level of financial

market development and the type of pension provided. Accordingly, changes in markets have
                                                                                                   14


apparently not wrought enhancements in financial knowledge, suggesting that there may be a

limit on what people can learn by themselves from their financial experience. There are also

important sex and age differences common across countries in financial knowledge. Women

uniformly know less, and they know they know less, than do men, in terms of financial

knowledge. Low levels of financial knowledge in older populations also suggest that these

groups may be particularly vulnerable.

       Third, most workers, including older ones, have not planned or even thought much about

retirement. This is important because retirement planning is a good proxy for retirement wealth;

those who have calculated how much they need to save for their own retirement reach retirement

age with three times the wealth of those who did no such calculations. We also show that

retirement planning can be traced back to financial literacy; those can accurately undertake

simple calculations, know about inflation, and are knowledgeable about risk diversification, are

all more likely to plan for their retirement. Finally, we argue that this relationship is causal: that

is, financial literacy influences retirement planning, and not the other way around.

       Fourth, it seems clear now that financial literacy should not be taken from granted, even

in countries with very developed financial markets. Indeed as the long-term shift continues

toward individual responsibility for retirement saving, investment, and decumulation, it is

important to evaluate which programs can best help people make good financial decisions. And

last, to be effective, financial education programs will be most effective if targeted to different

population subgroups. In sum, around the world, financial literacy is critical to retirement

security.
                                                                                                15




References
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. (2003). “Wealth Accumulation and the
      Propensity to Plan.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 68, 1007-1047.
Atkinson, Adele, Stephen McKay, Elaine Kempson, and Sharon Collard. (2006). “Levels of
       Financial Capability in the UK: Results of a baseline survey.” UK: Financial Services
       Authority.
Atkinson, Adele, Stephen McKay, Elaine Kempson, and Sharon Collard. (2007). "Levels of
       Financial Capability in the UK: Results of a Baseline Survey," Public Money &
       Management, 27(1): 29-36, February.
Banks, James and Zoe Oldfied. (2007), “Understanding Pensions: Cognitive Functions,
      Numerical Ability and Retirement Saving,” Fiscal Studies, 28(2).
Behrman, Jere, Olivia S. Mitchell, Cindy Soo, and David Bravo. (2010). “Financial Literacy,
      Schooling, and Wealth Accumulation.” NBER WP 16452.
Bernheim, Douglas. (1995). “Do Households Appreciate their Financial Vulnerabilities? An
      Analysis of Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy.” In Tax Policy and Economic
      Growth, American Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC, pp. 1-30.
Bernheim, Douglas. (1998). “Financial Illiteracy, Education and Retirement Saving,” in O.S.
      Mitchell and S. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions, University of
      Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, pp. 38-68.
Chai, Jingjing, Wolfram Horneff, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2010). “Extending
        Life Cycle Models of Optimal Portfolio Choice: Integrating Flexible Work, Endogenous
        Retirement, and Investment Decisions with Lifetime Payouts.” NBER WP 15682 January.
Christelis, Dimitris, Tullio Jappelli, and Mario Padula. (2010). “Cognitive Abilities and Portfolio
       Choice,” European Economic Review 54, pp. 18-38.
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. (FINRA; 2010). Financial Capability in the United
       States:    National     Survey,     Executive      Summary.  Washington,      D.C.
       http://www.finrafoundation.org/resources/research/p120478
Hastings, Justine and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2011). “How Financial Literacy and Impatience Shape
       Retirement Wealth and Investment Behaviors.” NBER Working Paper No. 16740.
Hastings, Justine, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Eric Chyn. (2010). “Fees, Framing, and Financial
       Literacy in the Choice of Pension Managers.” Pension Research Council Working Paper,
       Wharton School. Summer.
Hastings, Justine, and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton (2008), “Financial Literacy, Information, and
       Demand Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 14538.
Hilgert, Marianne, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly (2003), “Household Financial
        Management: The Connection between Knowledge and Behavior,” Federal Reserve
        Bulletin, 309-32.
Lusardi, Annamaria (1999), “Information, Expectations, and Savings for Retirement,” in Henry
                                                                                           16


       Aaron (ed.), Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Washington, D.C.:
       Brookings Institution Press and Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 81-115.
Lusardi, Annamaria. (2009). “U.S. Household Savings Behavior: The Role of Financial Literacy,
       Information and Financial Education Programs,” in C. Foote, L Goette, and S. Meier
       (eds), Policymaking Insights from Behavioral Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of
       Boston, pp. 109-149.
Lusardi, Annamaria. (2010). Americans’ Financial Capability. Report for the Financial Crisis
       Inquiry Commission. Washington, DC. February.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Jason Beeler. (2007). “Saving Between Cohorts: The Role of Planning,”
       in B. Madrian, O. Mitchell, and B. Soldo (eds.), Redefining Retirement: How Will
       Boomers Fare? Oxford University Press, Oxford: 271-295.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2007a), “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
       Role of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 54, pp. 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2007b). “Financial Literacy and Retirement
       Planning: New Evidence from the Rand American Life Panel.” Pension Research Council
       Working Paper WP2007-3.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and S. Olivia Mitchell. (2007c). “Financial Literacy and Retirement
       Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education,” Business Economics,
       January 2007, pp. 35-44.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2008a). “Planning and Financial Literacy. How Do
       Women Fare?” American Economic Review, 98(2), pp. 413-417.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. (2008b), “How Much Do People Know About
       Economics and Finance? Financial Illiteracy and the Importance of Financial Education,”
       Policy Brief n. 5, MRRC, March.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2009). “How Ordinary Consumers Make Complex
       Economic Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness.” NBER Working
       Paper 15350
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2011) “Financial Literacy and Planning:
       Implications for Retirement Wellbeing,” In Financial Literacy: Implications for
       Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace. Eds A Lusardi and O.S. Mitchell .
       Oxford: Oxford University Press forthcoming.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. (2009). “Financial Literacy and
       Financial Sophistication among Older Americans.” NBER Working Paper 15469.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. (2010) “Financial Literacy Among the
       Young,” Journal of Consumer Affairs. 44(2), pp 358-380.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. (2009.) “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and
       Overindebtedness,” NBER Working Paper n. 14808.
Mitchell, Olivia S. (2011). “Managing Risks in Defined Contribution Plans: What Does the
       Future Hold?” In Growing Old: Paying for Retirement and Institutional Money
                                                                                           17


       Management After the Financial Crisis. Eds. Yasuyuki Fuchita, Richard J. Herring and
       Robert E. Litan. Brookings Institution Press and Nomura Institute of Capital Markets
       Research. Forthcoming.
Moore, Danna (2003), “Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge, Behavior,
      Attitudes, and Experiences,” Technical Report n. 03-39, Social and Economic Sciences
      Research Center, Washington State University.
National Council on Economic Education (NCEE; 2005). What American Teens and Adults
       Know about Economics. NCEE: Washington, D.C.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD; 2005), Improving Financial
      Literacy: Analysis of Issues and Policies. OECD: Paris, France.
Poterba, James, Steve Venti, and David Wise (2008), “The Changing Landscape of Pensions in
       The United States.” In Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness
       of Financial Education and Saving Programs. Ed. A Lusardi. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press: 17-46.
van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. (2011). “Financial Literacy and Stock
      Market Participation.” Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.
Yakoboski, Paul and Jennifer Dickemper. (1997). “Increased Saving but Little Planning: Results
      of the 1997 Retirement Confidence Survey,” EBRI Issue Brief, 191.
