NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHILDREN LEFT BEHIND:
THE EFFECTS OF STATEWIDE JOB LOSS ON STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT
Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat
Anna Gassman-Pines
Dania V. Francis
Christina M. Gibson-Davis
Working Paper 17104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17104
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

This research was supported by the Smith Richardson Foundation. Ananat, Francis and Gibson-Davis
also gratefully acknowledge support from the William T. Grant Foundation. Gassman-Pines gratefully
acknowledges support from the Foundation for Child Development. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat, Anna Gassman-Pines, Dania V. Francis, and Christina M. Gibson-Davis.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Children Left Behind: The Effects of Statewide Job Loss on Student Achievement
Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat, Anna Gassman-Pines, Dania V. Francis, and Christina M. Gibson-Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 17104
June 2011, Revised August 2013
JEL No. I2,J6
ABSTRACT
We examine effects of state-level job losses on student achievement. Losses to 1% of the working-age
population decrease eighth-grade math scores by .076 standard deviations, with consistently negative
but less precise effects on eighth-grade reading and on fourth-grade math and reading. Effects are
34 times larger than found when comparing students with displaced parents to otherwise similar students,
suggesting that downturns affect all students, not just those whose parents lose employment. Evidence
is inconsistent with a “downward spiral of behavior” or reduced school funding as causal mechanisms;
rather, reduced income and increased distress likely inhibit performance. States experiencing displacement
of 1% of workers likely see an 8% increase in schools missing No Child Left Behind requirements.
Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
eoananat@duke.edu
Anna Gassman-Pines
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
agassman.pines@duke.edu

Dania V. Francis
Sanford Building
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
dania.frank@duke.edu
Christina M. Gibson-Davis
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
cgibson@duke.edu

Children Left Behind - 3
Introduction

Increased emphasis on student test scores in recent years has come during a time of
significant economic turmoil. Since the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) was passed in 2001,
the United States has experienced two recessions, including the largest recession since the Great
Depression, as well as high rates of job displacement as traditionally U.S.-based industries have
moved overseas. Given evidence on the effects of both parental job loss and local-area job loss
on youth academic success (Ananat, Gassman-Pines et al. 2011; Stevens and Schaller 2011), it is
important to understand how economic downturns may affect aggregate student test scores. Such
an understanding is vital to clarifying what affects student test performance and, therefore, to
forming both appropriate school accountability policies and approaches to dealing with the
community impacts of job destruction.
Studies that attempt to examine the effects of economic losses on academic achievement
face two major challenges to validity. First, in most instances, there are likely to be unmeasured
or unobserved characteristics that affect both a given family’s financial status and the family’s
well-being. For example, in families facing health or substance-use problems, parents may be
less likely to maintain employment and children may also have less school success than in other
families. While an instrumental variables approach can be used to address the endogeneity of
parental job loss, such an identification strategy still faces a second challenge to validity. That is,
it may miss effects of local economic crises on children that come through channels other than
parental unemployment. Such channels could include, for example, increased stress among even
continuously-employed parents and teachers, or spillover effects in the classroom from peers
whose parents lose jobs. Using children whose parents have not lost employment as a control
group for those whose parents are displaced, thereby assuming that these other channels are
negligible, may understate the effects of job loss on both groups of children. In fact, we find in
this paper that research addressing the first but not the second challenge understates the
aggregate achievement effects of economic downturns by as much as an order of magnitude.
In this paper, we address these two empirical challenges by examining the impact of
state-level job losses caused by business closings and layoffs on states’ student achievement test
scores. Using plausibly exogenous variation in business closings permits us to identify the causal
effect of an economic downturn on all students and on vulnerable subgroups of students in

Children Left Behind - 4
particular. We find that job losses to 1% of a state’s working-age population decrease that
state’s eighth-grade math scores the next year by .076 standard deviations, a large effect size
commensurate with (although opposite in sign of) interventions that are designed to impact test
scores. The results are highly robust to alternative specifications, perform as expected in
falsification checks, and are stable across demographic subgroups and the test score distribution.
We investigate potential mechanisms for this decline, and find that it cannot be
accounted for by decreased school budgets or by migration. We also present evidence against the
drop in test scores representing the outcome of a “downward spiral” of youth behavior after local
job losses, such as that depicted in William Julius Wilson’s classic book When Work Disappears
(1996), in which he argues that local job losses lead from idleness among adults to increased
antisocial role-modeling behavior, such as drug abuse and violence, and from there to youth
antisocial behavior, disengagement from and failure in school. If anything, like adults (Ruhm
2000), students appear to have stable or improved behaviors in the wake of downturns, including
reduced use of drugs and alcohol, stable rates of violence, and safer sex practices. By contrast,
our results are consistent with the hypothesis that worsened mental health during downturns
interferes with students’ attainment, and that lowered income can account for some but not all of
the decline in scores.
Our findings can provide insight to researchers investigating the determinants of student
achievement and to educators seeking to understand the effects of the recent economic crisis.
Further, our results have implications for accountability schemes: in a back-of-the-envelope
calculation, we find that states experiencing one-year job losses to 1% of their workers likely see
an 8% increase in the share of their schools failing to make Adequate Yearly Progress under No
Child Left Behind. These results suggest that local economic conditions are an important factor
in students’ test performance, and so are a relevant consideration for policymakers attempting to
fairly and accurately evaluate school performance.

Background
A broad consensus now exists that business layoffs and closings can be viewed as
exogenous shocks to workers and communities when conditioning on prior characteristics
(Jacobson, LaLonde et al. 1993; Stevens 1997; Sullivan and von Wachter 2009) and that effects

Children Left Behind - 5
on workers and communities subsequent to layoffs and closings can therefore be interpreted as
causal effects of job loss. The explanation behind this consensus is as follows. When an
individual is fired or quits, it may reflect negative unobservable characteristics of that individual,
or of the individual’s community. In contrast, however, closings and downsizings occur because
of larger macroeconomic and international trade forces. Although firms might close or relocate
due to declining worker productivity in an area (which, again, might reflect unobservable
community characteristics), empirically it has been repeatedly found that once fixed effects for
the area are included, firm decisions are not predictable using changes in community
characteristics. In this paper we provide further evidence of this empirical regularity.
One strand of literature has used this empirical strategy to examine the effects of an
individual-level job loss (whether a household head loses a job because of a closing, regardless
of how many others in the community are affected) on family-level outcomes such as income,
parenting practices, or children’s grade retention. Another strand has concentrated on the effects
of community-level job losses (the total number of jobs lost in a community) on communitywide outcomes such as levels of physical health, suicide, or welfare receipt. However, few
papers in this latter strand have looked at children’s outcomes. We complement previous work in
these two literatures by using a community-level empirical strategy while focusing on children’s
achievement as the outcome of interest. This approach allows us both to identify causal effects of
area job loss and to identify effects on children that do not come solely through their parents’
employment status. Below, we discuss the previous individual-level and community-level
literatures on the effects of job loss and use them to generate hypotheses on why communitywide job losses might affect aggregate levels of child academic performance.

Effects of individual-level job loss
Parental job loss can affect child development in two ways. First, parental job loss can
reduce families’ material resources. Second, parental job loss can lead to changes in families’
physical health, mental health, and behaviors, including parenting behaviors.
Job loss lowers earnings both in the short term, while parents look for new employment,
and over the longer term, because people who lose their jobs due to industry downturns often
must start over in new firms and new industries (Jacobson, LaLonde et al. 1993; Stevens 1997).

Children Left Behind - 6
Family income affects children’s outcomes. Studies have documented that changes in parental
income and material resources lead to changes in children’s well-being and, in particular, their
achievement test scores (Morris and Gennetian 2003; Dahl and Lochner 2012).
Job loss can also affect children’s outcomes by affecting parents’ mental health and
thereby altering family functioning. Individuals who have lost employment have worse
psychological (McKee-Ryan, Song et al. 2005) and physical (Sullivan and von Wachter 2009)
health than those who have not lost employment. Longitudinal studies that observe families
before and after a parental job loss have found that job loss leads to decreased family functioning
and impaired parent-child interactions (Jones 1988; Conger and Elder 1994; McLoyd, Jayaratne
et al. 1994; Kalil and Wightman 2010). Parental mental health problems and impaired parentchild interactions have both been strongly linked to worse child adjustment and lower levels of
school achievement (Elder, Eccles et al. 1995; McLoyd 1998). While it is possible that job loss
could lead parents to spend more time with their children, which could have beneficial effects on
child school achievement, research has in fact shown that, compared to employed parents,
unemployed parents do not spend more time with their children, either in general (Edwards
2008; Kalil and Ziol-Guest 2011) or specifically on education-related activities that could lead to
greater academic achievement (Levine 2011).
Researchers have also documented that parental job loss harms children’s school-related
outcomes. Longitudinal studies using child fixed effects have shown that parental job loss
increases grade repetition (Kalil and DeLeire 2002; Stevens and Schaller 2011) decreases GPAs
(Rege, Telle et al. 2011), and increases school-related behavior problems (Hill, Morris et al.
2011). Finally, parental job loss also appears to have long-lasting effects on children into
adulthood, such as lower earnings, greater receipt of public assistance, and lower college
attendance (Oreopoulos, Page et al. 2008; Coelli 2010).
Effects of community-level job losses
In addition to evidence that job loss worsens outcomes for job losers and their children,
there is also evidence that firm layoffs and shutdowns affect those who live in the impacted
community, whether they lose employment or not. Several researchers have measured the causal
effects of job loss on community-level employment, earnings, and public-assistance receipt. A

Children Left Behind - 7
set of studies by Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2003; 2005a; 2005b) examining booms and
busts in the steel and coal industries in the 1970s and 1980s found that industry downturns
lowered employment not only within but also outside of the initially affected sector.
Additionally, those who remain employed in an area that has experienced large job losses also
experience decreased earnings (Blanchflower and Oswald 1994). Further, new entrants into the
labor market during a downturn experience a lifelong decrease in earnings (Oreopoulos, von
Wachter et al. 2012).
In addition to reduced employment and earnings, those who live in an area that has
experienced job losses may also experience increased stress and decreased well-being, even
when they do not personally experience job loss. Longitudinal research with individual fixed
effects has shown that increases in the regional unemployment rate decrease employed
individuals’ reported life satisfaction (Clark, Knabe et al. 2010; Luechinger, Meier et al. 2010).
Similarly, longitudinal cross-national studies have shown that increases in countries’
unemployment rates are also associated with decreases in their employed citizens’ life
satisfaction (Ochsen and Welsch 2006; Ochsen 2008; Clark, Knabe et al. 2010; Luechinger,
Meier et al. 2010). Time-series analyses have shown that increases in the local unemployment
rate are associated with increases in psychological distress for those who were employed
(Dooley and Catalano 1984; Dooley, Catalano et al. 1988). Using two waves of data, Fenwick
and Tausig (1994) also found that increases in the local unemployment rate were associated with
increases in individuals’ psychological distress.
Taken together, the evidence indicates that deteriorating local economic conditions are
associated with deteriorating mental health, for those who lose jobs but also for those who
remain employed. Well-being could decrease among those who do not lose employment because
of increased feelings of job insecurity and anxiety about economic well-being or because of
distress for friends and neighbors who have lost work. These changes in adults’ mental health
could have implications for their children, as parental mental health has been strongly linked
with altered family interactions and, in turn, children’s developmental outcomes, including
school achievement (Downey and Coyne 1990). This could be place to put the “downward spiral
of behavior” set up?
These individual changes resulting from community-level job losses could also have
large effects on the school setting and on students’ experience in schools. For example, given the

Children Left Behind - 8
findings reviewed above, teachers who remain employed may also experience increases in stress.
Higher levels of teacher stress are related to lower levels of student academic achievement,
mainly through changes in teacher-student classroom interactions (Wiley 2000). Relatedly, if
students are in classrooms with peers whose parents have lost jobs, the interactions among
students within the classroom may be altered, potentially affecting all students’ levels of
achievement. Less positive classroom interactions are related to lower growth in children’s
academic achievement over time (Hamre and Pianta 2001; Pianta, Belsky et al. 2008). For
example, increases in one student’s behavior problems can disrupt learning by other students in
the same classroom (Figlio 2007), and such increases have been found among students who
experience parental job loss (Hill, Morris et al. 2011).
In sum, the evidence consistently indicates that those who maintain their jobs in the wake
of local job losses experience lower earnings and worse mental health, effects similar to,
although less intense than, those experienced by individuals who lose employment. Evidence
also strongly suggests that lower earnings and worse mental health among parents lead to lower
academic achievement among children. Moreover, changes within schools in teacher stress and
in other students’ behavior, which can also negatively affect student achievement, are by
definition experienced by both those whose parents do and those whose parents do not lose
employment. We hypothesize, therefore, that parents who maintain employment in the wake of
local job losses, like parents who lose employment, see their children’s academic performance
decline, albeit by a smaller amount.
Statewide job losses likely affect test scores both through lower achievement among
children whose parents lose jobs and through additional area-level mechanisms that affect all
children. We do not, therefore, expect that the relationship between statewide job losses and state
average test scores will be simply the relationship between individual-level parental job loss and
measures of children‘s academic achievement identified in earlier papers (Kalil and DeLeire
2002; Rege, Telle et al. 2011), scaled by the size of the total job loss in relation to the size of the
community. Rather, we expect that our estimate of the total statewide effect will be larger than
such a scaled estimate, for two reasons. First, even in a large downturn, most children do not
experience parental job loss. Small effects on the majority of children whose parents do not lose
employment may, in aggregate, contribute as much or more to the total relationship between
statewide job loss and test scores as does the large effect on the minority of children whose

Children Left Behind - 9
parents lose employment. Second, earlier papers have used children who do not experience
parental job loss as a control for those who do. If, instead, children who are unaffected by
parental job loss experience academic achievement effects in the same direction as those whose
parents are affected by job loss, standard “treatment minus control” effect estimates will tend to
understate the true effect of parental job loss on child test scores. Based on the literature
reviewed above, we believe that effects of statewide job losses will be in the same direction for
children whose parents lose jobs and for children whose parents do not, although the magnitude
of the effects likely differs. Thus, we hypothesize that our estimates of aggregate effects of statelevel job loss on test scores will be considerably larger than would be implied by extrapolations
from previous research. We note that it is unlikely that state-level job losses reflect uniform
losses in all communities within a state, and hence unlikely that state-level job losses cause
uniform changes in test scores across the state. Nonetheless, the relationship between losses
averaged across the state and test score changes averaged across the state is interpretable as the
aggregate effect of job losses within communities in that state on test scores in communities in
that state.

Data
We use two main data sources, one for test score information and one for job loss
information. Student academic performance data are from the National Center for Education
Statistics’ National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), which has administered
standardized tests to a nationally representative sample of students in roughly two year intervals
since 1964 (National Center for Education Statistics 2010). We focus our analysis on
mathematics and reading assessments administered to fourth and eighth graders from 1996 to
2009, which NAEP reports, when available, as state-level average scores and state-level
percentile distribution scores for all fifty states and the District of Columbia.1 The state-level
NAEP assessments are given to a representative sample of public school students in each
participating state. Scores are reported for students overall as well as for subgroups of students

1

NAEP also conducts assessments of twelfth-grade students’ academic performance, but those data are only
available at the state level beginning in 2009, the last year of our panel.

Children Left Behind - 10
by gender and race.2 Math assessments were administered in 1996, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2007 and
2009. Reading assessments were administered in 1998, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007 and 2009. The
tests are always administered in the first quarter of the year, between January and March.
Table 1 presents sample descriptive statistics of demographics of students who took the
NAEP assessments. The sample is fairly evenly split between male and female students. White
students make up the majority of students on average. The national trend over time shows a
growth in the share of Hispanic students from seven percent to between 14 and 16 percent and a
decline in the share of white students of about 10 percentage points. This pattern is consistent
among both fourth and eighth graders. The national share of black students remains stable at
about 15 percent. These demographics are consistent with the demographics of children in the
United States.
Mean assessment scores and standard deviations for all students and for subgroups of
students separately by grade level and test subject are presented in Table 2. The NAEP
assessments are designed to have a possible score range of 0 to 500 for individual students. The
first two columns in each subject-year grouping represent the mean and standard deviation of the
state average assessment scores. The third column contains the averages across years of the
national student-level standard deviation for a given assessment and year, which are of course
much larger than those for the state averages. Large differences, in expected directions, also
exist between the average assessment scores of different subgroups of students. Girls score
slightly higher on reading than do boys; white students score significantly higher than black and
Hispanic students in both subjects and both grade levels.
For the purposes of analysis, we standardize each state-level assessment score to have a
mean of zero and standard deviation of one (following the convention of using the individual
student level, not the state, standard deviation), which allows for comparison of test scores across
subjects, grades, and years. The sample is organized in state-year observations, yielding a

2 For eighth graders, scores are also reported by student-reported parental education. However, the distribution of
reported parent education in our sample is skewed towards educational attainment higher than is plausible given
national estimates (on average, over 45 percent of students in the sample report that at least one of their parents has a
college degree, while in the 2000 Census only 28 percent of households with comparably-aged children reported that
at least one parent has a college degree) (calculated from IPUMS 2000 5% sample Ruggles, S., M. Sobek, et al.
(2004). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0. [machine readable database] Minneapolis, MN:
Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor] ). Thus we do not report analysis by reported parental
education. Results for reported-parent-education subgroups are similar to those reported here (available upon
request).

Children Left Behind - 11
maximum of 306 observations for each grade and subject. Not all states administered
examinations in all years, and some states did not report assessment scores for all student
subgroups. Table A1 in the data appendix lists which states participated in the NAEP
assessments for each year of our sample.
Job loss data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Mass Layoff Statistics,
which report, for each state when available, the number of workers in a quarter who are affected
by mass closings or mass layoffs (defined as 50 or more workers) that last longer than thirty days
(BLS does not collect data on layoffs or closings affecting fewer than 50 workers). Data are
available from 1995 to 2009. For each year, the BLS reports two measures of workers affected
by job loss. The first is the total number of initial claimants (TIC), which reflects the total
number of workers who filed unemployment claims after a closing or layoff of 50 or more
workers. The second is the total number of separations, which is the number of workers who lost
jobs because of a mass closing or mass layoff. A mass closing or mass layoff is defined by BLS
as one in which 50 workers from the same firm have filed unemployment insurance claims in a
5-week period.3 Once BLS classifies that event as a mass closing or mass layoff, it then contacts
the firm to gather information about the total number of workers who lost jobs in that event
(separations). Separations is our preferred measure since it should capture all workers who
experience a mass closing or mass layoff instead of just those workers who then also filed
unemployment claims. However, the separations measure is likely to suffer from greater
measurement error than TIC because it involves the extra step of contacting companies for
further information on events that are identified through initial unemployment claims. As
discussed in the Methodology section, we combine these two measures in a two-stage least
squares approach in order to reduce measurement error.
Table 3 presents summary statistics for separations and TIC. For the purposes of our
analysis, we express both separations and TIC as a percentage of the working-age population
(defined as the number of state residents aged 25 – 64, measured for each state in the 2000
Census) over a one year time period. On average, 0.71 percent of the working-age population is
affected by separations and 0.66 percent file unemployment claims in a year. The variation in
3

If a firm has layoffs that occur in multiple sites or divisions within a state, those layoffs are treated as a single,
firm-level event if they occur for the same economic reason. If, however, layoffs at different sites occur for
different economic reasons, BLS treats those as distinct layoff events, in which case, the layoffs at each site would
have to meet the 50 worker threshold to qualify as a mass closing or mass layoff event, and thus to be included in
the data.

Children Left Behind - 12
these two measures is roughly the same. Figure 1 plots yearly separations and TIC. The
measures are highly correlated, with the percentage of workers reported by firms to be affected
by separations slightly higher than the percentage of workers who file for unemployment claims
in every year except 2008 and 2009.
As demonstrated in Figure 2, there is substantial variability in job losses across states and
years. Figure 2 presents the minimum and maximum percent of workers in each state affected
by job separations over the 15 years of our panel. There is significant variation in job losses
within states over time, as demonstrated by the difference between the minimum and maximum
percent affected in each state, as well as between states. The maximum percentage of workers
affected by job loss ranges from less than one half of one percent in Maryland in 2009 to nearly
3.5 percent affected in Alaska in 2009. While the highest observed job loss did occur during the
Great Recession (Alaska in 2009), many states experienced their largest losses in the 2002
recession (Colorado, Illinois), or even in years of relatively strong national economic growth,
such as 1996 (Maine).
We focus on job loss rather than the state unemployment rate because the unemployment
rate can be biased by changes in job-seeking behavior that are confounded with other changes in
a community. For example, bad news can discourage workers from looking for work and
actually decrease the unemployment rate while at the same time increasing community stress
and lowering test scores, which would positively bias the estimated relationship between
unemployment and test scores. By contrast, firm-level closings and layoffs can more plausibly be
viewed as exogenous “shocks” that are driven by the global economy and do not affect test
scores other than through their effects on job loss (we also test the exogeneity of these events).
Methodology
In order to explain the effects of job losses on test scores, we estimate the equation:
(1)
In this specification,

represents the mean scaled test score for students in state s at time t.

Separate equations are estimated for each of the four subject-grade combinations, as well as for
race and gender subgroup scores. In alternative models, we estimate the equation using scaled
percentile scores as dependent variables; these models measure whether the effect of job loss is
consistent throughout the test score distribution.

represents the percent of workers

in a state affected by mass layoffs for the year-long period up to and including the quarter the

Children Left Behind - 13
tests were administered (this measure is discussed further below). We also include state fixed
effects ( ) to account for the possibility that states that have higher job losses on average may
also have lower test scores on average, and year fixed effects ( ) to account for nation-wide
time-varying factors that may affect both job losses and test scores.4 Observations are weighted
by the number of test takers. We report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that are
clustered at the state level.
, we use a composite of two noisy measures, separations

To measure job loss,

and TIC. Use of either measure on its own is likely to lead to attenuation bias, while a composite
based on the correlation between the two can increase the reliability of our estimate of job
destruction (Angrist and Pischke 2009). The noise in our measure of TIC comes from the fact
that not all workers who lose jobs file for unemployment. The noise in our measure of
separations is due to the fact that, when contacted by the government, employers may not
accurately report the number of workers affected by a layoff. Each measure is composed partly
of a “true” signal of underlying job destruction, D, and partly of an error term:

Where corr(ε,u)<1
The correlation of the two measures, therefore, is:
Corr(

,

)=

+ υ,

Where υ <min(ε,u).
Specifically, we estimate a two-stage least squares specification where, in the first stage, we use
TIC to predict separations, and then report the coefficient on
predicting

. Note that

is simply

in an equation
,

.

Using the estimated correlation of the two measures as our measure of job loss provides a more
precise estimate of job destruction than does either measure on its own (Angrist and Pischke
2009). Using two-stage least squares rather than simply using the correlation as the right-hand
side variable in an OLS regression means that our standard errors are automatically adjusted to
take into account that
4

is a statistical artifact rather than a direct measurement.

The shallow panel of state‐year observations is not deep enough to support precise estimates when state‐specific
time trends are included; results do not vary significantly from those reported here, but are unstable. While the
inability to include trends may raise the concern that unobserved changes in states drive both job losses and
declining scores, our extensive falsification checks provide no support for this possibility.

Children Left Behind - 14

Results
Main estimates
Table 4 presents the results of estimating the impact of job losses on average test scores.
In this table each cell represents the coefficient and standard error on separations derived from
estimating equation (1) using two-stage least squares for a given subject-grade-subgroup
combination. For example, the first cell in the third column is the coefficient derived from
estimating the average impact of separations on all students in the sample who took an eighth
grade math assessment. The interpretation of this estimate is that job losses that affect one
percent of a state’s working-age population decrease that state’s average eighth-grade math score
by 0.076 student-level standard deviations, or by almost three points on average (the studentlevel standard deviation for the eighth grade math test is 36.4 points).
All 24 point estimates in Table 4 are negative, but only estimates for eighth grade math
are consistently statistically significant. Results in Table 4 suggest two main points. First, math
scores are more sensitive to job losses than are reading scores. In both the fourth-grade and
eighth-grade samples, the point estimates on math assessments are larger in magnitude than those
for reading, and this difference is statistically significant in the eighth grade. Second, eighth
grade scores are more sensitive to job losses than are fourth grade scores; point estimates are
consistently larger for eighth-grade math than for fourth-grade math. These results are consistent
with results from our analysis using county-level job loss and academic performance data from
North Carolina (Ananat, Gassman-Pines et al. 2011), which also finds effects of job losses on
eighth but not fourth grade test scores. Third, eighth grade math scores decline significantly
across all gender and race subgroups. Effects do not vary significantly by race or gender,
although point estimates for African-Americans are somewhat larger than for other groups.
Effect sizes average -.076 standard deviations and point estimates range from -.064 (for
Hispanics) to -.109 (for African Americans).
The lack of responsiveness of reading scores is consistent with the findings of many
school-based interventions (Decker, Mayer et al. 2004; Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist et al. 2009;
Hoxby and Murarka 2009; Angrist, Dynarski et al. 2010; Dobbie and Fryer in press). It may be
that math skills are more highly influenced by factors external to the family, including the school
and community contexts, than reading skills, which may be more highly influenced by the family
context. It may also be the case that math test scores are more sensitive to recent influences than

Children Left Behind - 15
are reading scores, since it may be easier to isolate and test recently-taught math concepts on an
exam than it is to isolate particular reading skills. Further research is needed to understand why
math scores may be more responsive than reading scores to changes in the immediate economic
circumstances of students’ communities.
The lack of responsiveness of fourth grade test scores is also consistent with the
developmental literature. Older children who are just entering adolescence are likely more
developmentally vulnerable than younger children in the period of middle childhood (Eccles,
Midgley et al. 1993). In addition, families are better able to shield younger children from the
effects of job losses; research has shown that as youth age, they become more aware of their
families’ economic pressures (Mistry, Benner et al. 2009). Finally, adolescence is a
developmental period marked by the increasing importance of peers (Eccles, Midgley et al.
1993). Because adolescents are more likely to interact with a peer whose parent has lost a job
than are younger children, any effects through peer interactions of community-wide job losses
will be stronger for adolescents.

Percentile test scores
We have also used two stage least squares to estimate equation (1) while replacing
average state scores with percentile scores as the dependent variable. The percentile results for
eighth graders are presented in Table 5.5 As in Table 4, each cell presents the coefficient and
standard error on separations from a separate regression for each of the various subgroups and
for both math and reading. These results follow the same pattern as the results when using
average test scores as an outcome. Math scores are typically more responsive to job losses than
are reading scores. Point estimates for black students’ test scores across the distribution are more
negative than are white or Hispanic students’. Notably, effects are quite uniform across the
distribution; it does not appear that the effects on average test scores are driven by a few students
“bombing” the test after job losses while other students’ scores are stable. Rather, effects on
students across the distribution appear to cluster around -.076 standard deviations, ranging from
a maximum of -.055 standard deviations for whites at the 90th percentile to a minimum of -.139
standard deviations for blacks at the 50th percentile.
5

The results for fourth-grade students, similar to those for the average test scores outcome measure, do not exhibit
statistical significance and are not presented here (available upon request).

Children Left Behind - 16

Robustness checks
Our main results – that math scores are more sensitive to job losses than reading scores,
and that eighth graders are more sensitive to job losses than fourth graders – are robust across
subgroups of students and are also robust to percentile outcome measures. In this section we
discuss seven other robustness checks (results are summarized in Table 6; estimates from all of
these checks are available upon request).
First, we estimated the model 51 times, excluding each state and the District of Columbia
individually. While the state fixed effects we include in our model will absorb any persistent
relationship between test scores and job loss in a particular state, these specifications test
whether severe events in a particular state (such as Hurricane Katrina in Louisiana) that can
cause above-average job losses and below-average test scores significantly affect our results. All
results are similar when dropping each state, meaning that no single state is driving our results.
Second, we performed a similar exercise excluding each year. While the year fixed
effects we include in our model will absorb the effects of any nationwide phenomenon that
affected both job loss and test scores in a given year, these specifications further test whether
severe events that may have affected both outcomes in only some parts of the country (such as
9/11 on the mid-Atlantic region) significantly affect our results. All results are similar when
dropping each year, meaning that no one-time sub-national event is driving our results.
Third, we ran unweighted regressions. While the analysis on which our main results are
based weighs each state-year observation by the number of test takers in that state and year (and,
where appropriate, subgroup), this analysis treats all state-year observations equally. Whereas
our main results can therefore be interpreted as reporting the effects in the typical state in which
a student lives (the results most important to a national policymaker), these results can be
interpreted as the effects on a state itself (a result important to state policymakers). Analysis
conducted using unweighted observations obtains results that are substantially similar to those
shown here.
Fourth, we conducted analysis using only subsets of states for which we were not missing
data on racial subgroups. Because of geographical variation in the size of the population of black
and Hispanic students, some states did not report subgroup scores for either or both black or
Hispanic students in some years. In order to test whether the differential estimated responses to
job losses experienced by black students compared to white or Hispanic students was driven by

Children Left Behind - 17
larger proportions of black students living in regions that are more sensitive to job loss, we
estimated models using only the subsample of state-years for which there were no missing
observations for blacks. The racial differences in point estimates of sensitivity to job losses are
robust to this specification change. We performed a similar exercise using observations on
Hispanic students and obtained similar results.
Fifth, we conducted analysis using only a balanced panel of states for which we are never
missing job losses or NAEP scores in years in which the tests are conducted. (Table A1 lists, for
each state, the years in which it reported test scores, job losses, and both.) We did so in order to
test whether the estimated responses to job losses are influenced by the inclusion of states that
only selectively report job losses or test scores (whose participation decisions in BLS data
collection and/or NAEP data collection are perhaps influenced by their economies or by their
expected scores). Because we have a shallow panel of only at most six observations for each
state-grade-test, this robustness check likely reduces measurement error as well (since state fixed
effects are unlikely to be well estimated for states that are observed fewer than six times,
meaning that such states will contribute significant noise to our estimates). In fact, while the
number of students we observe is reduced by 40% under the restriction that job losses are never
missing, the estimated effect of a 1% job loss on eighth-grade math scores increases by 50% to 0.114 standard deviations, and the t-statistic increases as well, to 3.7. Similarly, while the
number of students we observe is reduced by 29% under the restriction that NAEP scores are
never missing, the estimated effect of a 1% job loss on eighth-grade math scores increases by
26% to -.096 standard deviations, and the t-statistic is stable at 2.8. These results suggest that our
estimates are not only robust to but actually strengthened by restricting to a balanced panel.
Sixth, we examined the effects of job loss on test scores using only the subset of stateyears in which the state started the year with a high (above the median for the full panel of states)
unemployment rate. Given the mechanisms we propose through which we believe job losses
affect child academic achievement, we hypothesize that job losses should matter more in times
and places when the local economy is already under stress. We believe job losses will have
stronger effects on stress, on family and community functioning, and subsequently on test scores,
when a high pre-existing unemployment rate makes it more difficult for those who experience
job displacement to find a new job. That is in fact what we find: in areas with high current

Children Left Behind - 18
unemployment, the estimated effect of a 1% job loss on eighth-grade math scores increases by
28% to -.097 standard deviations, and precision increases as well.
Finally, we have run models including a variety of important time-varying covariates and
results do not change. These include characteristics of state populations, including percent of the
state population who are minors (under age 18), percent who are elderly (age 65 or older),
percent who are white, black, and Hispanic, education structure of the state (percent of adults 25
and older who are high school dropouts, high school graduates, have some college education,
and are college graduates), and percent who are poor. We have also estimated our models
controlling for characteristics of the student test-taker population, including percent of students
who are white, black, and Hispanic and percent of students who are eligible for free or reducedpriced lunch. Finally, we have controlled for underlying economic conditions in the state,
including: the average unemployment rate in the year preceding the test; unemployment
insurance claims per capita in the year preceding the test; state GDP; and the home foreclosure
rate in the state in the year preceding the test.
Falsification checks
We conducted falsification checks in which we estimated equation (1) using future job
losses, i.e. losses in the four quarters following the test, instead of lagged job losses. Significant
estimates from these regressions would cast doubt on our identifying assumption that job losses,
conditional on state and year fixed effects, can be viewed as exogenous shocks to states. Such
results would instead suggest that states that experience above-average job losses in a given year
already had declining test scores. However, the results of the falsification checks, which are
presented in Table 7, are generally small and statistically insignificant. Only two of the twenty
coefficients are marginally significant at the 10% level, and of these one is in the unexpected
(positive) direction. One of the twenty results presented is significant at the 5% level, and it, too,
is in the unexpected (positive) direction. These estimates lend support to the assumption that
changes in state test scores do not occur until after job losses occur, and hence the relationship
between job losses and test scores can be interpreted causally.
We also conducted falsification checks in which we estimated equation (1) using state
population counts for 13- and 14-year-olds as the outcome (measured in the American
Community Survey), in order to examine whether our results were being driven by migration

Children Left Behind - 19
patterns (see Table 8). Significant effects of job losses on migration patterns would affect the
interpretation of our results by raising the possibility that some of the effect of job loss on test
scores might stem from changes in the composition of students taking the tests. For example, if
students with higher test scores were more likely to move out of state in response to job losses,
lower test scores may be (at least partially) explained by migration and not changes in student
performance. However, outmigration in response to industry downsizing is believed to take an
entire generation to complete (Blanchard and Katz 1992), and so it is not surprising that we find
no relationship between job losses and the total number of 13- and 14-year-olds in a given state
the following year. We also find no evidence of changes in test-taker gender or race composition
after job losses.
Examining the state population as a whole, again using data from the American
Community Survey (ACS), we see no effect of job losses on the share of the population that is
elderly or on racial or educational composition of the state. Again, this is consistent with the
short time frame of our analysis combined with the fact that outmigration in response to
economic changes is a generational process. We do, however, see a marginally significant effect
of job losses on the share of the population that is poor, which is consistent with our expectation
that job losses increase economic distress. This finding also provides reassurance that our lack of
statistically significant effects for other population characteristics reflects an actual lack of
migration and not merely noise and imprecision in the ACS data.

Interpretation
Policymakers and researchers alike have so far paid little attention to the potential
effects of job losses on aggregate test scores, although they do frequently acknowledge the
struggles of children facing parental job loss. One likely explanation for this oversight is that
observers assume that the aggregate impacts of job loss are simply the difference in outcomes
between children whose parents do and do not lose jobs (e.g., those found by Kalil and DeLeire
2002; Hill, Morris et al. 2011; Rege, Telle et al. 2011) scaled by the share of workers who lose
jobs. Since these studies find that students who face parental job loss experience outcome
declines of .06 to .17 standard deviations relative to students who do not face parental job loss,
observers who extrapolate from these studies to predict population-level effects of a 1% job loss
would estimate effect sizes of .0006 to .0017 standard deviations. Even taking into consideration

Children Left Behind - 20
that, according to analysis of the ACS, 1.5% of eighth-graders experience job loss within the
household when there is a job loss to 1% of the working-age population, estimates would still be
.0009 to .00255 standard deviations. Based on such calculations, a policymaker would
erroneously conclude that aggregate effects of job losses on test scores are negligible.
Our estimate of .076 standard deviations is more than an order of magnitude larger. We
believe that this difference is due to the fact that our methodology captures negative effects of
job loss on workers and families who maintain employment but are affected by their friends’ and
neighbors’ job loss and the resulting changes to their communities and classrooms. If we assume
that these other children are affected by statewide job loss, albeit less severely than those who
experience parental unemployment, it becomes straightforward to reconcile our study with the
findings of earlier studies that contrast the two groups of children, as illustrated in Table 9.
For example, suppose that the 98.5% of children whose parents do not lose employment,
but who are indirectly affected either at home or at school, experience test score declines that are
one-third the magnitude of the decline experienced by the 1.5% of students who experience
household job loss, a scenario displayed in row 5 of Table 9. In that case, a .222 standard
deviation decrease in math scores among students who parents lose jobs would imply a .074
standard deviation decrease among other students, and the combination of these effects would
produce a .076 standard deviation decrease in the state. The combination would also produce a
.15 standard deviation decrease in the test scores of children experiencing parental job loss
relative to other children, exactly the estimate that Kalil and DeLeire (2002) report for this
difference. Note that extrapolating from the Kalil and DeLeire estimate by assuming that
children whose parents do not lose employment experience zero declines, however, would miss
97% of the total impact in this scenario, since impacts one-third the size occur to a group nearly
100 times larger.
Comparing our estimates to those in two other studies that use the same approach as
Kalil and DeLeire (2002), by Hill et al.(2011)6 and Rege et al. (2011), suggests effects on
children who do not experience parental job loss that are 30-56% the size of the effects on those
who do experience parental job loss (see rows 4 and 8 of Table 9). These magnitudes, while
striking, are consistent with the effects of downturns on adults who maintain employment

6

We use the OLS estimates from Hill et al., as their OLS empirical strategy is most comparable to the strategy that
we and the other papers we discuss employ.

Children Left Behind - 21
relative to those who lose employment; for example, Dooley, Catalano et al. (1988) find that a
one-standard-deviation increase in the local unemployment rate increases an individual’s
psychological distress by one-fourth as much as does personal job loss.
It is not necessary to find large spillovers plausible in order to be struck by the share of
aggregate effects missed when focusing only on children who experience parental job loss,
however. As can be seen in row 2 of Table 9, even if the indirect impact is only one-tenth the
size of the direct impact of job loss, analysis focusing solely on children who experience parental
job loss would miss 88% of the aggregate impact of job destruction. Readers who are skeptical
of the mere existence of any effects on children who do not experience household job loss should
note that zero effect of job losses on the test scores of children who are not directly impacted is
implausible, as that would require a 5-standard-deviation decline in the average test scores of
children who experience parental job loss (row 1 of Table 9).
Mechanisms
Given the evidence for sizeable aggregate declines in test scores, of a magnitude
plausible only if driven both by directly and indirectly affected children, it is worth exploring
through what mechanisms job losses may drive declines, a task to which we turn next. We
consider four possibilities: changes in income; changes in school resources; changes in behavior;
and changes in mental health.
Family income. Family income appears to have causal effects on children’s academic
achievement. Dahl and Lochner (2012) find that an increase in family income of 20 percent
increases test scores by .06 standard deviations. This magnitude, however, suggests that average
family income would need to fall by more than a quarter in order to cause a .076 standard
deviation decline in test scores. A job loss to 1% of a state’s working-age population leads,
according to an analysis of the ACS, to a decline in the mean income of households containing a
13- or 14-year-old of only about 2% (declines greater than 4% can be ruled out with 95%
confidence). Thus, while income losses are almost certainly a partial cause of the decline in test
scores, additional mechanisms must be at work.
School resources. Another possible reason for declining test scores after job losses is
that, in the face of downturns, school budgets are reduced. We examine this possibility in Table
10, which presents data from the National Center for Education Statistics’ National Public

Children Left Behind - 22
Education Financial Survey. A job loss to 1% of a state’s working-age population has small
negative but insignificant effects on state and local educational revenues per pupil. It has a
significant, but positive, effect on transfers from the federal government, consistent with the fact
that federal education support to the states is partially compensatory. However, the effect on
federal payments is quite small ($75 per pupil); the fact that it is significant while the effect on
state revenues is not, despite being larger at -$147, likely reflects the fact that federal payments
are measured with less error.
Likewise, the effects of job losses on instructional expenditures, support expenditures,
and total educational expenditures per pupil are negative but insignificant and small. The point
estimate for the change in per pupil education expenditures, -$190, represents less than 1.5% of
per pupil spending. There is little evidence that changes in school spending of this magnitude
have measureable effects on student achievement (Hanushek 2003), and it is highly unlikely that
they can account for the large and significant effects on test scores that we find.
Behavior. In his classic book When Work Disappears (1996), William Julius Wilson
argues that local job losses lead from idleness among adults to increased antisocial role-modeling
behavior, such as drug abuse and violence, and from there to youth antisocial behavior,
disengagement from and failure in school. We examine the possibility of such a “downward
spiral of behavior” using data on teen behaviors taken from the Youth Risk Behavior Survey
(YRBS). The YRBS is fielded biannually in February through April of odd years by the Centers
for Disease Control (CDC), and is the definitive source of widely-reported statistics such as the
share of teens who are sexually active or who have experimented with illegal drugs.
Table 11 presents results from regressions estimating the effect of a job loss to 1% of
the working-age population on youth behaviors. Students are significantly less likely to report
having consumed alcohol and insignificantly less likely to have used marijuana after job losses.
They report significantly fewer recent (over the last 3 months) sex partners and are significantly
more likely to have used contraception the last time they had sex. There is no change in the
probability of having carried a weapon to school in the past year, or in having engaged in a
physical fight. These results are not consistent with a “downward spiral of behavior”; rather, like
adults (Ruhm 2000), youth appear to have better behaviors during downturns. We find no
evidence that antisocial behavior trends can account for the decline in test scores.

Children Left Behind - 23
Mental health problems. The last column of Table 11 shows the effects of job losses on
the probability that a youth has made plans to commit suicide over the past year, a behavior also
tracked in the YRBS. There is a significant rise in this activity of about 8 percent, from a base of
1 in 10 teens. This suggests emotional distress among youth during downturns on par with
increases in adult distress. Moreover, it suggests that, as among adults (Fenwick and Tausig
1994), distress is widespread rather than concentrated among those who experience household
job loss; in order for directly impacted youth to drive these findings entirely, half of them would
have to have made plans for suicide in the past year, an implausible magnitude. Because mental
health problems can inhibit learning (Fergusson and Woodward 2002), and because a near
doubling in a right-tail outcome such as suicide planning is suggestive of other changes across
the distribution of mental health problems, we believe this mechanism may account for a
considerable part of the decline in test scores we observe.

Conclusion
This paper finds that students experience sizeable declines in eighth-grade math test
scores in the wake of economic downturns. We argue that students who do not experience
parental job loss, as well as those who do, are hurt by downturns. The failure in previous
research to capture effects on the former group of students means that inferences drawn from that
research have understated aggregate effects of downturns by an order of magnitude. When
correctly measured, aggregate effects are comparable to effects of policy interventions, such as
Tennessee STAR (Word 1990), that have generated enormous policy interest. States with large
job losses (we observe maximum losses of 3.4%) are predicted to experience average test score
declines of over 25% of a standard deviation, or nearly 10 points. The magnitude of these effects
suggests that costs to students from downturns are a relevant consideration, along with other
costs of recessions, for policymakers considering economic stimulus and other policies to
mitigate effects of the business cycle.
In addition, in this era of greatly increased focus on school accountability for student
performance, education policy makers and leaders should be cognizant of the external factors
that can negatively influence student achievement. Given the accountability standards enacted in
NCLB legislation, even small changes in average test scores could have large implications, if
they change schools’ proficiency levels. In the 2009-10 school year, 38% of schools failed to

Children Left Behind - 24
make Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) as mandated under NCLB (Center on Education Policy
2011). Under conservative assumptions, we estimate that a state that experienced a downturn
leading to job losses to 1% of its workers (a magnitude that we observe in most states during our
panel) would have had only 35% of its schools fail to achieve AYP in the absence of a downturn,
an 8% decline.7
Statewide job losses, which result from factors external to schools such as pressure from
globalization and macroeconomic conditions, can significantly influence student achievement
and are well beyond the control of teachers and school administrators. The significant effect
these losses can have on schools’ abilities to meet accountability goals suggests that
policymakers may want to consider recent economic change when defining whether a school is
meeting accountability targets.

7

This calculation assumes: that school-level test score standard deviations are closer to student than to state standard
deviations (30 points, compared to 36 for students and 9 for states, a conservative assumption); and that school
averages are normally distributed.

Children Left Behind - 25
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. D. Angrist, et al. (2009). "Accountability and Flexibility in Public
Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and Pilots." NBER Working Paper, No.
15549.
Ananat, E. O., A. Gassman-Pines, et al. (2011). The effects of local employment losses on
children's educational achievement. Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the
Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income Children. G. J. Duncan and R. Murnane. New
York, Russell Sage Foundation: 299-313.
Angrist, J. D., S. M. Dynarski, et al. (2010). "Who Benefits from KIPP?" NBER Working Paper,
No. 15740.
Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton, NJ, Princeton
University Press.
Black, D. A., T. G. McKinnish, et al. (2003). "Does the availability of high-wage jobs for lowskilled men affect welfare expenditures? Evidence from shocks to the steel and coal
industries." Journal of Public Economics 87: 1921-1942.
Black, D. A., T. G. McKinnish, et al. (2005). "The Economic Impact of the Coal Boom and
Bust." The Economic Journal 115: 449-476.
Black, D. A., T. G. McKinnish, et al. (2005). "Tight Labor Markets and the Demand for
Education: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust." Industrial & Labor Relations
Review 59: 3-15.
Blanchard, O. J. and L. F. Katz (1992). "Regional Evolutions." Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1992(1): 1-75.
Blanchflower, D. G. and A. J. Oswald (1994). The Wage Curve. Boston, MA, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Center on Education Policy (2011). How many schools have not made Adequate Yearly
Progress? Washington, DC, Center on Education Policy.
Clark, A., A. Knabe, et al. (2010). "Boon or bane? Others' unemployment, well-being and job
insecurity." Labour Economics 17(1): 52-61.
Coelli, M. B. (2010). "Parental job loss and the education enrollment of youth." Labour
Economics 18(1): 25-35.
Conger, R. D. and G. H. Elder, Jr. (1994). Families in troubled times: Adapting to change in
rural America. New York, Walter de Gruyter.
Dahl, G. B. and L. Lochner (2012). "The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit." American Economic Review 102: 19271956.
Decker, P., D. Mayer, et al. (2004). "The Effects of Teach for America on Students: Findings
from a National Evaluation." Mathematica Policy Research Report, No. 8792-750.
Dobbie, W. and R. Fryer (in press). "Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement
among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics.
Dooley, D. and R. Catalano (1984). "The epidemiology of economic stress." American Journal
of Community Psychology 12(4): 387-409.
Dooley, D., R. Catalano, et al. (1988). "Personal and aggregate unemployment and psychological
symptoms." Journal of Social Issues 44(4): 107-123.

Children Left Behind - 26
Downey, G. and J. C. Coyne (1990). "Children of depressed parents: An integrative review."
Psychological Bulletin 108: 50-76.
Eccles, J. S., C. Midgley, et al. (1993). "Development during adolescence." American
Psychologist 48: 90-101.
Edwards, R. (2008). American time use over the business cycle. New York, NY, Queens College
and the Graduate Center, City University of New York.
Elder, G. H., Jr., J. S. Eccles, et al. (1995). "Inner-City Parents Under Economic Pressure:
Perspectives on the Strategies of Parenting." Journal of Marriage and Family 57(3): 771784.
Fenwick, R. and M. Tausig (1994). "The Macroeconomic Context of Job Stress." Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 35(3): 266-282.
Fergusson, D. M. and L. J. Woodward (2002). "Mental health, educational, and social role
outcomes of adolescents with depression." Archives of General Psychiatry 59: 225-231.
Figlio, D. N. (2007). "Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their Peers." Education
Finance and Policy 2(4): 376-394.
Hamre, B. K. and R. C. Pianta (2001). "Early teacher-child relationships and the trajectory of
children's school outcomes through eighth grade." Child Development 72: 625-638.
Hanushek, E. A. (2003). "The failure of input-based schooling policies." The Economic Journal
113: F64-F98.
Hill, H. D., P. A. Morris, et al. (2011). "Getting a job is only half the battle: Maternal job loss
and child classroom behavior in low-income families." Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 30(2): 310-333.
Hoxby, C. M. and S. Murarka (2009). "Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls and
How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement." NBER Working Paper, No. 14852.
Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, et al. (1993). "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers." The
American Economic Review 83(4): 685-709.
Jones, L. P. (1988). "The effect of unemployment on children and adolescents." Children and
Youth Services Review 10(3): 199-215.
Kalil, A. and T. DeLeire (2002). "Parental job loss and early adolescent development in Black
and White families." JCPR Working Paper 282.
Kalil, A. and P. Wightman (2010). "Parental job loss and family conflict." National Center for
Family and Marriage Research, Bowling Green State University, Working paper No.
WP-10-07.
Kalil, A. and K. Ziol-Guest (2011). The Great Recession and married parents’ use of time.
Society for Research in Child Development Biennial Meeting. Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
Levine, P. B. (2011). How Does Parental Unemployment Affect Children’s Educational
Performance? Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of
Low-Income Children. G. J. Duncan and R. Murnane. New York, Russell Sage
Foundation.
Luechinger, S., S. Meier, et al. (2010). "Why does unemployment hurt the employed?: Evidence
from the life satisfaction gap between the public and the private sector." Journal of
Human Resources 45(4): 998-1045.
McKee-Ryan, F., Z. Song, et al. (2005). "Psychological and Physical Well-Being During
Unemployment: A Meta-Analytic Study." Journal of Applied Psychology 90(1): 53-76.

Children Left Behind - 27
McLoyd, V. C. (1998). "Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development." American
Psychologist 53: 185-204.
McLoyd, V. C., T. E. Jayaratne, et al. (1994). "Unemployment and work interruption among
African American single mothers: Effects on parenting and adolescent socio-emotional
functioning." Child Development 65: 562-589.
Mistry, R. S., A. D. Benner, et al. (2009). "Family economic stress and academic well-being
among Chinese-American youth: The influence of adolescents' perceptions of economic
strain." Journal of Family Psychology 23(3): 279-290.
Morris, P. A. and L. A. Gennetian (2003). "Identifying the effects of income on children's
development using experimental data." Journal of Marriage and Family 65: 716-729.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2010). "NAEP: Measuring Student Progress Since
1964." from http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/about/naephistory.asp.
Ochsen, C. (2008). "Subjective well-being and the duration of aggregate unemployment in
Europe." Thnen-Series of Applied Economic Theory, Working Paper #97.
Ochsen, C. and H. Welsch (2006). "The social costs of unemployment: Accounting for
employment duration." Thunen-Series of Applied Economic Theory, Working Paper #60.
Oreopoulos, P., M. E. Page, et al. (2008). "The intergenerational effects of worker
displacement." Journal of Labor Economics 24: 729-760.
Oreopoulos, P., T. von Wachter, et al. (2012). "The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of
Graduating in a Recession: Hysteresis and Heterogeneity in the Market for College
Graduates " American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4: 1-29.
Pianta, R. C., J. Belsky, et al. (2008). "Classroom effects on children's achievement trajectories
in elementary school." American Educational Research Journal 45: 365-397.
Rege, M., K. Telle, et al. (2011). "Parental Job Loss and Children's School Performance." The
Review of Economic Studies.
Ruggles, S., M. Sobek, et al. (2004). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0.
[machine readable database] Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer
and distributor]
Ruhm, C. J. (2000). "Are Recessions Good for Your Health?" Quarterly Journal of Economics
115(2): 617-650.
Stevens, A. H. (1997). "Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job
Losses." Journal of Labor Economics 15(1): 165-188.
Stevens, A. H. and J. Schaller (2011). "Short-run effects of parental job loss on children's
academic achievement." Economics of Education Review 30(2): 289-299.
Sullivan, D. and T. von Wachter (2009). "Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
Administrative Data." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1265-1306.
Wiley, C. (2000). "A Synthesis of Research on the Causes, Effects, and Reduction Strategies of
Teacher Stress." Journal of Instructional Psychology 27: 80-87.
Wilson, W. J. (1996). When work disappears: The world of the new urban poor. New York,
Alfred A. Knopf.
Word, E. (1990). The State of Tennessee’s Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR) Project.
Final Summary Report 1985 – 1990. Nashville, TN, Tennesee State Department of
Education.

Children Left Behind - 28

Children Left Behind - 29
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics ‐ Student Demographics by Year and Subject
Year
Subject
% Male
Race/Ethnicity
% Black
% Hispanic
% White

% Male
Race/Ethnicity
% Black
% Hispanic
% White

1996
Math
51

1998
2000
2002
Reading
Math
Reading
A. fourth Grade
49
50
51
18
9
65

2003
Both

2005
Both

2007
Both

2009
Both

51

51

51

51

16
7
71

17
7
67

19
10
64

17
12
64

16
15
61

15
16
61

15
16
61

50

B. eighth Grade
49
50
50

51

51

50

51

15
7
72

16
8
67

15
10
68

15
13
64

15
14
63

15
14
63

16
7
69

17
9
67

Source: National Center for Education Statistics ‐ http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/

Children Left Behind - 30
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics ‐ Test Scores by Grade Level, Subject and Subgroup
A. fourth Grade
Math
Mean
All Students
234

1

2

St.Dev.
9.4

Indiv. Std. Dev.
29.1
28.3
29.8

Reading
3

Mean St.Dev.
218
7.7

Indiv. Std. Dev.
36.4

Gender
Female
Male
Race/Ethnicity
Black
Hispanic
White

233
235

9.2
9.7

214
223
241

10.7
9.3
8.1

All Students

277

9.6

Female
Male
Race/Ethnicity
Black
Hispanic
White

276
278

9.4
9.8

252
261
286

9.9
8.6
7.5

221
214

7.5
8.1

35.7
36.8

198
202
227

8.0
8.1
5.1

34.4
36.3
32.7

262

6.8

34.8

35.3
37.5

267
257

6.7
7.0

33.7
35.2

33.3
34.2
32.7

243
246
270

5.2
5.8
4.3

33.1
35.1
31.5

26.8
27.6
25.9
B. eighth Grade
36.4

Gender

1. Mean is computed by taking the average across states and years of the reported state‐level averages of
individual student scores. The mean is weighted at the state level by the number of students in each state.
2. St. Dev. Is computed by taking the standard deviation across states and years of the reported state‐level
averages of individual student scores, and weighted at the state level by the number of student in each state.
3. Indiv. Std. Dev. Is computed by taking an average across years of the national student‐level standard
deviations reported by NAEP for a given assessment and year
Source: National Center for Education Statistics ‐ http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics ‐ Job Losses as a Percent of Working Age
Population
Separations

1

Total Initial Claimants

2

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

506

0.71

0.47

0

3.39

506

0.66

0.47

0

3.66

1. Separations is calculated by dividing the total yearly number of separations in a
state by the working age population (ages 25‐64) in that state.
2. Total Initial Claimants is calculated by dividing the total yearly number of
claimants in a state by the working age population (ages 25‐64) in that state.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics ‐ http://www.bls.gov/mls/

Table 4. Estimation Results ‐ Impact of Job Losses on Student
Test Scores
Fourth Grade

Eighth Grade

Children Left Behind - 31
Math
All Students

Reading

Math

Reading

‐0.032

‐0.013

‐0.076***

‐0.009

(0.035)

(0.020)

(0.027)

(0.022)

Student Subgroups
Gender
Female

Male

‐0.033

‐0.003

‐0.077***

‐0.007

(0.029)

(0.018)

(0.029)

(0.019)

‐0.023

‐0.022

‐0.072***

‐0.022

(0.038)

(0.024)

(0.027)

(0.025)

‐0.010

‐0.015

‐0.109**

‐0.042

(0.042)

(0.035)

(0.049)

(0.041)

‐0.014

‐0.011

‐0.064***

‐0.028

(0.051)

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.017)

‐0.049

‐0.029

‐0.066*

‐0.002

(0.037)

(0.022)

(0.036)

(0.026)

Race/Ethnicity
Black

Hispanic

White

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Each cell represents the coefficient and standard error on Separations
derived from estimating equation (2) for a given subject‐grade‐subgroup
combination. The specification equation (2) includes both state and year
fixed effects.

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics; National Center for Education Statistics

Children Left Behind - 32

Table 5. Estimation Results ‐ Impact of Job Losses on Percentile Test Score Outcomes (8th Grade)
Math
Percentile
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
All Students ‐0.078** ‐0.081** ‐0.077*** ‐0.071*** ‐0.064***
(0.039) (0.033) (0.026) (0.024) (0.023)
Student Subgroups
Gender
Female ‐0.087** ‐0.087*** ‐0.076*** ‐0.069** ‐0.071***
(0.036) (0.033) (0.028) (0.027) (0.026)
Male

10th
‐0.048
(0.034)

25th
‐0.023
(0.029)

Reading
50th
‐0.008
(0.021)

‐0.034
(0.033)

‐0.013
(0.025)

0.003
(0.017)

0.009
(0.017)

0.020
(0.019)

75th
0.001
(0.015)

90th
0.009
(0.015)

‐0.069
(0.043)

‐0.075** ‐0.077*** ‐0.077*** ‐0.055***
(0.033) (0.027) (0.023) (0.021)

‐0.061
(0.042)

‐0.028
(0.035)

‐0.017
(0.026)

‐0.009
(0.020)

‐0.004
(0.017)

‐0.101
(0.066)

‐0.122** ‐0.139*** ‐0.118*** ‐0.089*
(0.051) (0.043) (0.043) (0.046)

0.005
(0.054)

‐0.030
(0.039)

‐0.042
(0.038)

‐0.051
(0.044)

‐0.055
(0.042)

Hispanic

‐0.058
(0.041)

‐0.065** ‐0.059*** ‐0.077*** ‐0.056*
(0.027) (0.022) (0.024) (0.029)

‐0.076*** ‐0.033
(0.028) (0.026)

‐0.005
(0.028)

‐0.006
(0.021)

0.022
(0.025)

White

‐0.059
(0.051)

0.001
(0.023)

0.006
(0.019)

0.018
(0.016)

Race/Ethnicity
Black

‐0.065
(0.043)

‐0.068** ‐0.062**
(0.034) (0.031)

‐0.055*
(0.029)

‐0.026
(0.051)

‐0.008
(0.035)

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Each cell represents the coefficient and standard error on Separations derived from estimating equation (2) for a given subject‐grade‐
subgroup combination. The specification in equation (2) includes state and year fixed effects.

Children Left Behind - 33

Table 6. Robustness checks: Effect of job losses on eighth grade math scores when:
Restricting sample to:
Controlling for:
state
state‐years with
demographics
test‐taker
above median
(age, race, and demographics
state
balanced panel unemployment
education
(race and free unemployment state UI claims
of states
rate
structure)
lunch status)
rate
per capita
state GDP
‐0.123***
‐0.097**
‐0.075***
‐0.075***
‐0.061***
‐0.063***
‐0.073***
(0.031)
(0.029)
(0.027)
(0.026)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.027)

foreclosures
‐0.060***
(0.022)

unweighted
‐0.076**
(0.030)

Children Left Behind - 34

Table 7. Falsification Results ‐ Impact of Future Job Losses
on Student Test Scores
4th Grade
Math Reading
All Students ‐0.003
0.02
‐(0.026) ‐(0.017)

8th Grade
Math
‐0.016
‐(0.024)

Reading
0.001
‐(0.013)

Female ‐0.013 0.018
‐(0.025) ‐(0.014)

‐0.007
‐(0.021)

0.018
‐(0.016)

Male 0.006 0.024
‐(0.027) ‐(0.028)
Race/Ethnicity
Black 0.045* 0.049*
‐(0.019) ‐(0.022)

‐0.032
‐(0.024)

‐0.007
‐(0.012)

0.01
‐(0.022)

‐0.001
‐(0.030)

Hispanic ‐0.117 ‐0.037
(0.000) ‐(0.023)

‐0.094**
‐(0.028)

‐0.014
‐(0.035)

White ‐0.023 0.011
‐(0.024) ‐(0.013)

‐0.014
‐(0.027)

0.002
‐(0.014)

Student Subgroups
Gender

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Each cell represents the coefficient and standard error on
Separations derived from estimating the specification for a given
subject‐grade‐subgroup combination. The specification includes
state and year fixed effects.

Children Left Behind - 35

Table 8. Falsification results: Effects of 1% job loss on:
State
Percent of state population that is:
Percent of testtakers who are:
population of
13‐ and 14‐year‐
Per‐pupil
high school high school has some college
elderly black white Hispanic dropouts graduates college graduates poor
olds
male white black Hispanic expenditures
0.048
‐0.032
0.028
‐0.043
0.897+
0.256 ‐0.021 ‐0.411 ‐0.000
‐81.926
0.079
‐0.08 0.111
‐0.204
(0.062) (0.095) (0.251) (0.156)
(0.158)
(0.137)
(0.099)
(0.115) (0.492)
(0.318) (1.243) (0.436) (0.947)
(353.798)

Children Left Behind - 36

Table 9. Calibration: Combinations of direct and indirect effects consistent with a population average effect
of .076 SD from a 1% job loss
A

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

Spillover
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.33
0.40
0.50
0.56
0.80
1.00

B

C

D

E

F
Estimated
population
effect (SD)
when
Indirect effect
extrapolating to
Difference
on 98.5% of
Direct effect
aggregate effect
(SD) on 1.5% population who between those
from column D
who do and do
do not
of population
not experience Papers finding the (i.e. when
who experience experience
assuming
parental job difference listed
parental job
parental job
spillover = 0)
in column D
loss
loss
loss
5.067
0.000
5.067
0.076
0.670
0.067
0.603
0.009
0.358
0.072
0.287
0.004
0.245
0.073
0.171
Hill et al.
0.003
0.222
0.074
0.148
Kalil and DeLeire
0.002
0.186
0.074
0.111
0.002
0.150
0.075
0.075
0.001
0.135
0.075
0.060
Rege et al.
0.001
0.095
0.076
0.019
0.000
0.076
0.076
0.000
0.000

G
Share of true
effect missed
when
extrapolating to
aggregate effect
from column D
(i.e. when
assuming
spillover = 0)
0.0%
88.1%
94.3%
96.6%
97.1%
97.8%
98.5%
98.8%
99.6%
100.0%

"Spillover" refers to effects on children whose parents do not experience job loss as a percentage of the true direct
effect on children whose parents experience job loss.

Children Left Behind - 37

Table 10. Estimated Results ‐ Impact of Job Losses on Per Pupil School Finance
State
Local
Federal
Instructional Support
Total Ed
Revenues
Revenues
Revenues Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure
‐147.798
25.181
75.315**
‐124.612
‐24.218
‐190.217
(165.129)
(92.002)
(30.035)
(123.329)
(59.629)
(213.867)
Mean
6,739.691*** 5,404.253*** 883.414*** 7,272.405*** 4,136.522*** 13,110.528***
(277.550)
(186.979)
(63.403)
(215.322)
(114.867)
(363.359)
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

All Students

Ever used
alcohol

Ever used
marijuana

Ever had sex

‐0.0236***
(0.0081)

‐0.0149
(0.0094)

0.0024
(0.0118)

Table 11. Youth behaviors
Used
Carried a
Number of
contraception
weapon to
recent sex
last time had school in the
partners
sex
last year
‐0.0514**
(0.0245)

0.1249***
(0.0124)

‐0.0049
(0.0035)

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Each cell represents the coefficient and standard error on Separations . The specification includes state and year fixed effects.

Felt unsafe at
Physical fight school in the
in the last year
last year
0.0037
(0.0074)

0.0059
(0.0046)

Suicidal
thoughts in
the last year

Suicidal plans
in the last year

0.0046
(0.0055)

0.0083*
(0.0048)

Children Left Behind - 38

.4

% of Working Age Population Affected
.6
.8
1
1.2

Percent of Working Age Population Affected by Layoffs

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003
Year

Separations

2005

2007

2009

TIC

Figure 1. National Percent of Working Age Population Affected by Layoffs as Represented by Separations and Total Initial Unemployment Claims

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics - http://www.bls.gov/mls/

Children Left Behind - 39

Figure 2. Minimum and Maximum Percent of Working Age Population Affected by Job Loss, 1995‐2009

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics - http://www.bls.gov/mls/

Children Left Behind - 40

Table A1. States Reporting both Test Score and Job Loss Data
Year
Test Subject
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana

1996
Math
T, J
T, J
T
T, J
T, J
T, J
T, J
T
T
T, J
T,J
T
J
J
T,J
T
J
T
T,J

1998
Reading
T

2000
Math
T,J

T
T
T,J
T
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
J
J
J
J
T
T,J
T,J

T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
J
T,J
T,J
T,J

2002
Reading
T,J
J
T,J
T,J
T,J
J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
J
T,J
J
T,J
T,J
T,J

2003
Both
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J

2005
Both
T
T
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
T
T
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J

2007
Both
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J

2009
Both
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J

Children Left Behind - 41

Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah

T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
J
J
T
T,J
T,J
T
J

T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J

T
J
T
T,J

J
T,J
T,J
T,J
J
J
T,J
T
J
T
T,J

T,J
T,J
T

T,J
T,J
T

T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T
T,J
J
T
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
J
T
T,J
J
T,J
T,J
T,J

T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T
T,J
J
J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J

T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T

T
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T
T
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T

T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T
T
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J

T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
T,J
T,J
T

Children Left Behind - 42

Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
# of States Reporting Both

T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
28

J
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
25

T
T,J
J
T
J
T
28

T
T,J
T,J
T
J
T
36

T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
38

T
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
30

T
T,J
T,J
T,J
T,J
T
37

T – NAEP test score data are available for a given state‐year
J – BLS mass closing or mass layoff data are available for a given state‐year
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics ‐ http://www.bls.gov/mls/
National Center for Education Statistics ‐ http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/

T
T,J
T,J
T
T,J
T
41

