                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            AMERICANS' FINANCIAL CAPABILITY

                                          Annamaria Lusardi

                                         Working Paper 17103
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17103


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




This paper draws heavily from the work I did on preliminary releases of the Financial Capability Study
together with Chris Bumcrot, John Gannon, Michelle Greene, Christine Kieffer, and Judy Lin. Geraldine
Walsh edited the manuscript several times and I have very much benefitted from her suggestions and
comments. I would like to thank Dubis Correal from the U.S. Treasury and participants to the International
Conference on Financial Education in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, December 2009, and the ASPE-NIA
seminar on the Impact of Economic Crisis on Behaviors, Expectations and Well-Being Among Middle-Aged
and Older Americans, Washington, DC, January 2010 for many helpful comments. Ben Rump provided
excellent research assistance. The first version of this paper was prepared as a report for the Financial
Crisis Inquiry Commission. All mistakes are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Annamaria Lusardi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Americans' Financial Capability
Annamaria Lusardi
NBER Working Paper No. 17103
June 2011
JEL No. D14

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines Americans’ financial capability, using data from a new survey. Financial capability
is measured in terms of how well people make ends meet, plan ahead, choose and manage financial
products, and possess the skills and knowledge to make financial decisions. The findings reported
in this work paint a troubling picture of the state of financial capability in the United States. The majority
of Americans do not plan for predictable events such as retirement or children’s college education.
Most importantly, people do not make provisions for unexpected events and emergencies, leaving
themselves and the economy exposed to shocks. To understand financial capability, it is important
to look not only at assets but also at debt and debt management, as an increasingly large portion of
the population carry debt. In managing debt, Americans engage in behaviors that can generate large
expenses, such as sizable interest payments and fees. Moreover, more than one in five Americans has
used alternative (and often costly) borrowing methods (payday loans, advances on tax refunds, pawn
shops, etc.) in the past five years. The most worrisome finding is that many people do not seem well
informed and knowledgeable about their terms of borrowing; a sizeable group does not know the terms
of their mortgages or the interest rates they pay on their loans. Finally, the majority of Americans lack
basic numeracy and knowledge of fundamental economic principles such as the workings of inflation,
risk diversification, and the relationship between asset prices and interest rates.


Annamaria Lusardi
George Washington School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
1. Introduction

“While the crisis has many causes, it is undeniable that financial illiteracy is one of the root
causes... Sadly, far too many Americans do not have the basic financial skills necessary to
develop and maintain a budget, to understand credit, to understand investment vehicles, or to
take advantage of our banking system.”
                               —U.S. President’s Advisory Council on Financial Literacy (2008)


Individuals are increasingly in charge of their financial well-being during their working lives and
after retirement. With the rapid change in the pension landscape and the shift from Defined
Benefit to Defined Contribution pensions, how much wealth people will have at retirement
depends on how adequately they have contributed to retirement accounts and the investment
allocation of those retirement assets. Younger generations, in particular, will have to rely mostly
on self-directed accounts for their retirement. The cost of higher education has also been
increasing steadily over time and can take up a large part of family finances, making it another
important life event to plan for. And individuals have to make financial decisions while facing
much more complex financial markets than in the past. The costs of not having the necessary
skills to make financial decisions have become significant, as the financial crisis has shown.
Managing day-to-day finances has become not only more difficult but getting it wrong poses
greater risks today than in the past.

Much of the extant research work on financial literacy is based on sub-samples of the U.S.
population. For example, the work of Lusardi and Mitchell (2006, 2007, 2009) and Lusardi,
Mitchell and Curto (2010) covers samples representing older respondents (the Early Baby
Boomers and those older than 50) and young adults (23–28 years old). Other work is
representative of the entire population, but analysis is restricted to only a handful of survey
questions measuring financial knowledge (Stango and Zinman, 2009; Lusardi and Tufano,
2009a,b). The surveys that provide more detailed information about financial literacy, such as
those of the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy or the National Council on
Economic Education (NCEE) provide little information about financial behavior. And while
financial literacy is an important tool for making financial decisions, it can provide only limited
descriptions of how capable individuals are and of the ways individuals make financial decisions.

This paper aims to shed light on the causes of the financial crisis by looking at the following
question: How financially capable are Americans? If people are ill-equipped to make financial
decisions, there can be consequences for the individuals themselves and for the economy as a
whole. A new survey fielded in the summer of 2009 provides timely insights on this important
topic. Financial capability is measured in terms of how well people make ends meet, plan ahead,
choose and manage financial products, and possess the skills and knowledge to make financial
decisions. This paper provides a descriptive analysis of financial capability. For theoretical and
empirical work on these data, see Lusardi (2010), Lusardi and Mitchell (2011), and Lusardi,
Michaud, and Mitchell (2011).
The findings from this survey paint a troubling picture of the state of financial capability in the
United States, very much in line with the opening quote from the U.S. President’s Council in
Financial Capability (2008). The majority of Americans do not plan for predictable events such
as retirement or children’s college education. Most importantly, people do not make provisions
for unexpected events and emergencies, leaving themselves and the economy exposed to shocks.
To understand financial capability, we need to look not only at assets but also at debt and debt
management, as an increasingly large portion of the population carries debt. In managing debt,
Americans engage in behaviors that can generate large expenses, such as sizable interest
payments and fees. Moreover, more than one in five Americans has used alternative (and often
costly) borrowing methods (payday loans, advances on tax refunds, pawn shops, etc.) in the past
five years. The most worrisome finding is that many people do not seem well informed and
knowledgeable about their terms of borrowing; a sizeable group does not know the terms of their
mortgages or the interest rates they pay on their loans. Finally, the majority of Americans lack
basic numeracy and knowledge of fundamental economic principles such as the workings of
inflation, risk diversification, and the relationship between asset prices and interest rates. There is
also a sharp disconnect between self-reported financial knowledge and financial knowledge as
measured by financial literacy quizzes. Even those who give themselves high knowledge ratings
score poorly on the quizzes. Moreover, while many believe they are pretty good at dealing with
day-to-day financial matters, in actuality they engage in financial behaviors that generate
expenses and fees: overdrawing checking accounts, making late credit card payments, or
exceeding limits on credit card charges. Comparing terms of financial contracts and shopping
around before making financial decisions are not at all common among the population.

Some groups display lower financial capability than others. The young, African Americans and
Hispanics, and those with low education are more likely to display behaviors correlated with low
financial capability. While low levels of income and income shocks are important factors
explaining why individuals do not have rainy day funds, do not have retirement accounts, or do
not pay credit card balances in full, they are not the only determinants. It is, however, worrisome
that those with the fewest resources are also those engaged in behaviors that generate some of the
greatest expenses and fees.

In short, there are important gaps in the financial capability of Americans. When considered
together with the economic difficulties many families in the United States are currently facing,
the results from this survey highlight how important it is to give people the information and
resources they need to make sound financial decisions.


2. Review of the Literature on Financial Literacy and Financial Decision-Making


Over the last two decades, researchers have started to explore whether individuals are well-
equipped to make financial decisions. Bernheim (1995, 1998) was among the first to document
that many U.S. consumers display low levels of financial literacy. More recently, Hilgert,
Hogarth, and Beverly (2003) report that most Americans fail to understand basic financial
concepts, particularly those relating to bonds, stocks, and mutual funds.1 In a survey of
Washington state residents, Moore (2003) finds that people frequently fail to understand terms
and conditions of consumer loans and mortgages. This problem may persist for some time. The
National Council on Economic Education’s report (NCEE 2005) shows a widespread lack of
knowledge regarding fundamental economic concepts among high school students, confirming
similar findings by the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy (Mandell, 2008).
Lack of financial sophistication is not only an American problem: The 2005 report on financial
literacy by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and Smith
and Stewart (2008) document low levels of financial literacy in several countries. Similarly, the
Survey of Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) shows that respondents score
poorly on financial numeracy and literacy scales (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2010).
Consistent with the findings of Moore (2003), Miles (2004) reports that U.K. borrowers have a
poor understanding of mortgages and interest rates.
Lusardi and Mitchell’s (2006, 2008) module on planning and financial literacy for the 2004
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) provides further evidence of financial illiteracy. They find
that many older (50+) individuals cannot do simple interest-rate calculations, such as calculating
how money would grow at an interest rate of two percent, and do not understand inflation and
risk diversification. Similar results are seen in a sample of early Baby Boomers (ages 51–56):
most respondents display low numeracy and very limited knowledge of the power of interest
compounding (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007). They also show that financial literacy is very low
among women, those with low educations and African-Americans and Hispanics.
One of the reasons for the interest in financial literacy is not only the increase in individual
responsibility but also the debate on whether people are saving enough for their retirement, the
reasons for the large increase in debt and in personal bankruptcy rates, and the incidence of
financial mistakes (Campbell, 2006).
Financial literacy has been linked to saving behavior and portfolio choice. For example, the less
financially literate are found to be less likely to plan for retirement (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006,
2008, 2009), to accumulate wealth (Stango and Zinman, 2009), and to participate in the stock
market (van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011; Yoong 2011; Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula,
2010). Moreover, less literate individuals are less likely to choose mutual funds with lower fees
(Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton, 2008).2 There is also some indication that literacy may affect debt
as well. Moore (2003) reports that respondents with lower levels of financial literacy are more
likely to have costly mortgages. Similarly, Campbell (2006) reports that individuals with lower
incomes and lower education levels—characteristics that are strongly related to financial
literacy—are less likely to refinance their mortgages during a period of falling interest rates.
Lusardi and Tufano (2009a) show that individuals with lower levels of financial literacy tend to
transact in high-cost manners, incurring higher fees and using high-cost borrowing. The less
knowledgeable also report that their debt loads are excessive or that they are unable to judge
their debt position. All of these papers raise warnings about the low levels of financial literacy.


1
 Other surveys on smaller samples find similar results. See Agnew and Szykman, 2005.
2
 Financial knowledge is also found to be linked to the ability to budget, save money, and control spending (Perry
and Morris, 2005).
3. The National Financial Capability Study

The National Financial Capability Study consists of three linked surveys: (1) National Survey: A
nationally projectable telephone survey of 1,488 American adults; (2) State-by-State Survey: A
state-by-state online survey of approximately 25,000 American adults (roughly 500 per state,
plus the District of Columbia; (3) Military Survey: An online survey of 800 military service
members and spouses. This report outlines the findings of the National Survey, administered to
respondents between May and July 2009. The primary sample of 1,200 respondents was
constructed to be representative of the general adult U.S. population. To ensure sufficient
number of respondents for the analysis, African-Americans, Hispanics, Asian-Americans and
adults with less than a high school education were oversampled. The total number of respondents
in the sample was 1,488. The data collection and design of the survey instruments was supported
by FINRA Investor Education Foundation.3

It’s worth noting that a handful of other countries have so far collected data on financial literacy/
financial capability. The United Kingdom was among the first to design a survey on financial
capability, in 2005, and similar initiatives have been undertaken in New Zealand, Australia,
Ireland, Canada, and the Netherlands. New Zealand is one of the few countries to have followed
up with a second survey, with a 2009 survey designed to assess the changes in financial
knowledge and behavior of New Zealanders over a three-year span.

The overarching research objectives of the U.S. financial capability survey were to benchmark
key indicators of financial capability and evaluate how these indicators vary with underlying
demographic, behavioral, attitudinal, and financial literacy characteristics. Financial capability
cannot be judged simply by looking at one indicator. Rather, it covers several aspects of
behavior. Consistent with the surveys that have been done in other countries, these behavior
aspects include how people manage their resources, how they make financial decisions, the skill
set they use in making such decisions, and the search and information elaboration that goes into
those decisions.

While the survey data provide a richer set of information, this report focuses on four main areas
to assess Americans’ financial capability:

(1) Making ends meet

(2) Planning ahead

(3) Choosing and managing financial products

(4) Financial literacy and self-assessed skills

The findings reported below paint a picture of the current state of financial capability in the U.S.
population and of who is less (or more) financially capable.


3
    More information about this survey is provided at: http://www.finrafoundation.org/resources/research/p120478
3.1. Making ends meet

A key building block of financial capability is the ability to make ends meet, which can be
measured by examining how people deal with everyday financial matters and the extent to which
people balance monthly income and expenses to avoid overspending. The data indicate several
signs of financial strain among American adults.
     Almost half of Americans reported having trouble keeping up with monthly expenses and
        bills, with almost 14 percent of survey respondents stating it is very difficult to do so and
        35 percent finding it somewhat difficult.
     Nearly one-quarter (23 percent) of individuals with checking accounts reported
        overdrawing those accounts on occasion. Significantly, of those who overdrew their
        accounts, 73 percent reported finding it very or somewhat difficult to cover their monthly
        expenses and pay their bills.
     About 16 percent of mortgage borrowers reported having been late on a payment at least
        once in the last 2 years, including 10 percent who had been late more than once.
     A smaller but significant number of respondents who have self-directed retirement
        accounts (either an employer-sponsored defined contribution plan or a retirement account
        they manage on their own) reported tapping into their retirement savings. Specifically,
        nearly 9 percent have taken out a loan from their retirement accounts during the past 12
        months, and almost 5 percent have taken a permanent hardship withdrawal. These
        depletions are most prevalent among those earning between $25,000 and $75,000 a year,
        with more than 10 percent of this income cohort borrowing against their retirement
        savings and nearly 8 percent taking hardship withdrawals.

The recent economic crisis has hit individuals hard, hindering their ability to make ends meet.
One-third of respondents stated they had experienced a large and unexpected drop in income
during the past year. Workers earning less than $25,000 a year and Hispanics appear to have
been especially hard hit, with 41 percent and 43 percent, respectively, reporting a drop in
income. Across all demographic groups, those who suffered large decreases in income were
more likely to report having difficulties covering their expenses.


3.2. Planning ahead

There are several life events that families need to plan for, such as retirement and children’s
education. And because the future is inherently uncertain, families also need to make provisions
to buffer themselves against shocks. Being able to weather shocks not only contributes to
financial stability at the micro level but also increases the stability of the macro economy.

Rainy day funds

One important finding of the data is the lack of rainy day funds for a large part of the population.
Only 49 percent of respondents have set aside emergency or rainy day funds that would cover
expenses for 3 months in case of sickness, job loss, economic downturn, or other emergency.
Thus, many families would not be able to draw on personal financial resources if hit by a shock.
And those without rainy day funds are more likely to be hit by shocks. While in the overall
respondent population, 33 percent reported having experienced a large decrease in income in the
past 12 months, among those without rainy day funds, the proportion is 40 percent. Thus, while
some may not have an emergency fund because a shock depleted their buffer stock of savings,
the economy is fragile to shocks.

These findings are consistent with the results from the Global Economic Crisis survey, a survey
fielded between June and September 2009 in thirteen countries including the United States by the
survey research firm TNS Global. To assess Americans’ confidence in their ability to cope with a
small financial shock, respondents were asked how confident they were that they could come up
with $2,000 if an unexpected need arose within the next month. As many as 46 percent of
Americans stated they cannot or are not confident they could come up with $2,000 in a month’s
time (Lusardi, Schneider, and Tufano, 2011). The widespread lack of modest buffer stocks of
savings makes the current economy overly vulnerable to unexpected events.

Lack of saving among Americans is not a recent phenomenon. Starting in the mid-1980s, the
saving rate in the United States has declined steadily and it has been hovering around zero for
several years. The survey provides a crude measure of saving by asking respondents whether,
over the past year, household expenses (not including the purchase of a new house or car or other
big investments) have been greater, equal or less than income. Expenses have been greater than
income for 12% of individuals and about equal to income for 36% of individuals. Thus, about
half of individuals have not saved last year. When looking at both the stock of (precautionary)
savings and the flow of saving, one finds that a large fraction of the economy is exposed and
vulnerable to shocks.

The picture becomes somewhat worse if we combine information on rainy day funds with
information on health insurance coverage. Families could buffer a health shock if they were
covered by health insurance. However, about 81 percent of respondents report being covered by
health insurance. If we consider the proportion of individuals that are covered by health
insurance and also have emergency funds, we end up with a smaller fraction (45 percent) of
individuals that have some provisions. Thus, more than half of the population could have
difficulties dealing with health shocks. And a significant minority of the population (15 percent)
is highly exposed to shocks: they do not have an emergency fund and are without health
insurance.

Vulnerability to shocks is not only widespread in the population but it is particularly severe
among some demographic groups. A small fraction of the young (age 18–29) and those with low
income and have emergency funds. However, income and age are not the sole predictors of
having rainy day funds. Even those with income above $75,000 and those who should be at the
peak of wealth accumulation (age 45–59) do not always make provisions for shocks. Conversely,
some low income individuals and young adults do make provisions. It is nevertheless
problematic that those who are less likely to have rainy day funds are also less likely to be
covered by health insurance, doubling their exposure to shocks.

                            Total             Income                          Age
                                    <$25K $25-75K >$75K 18-29 30-44 45-59 60+
   Have rainy day funds     49%      26%    53%    75%  31% 49% 50% 64%
   Have health insurance    81%      61%    87%    97%  65% 78% 84% 93%


Planning for retirement

In addition to not preparing for unforeseen emergencies, people do not prepare for predictable
events. Despite the changes in the pension landscape in the past twenty years and the increased
individual responsibility for financial security after retirement, the majority of Americans have
not done any retirement planning. Making decisions about how much to save in order to afford a
comfortable retirement requires collecting information about several important variables
(including Social Security and pension benefits) and doing some, even rudimentary, calculations.
Yet, when asked whether they have ever tried to figure out how much they need to save for
retirement, only 42 percent of respondents who are not retired said they did.

Lack of planning is high not only among young respondents, but also among older adults: only
51 percent of respondents who are 45–59 years old and not yet retired have tried to calculate how
much they need to save for retirement. Thus, while the proportion of planners increases with age,
even close to retirement only a little more than half of older individuals have attempted to
calculate how much they need to save. Among low income respondents, we see that retirement
planning is low or even nonexistent. These findings are consistent with data on retirement
planning from other surveys, such as the Health and Retirement Study and Retirement
Confidence Survey. Those surveys as well document lack of retirement planning, even when
retirement is not far away (Lusardi, 1999, 2009; Yakoboski and Dickemper, 1997).


                            Total          Income                  Age
                                     <$25K $25-75K >$75K 18-29 30-44 45-59                   60+
Have tried to figure out
                            42%       17%       45%        68%      23%     46%     51%      50%
saving needs

Lack of planning does not occur because individuals already have retirement accounts that can
support them at retirement. In fact, those who do not plan are much less likely to have retirement
accounts. The majority of non-planners do not have retirement accounts: only 40 percent of non-
planners have retirement accounts, versus 82 percent of planners. Thus, those who do not plan
appear to be more likely to end up making fewer provisions for retirement.

Additional evidence about lack of retirement planning is provided by the very limited use of
information on important components of retirement savings. Since 1995, Social Security has
been mailing out personalized information about Social Security benefits. However, data from
the survey show that only about 65 percent of individuals who are not retired acknowledge
receiving a statement from Social Security and the large majority of those who received it did not
make use of the information. Only between 21 and 25 percent of recipients say they have used
the information sent by Social Security.
Planning for children’s education

Lack of planning can also be witnessed when considering events closer at hand than retirement.
It is widely reported that over the past decade tuition and fees at four-year public colleges and
universities have increased more rapidly than they did during the 1980s or 1990s, rising by an
average of nearly 5 percent each year (adjusted for inflation). With this trend unlikely to abate,
an average American family with children can expect to dedicate a sizable share of their
resources to paying college tuition. However, well below half (41 percent) of those who have
financially dependent children have set money aside for college education. And even those who
have set money aside may not have done it in the most tax-savvy way. Only 33 percent of those
who have set aside money for college education have used a tax-advantaged savings account
such as a 529 Plan or Coverdell Education Savings Account.

Planning for children’s education is much more prevalent among those with higher income and
those who have a college degree. The share of individuals having set aside money for children’s
education is notably higher among respondents with a college education versus other education
groups, including those with some college education. Even among those with high income and
high education, the majority of those who save for their children’s education do not use tax-
advantage savings accounts.

                            Total          Income                          Education
                                             $25-                 Less         Some
                                     <$25K        >$75K                   HS               College
                                             75K                  HS           Coll.
Have set money aside
                             41%      20%       35%      68%      27%     28%     41%        60%
for college education
If yes: Have used 529 or
                             33%      18%       26%      41%      35%     29%     25%        40%
Coverdell


3.3. Choosing and managing financial products

I turn now to what we have learned about how individuals choose and manage financial
products, examining how people manage their liquidity, how they borrow, and their exposure to
financial market risks.

Banked and unbanked

One important feature to note first is that there is a group of individuals who have neither a
checking nor a savings account. About 15 percent do not have a checking account and 28 percent
do not have a savings account, a money market account, or Certificates of Deposit. Considering
these two variables together, the proportion of the unbanked is 12 percent of the population.
However, the proportion is vastly different across income and education levels. Close to one-
third (31 percent) of those with low income are unbanked, and 36 percent of those without a high
school degree are unbanked. The unbanked are also disproportionately African American and
Hispanic. As many as 28 percent of African Americans and 30 percent of Hispanics are
unbanked.
                    Total            Income                         Education
                                       $25-                               Some
                               <$25K        >$75K       Less HS    HS                 College
                                       75K                               College
Have checking
                    85%        63%    95%       98%      62%      79%        91%        97%
account
Have savings
                    72%        43%    81%       94%      38%      64%        79%        91%
account
Are banked          88%        69%    97%       98%      64%      85%        93%        97%


Not having a bank account can make the management of liquidity and payments rather difficult
and, in particular, can generate fees—for example, for the use of money orders or check-cashing
services, which the unbanked use often. According to the data, 71 percent of the unbanked
sometimes use money orders to pay bills and 47 percent use check cashing services.

However, even those who have bank accounts can engage in behavior that generates expenses
and fees. As mentioned earlier, about one-quarter of individuals who have checking accounts (23
percent) overdraw their accounts occasionally. Considering all these groups together, at least
one-third of Americans are likely to incur fees and expenses to manage their liquidity either
because they lack a bank account or because they have overdrawn that account.

High-cost borrowing

A sizable share of Americans engage in alternative forms of borrowing, such as taking out an
auto title loan, a “payday” loan, getting an advance on tax refunds, using pawn shops, or using a
rent-to-own store. All of these borrowing methods usually charge high interest rates; much
higher than are charged by banks or by credit card companies.

As described below, while a small fraction of the population has used each method of borrowing,
as many as 23 percent have used one of these methods in the last five years. The use of these
alternative methods of borrowing is also highly correlated: those who have used pawn shops are
more likely to have used an advance on tax refunds or taken out a payday loan and vice versa.
Most importantly, these alternative methods of borrowing are disproportionately—though not
exclusively—used by those who are unbanked. Thus, lack of a bank account is likely to result in
the utilization of high-cost borrowing. Many of the users of these alternative methods also do not
have credit cards. Lack of formal ways of borrowing often translates into heavier use of high-
cost borrowing.

The high interest rates and fee payments that high-cost borrowing generates are paid by the most
frequent users of these methods, who are disproportionately the young, those with low income,
those without a high school education, and African Americans and Hispanics.


In the past 5 years, have you           Total         Unbanked Banked       No credit Credit
                                                                            cards     cards
taken out an auto title loan                7%          5%         7%          6%        8%
taken out a “payday” loan                  5%           8%          5%             7%         4%
gotten an advance on tax refund           8%           16%         7%             12%         6%
used a pawn shop                           8%          26%          6%            18%          4%
used a rent-to-own store                   5%          15%          3%            11%          2%
used one of these methods                 23%          44%         20%            34%         19%


Credit cards
A more traditional way in which many Americans borrow is through the use of credit cards.
More than two in three (68 percent) reported having credit cards. In addition, among those who
reported having credit cards, about 27 percent stated they had at least four credit cards.

As illustrated in the table below, most credit card holders have engaged in at least one behavior
that results in interest charges or fees. Nearly one-third (33 percent) engaged in two or more such
activities, and 17 percent engaged in three or more. Moreover, when looking at the subset of
behaviors that are likely to generate sizeable interest or fees (paying the minimum payment,
paying late fees, paying over-the-limit fees, or using the card for cash advances), I found that the
borrowing habits of 41 percent of credit card holders resulted in either substantial interest
payments, fees, or both. While the incidence of interest- and fee-generating behavior occurs
across all income groups, the proportion of those who paid only the minimum amount due, used
the cards for cash advances, and paid fees was higher for those earning less than $75,000 than for
those earning more.

                                                                                 Income
                                                                                    $25-
In the past 12 months…                                          Total     < $25K              $75K+
                                                                                    75K
I always paid credit card in full                               54%        54%      52%        55%
In some months, I carried over a balance and was charged
                                                                51%        47%          52%    51%
interest
In some months, I paid the minimum payment only                 29%        36%          30%    22%
In some months, I was charged a fee for late payment            23%        26%          25%    19%
In some months, I was charged a fee for exceeding my
                                                                  8%       12%           8%    4%
credit line
In some months, I used the cards for a cash advance               8%       12%           8%    6%

There are also important patterns among age groups. While half of young credit card holders
paid credit card balances in full each month, many (41 percent) paid only the minimum amount
due. Young credit card users were also those most likely to use their cards for a cash advance or
to be charged fees, particularly fees for exceeding their credit limit. On the other hand,
individuals over age 60 were disproportionately more likely to pay in full and were also much
less likely to engage in behaviors generating high interest payments and fees.

In the past 12 months…                        Total                             Age
                                                          18-29         30-44         45-59   60+
I always paid my credit cards in full           54%        51%           45%           44%    75%
In some months, I carried over a balance       51%        46%        62%         58%        33%
In some months, I paid the minimum only        29%        41%        35%         31%        11%
In some months, I was charged a fee for
                                               23%        24%        27%         29%        11%
late payment
In some months, I was charged a fee for
                                                 8%       14%         8%          9%         2%
exceeding my credit line
In some months, I used the cards for a
                                                 8%       11%        10%          8%         5%
cash advance
Mortgages
One significant source of borrowing people engage in is taking out a mortgage to buy a house.
The data indicate that 61 percent of individuals own a home and, among homeowners, 61 percent
have a mortgage and 21 percent have a home equity loan. There are significant differences in
mortgage holdings among income groups. While the majority of those with average or high
income have a mortgage, about 31 percent of homeowners who have low income have a
mortgage. Low income homeowners are also much less likely to have a home equity line of
credit.

                     Homeowners who        Total          Income
                                                   <$25K $25-75K >$75K
                     Have mortgage         61%      31%     61%   77%
                    Have lines of credit   21%      11%     20%   27%


To better understand some of the behavior that may have led to problems with mortgage
borrowing, it is useful to note that of those who bought a home in the past five years, 17 percent
report putting no money down as a down payment. Overall, 42 percent of mortgage borrowers
who bought a house in the past five years had down payments that were less than 20 percent of
the purchase price of the house and 25 percent had down payments that were five percent of the
price of the house or lower. Note also that 12 percent did not know what their down payment
was. Those who bought the house within the past two years had even lower down payments. For
those recent mortgage borrowers, 19 percent put zero down, 32 percent put five percent or less,
and 51 percent had down payments strictly lower than 20 percent, while 7 percent did not know
what their down payment was. (Please note these statistics are based on small number of
observations.) Thus, mortgage borrowers have been highly exposed to fluctuations in housing
prices, and the sharp decreases in home prices experienced in some parts of the country since
2006 likely resulted in negative equity for some recent mortgage borrowers.
When asked about the type of mortgages they have, eight percent of mortgage borrowers stated
their mortgages are adjustable rate mortgages, while the large majority hold fixed rate mortgages
(and two percent did not know which type of mortgage they have). When asked whether they
have an interest-only mortgages or a mortgage with an interest-only option, a rather large
fraction (16 percent) stated they have an interest-only mortgage. Moreover, 20 percent did not
know the answer to this question. This type of confusion is worrisome as mortgages, in particular
mortgages that have been issued recently, are rather complex contracts and borrowers need to
have a full understanding of the mortgage contracts they engage in. Another worry is that 10
percent of mortgage borrowers report not knowing the interest rate they are paying on their
mortgage.
As far as meeting the payments on their mortgage, as reported before, one out of six mortgage
borrowers (16 percent) reported having been late with their mortgage payment at least once in
the past two years. However, those who state they have interest-only mortgages or who do not
know whether they do are more likely to have been late in their payment (among those, 22
percent have been late). Similarly, those who do not know the interest rate they are paying on
their mortgage have been more likely to be late in their mortgage payment. Thus, lack of full
understanding of mortgage contracts can have consequences on servicing the mortgage and
meeting the mortgage payments.
Overall, two percent of respondents reported having been involved in a foreclosure process in the
last two years.
Retirement accounts
An increasingly important asset is retirement savings. Recognizing that many Americans are not
familiar with all of the technical terms and distinctions used to describe various retirement plans,
the survey employed a few “plain language” questions to assess whether respondents have a
retirement plan through an employer and, if so, which type (specifically, a defined benefit plan or
a defined contribution plan, such as a 401(k) plan). In addition, the survey asked whether
individuals have any retirement account plan they set up on their own, such as an individual
retirement account (IRA), Keogh, SEP, or other type of retirement account.

More than half of respondents (51 percent) report having a pension through a current or previous
employer. Differences across income and education groups become more extreme when
considering this important asset. Only 13 percent% of those with low income have pensions
versus a much higher share, 61 percent and 83 percent, for those in higher income groups.
Similarly, those with low education are disproportionately less likely to have pensions.
Differences are equally large when considering accounts such as IRAs, Keoghs, and SEPs. In
this case, only a minuscule fraction of those who have low income and low education (four and
seven percent respectively) report having such accounts, versus those with high income and high
education (57 and 55 percent respectively).


                          Total             Income                          Education
                                                                 Less           Some
                                  <$25K $25-75K >$75K                     HS                College
                                                                 HS             Coll.
Have retirement plan
                          51%      13%       61%        83%      22%     39%      54%         76%
via employer
Have other retirement
                          28%       4%       27%        57%       7%     14%      26%         55%
account

As mentioned earlier and to stress again the importance of looking not only at asset building but
also at debt, there is indication that some individuals have also started tapping into their
retirement accounts. About 8.7 percent of respondents with retirement accounts have taken a
loan from an account in the past 12 months and 4.7 percent have taken a hardship loan. These
loans are more prevalent among those with average income (from $25k to $75K).

In the past 12 months, have you                        Total                   Income
                                                                   < $25K     $25-75K       $75K+
taken a loan from retirement account                   8.7%         9.1%        10.2%        7.3%
taken a hardship withdrawal from retir. Account        4.7%         2.9%         7.6%        2.1%

Responses to how the money in these accounts is invested reveal some lack of knowledge or
perhaps lack of familiarity with some investment terms. For example, when asked whether and
how much of their retirement portfolio is invested in stocks or mutual funds that contain stocks,
37 percent of those with self-directed accounts stated that more than half is invested in stocks,
but as many as 17 percent did not know the answer to this question. When asked if retirement
assets are invested primarily in a life-cycle or target-date fund, 22 percent stated they invested
primarily in these funds, but 37 percent stated they did not know the answer to this question. And
of those who do not invest in life-cycle or target-date funds, about half (47 percent) stated they
rarely or never rebalance the investment in their retirement accounts.

Stocks, bonds, and mutual funds

Respondents have been asked about their investment in bonds, stocks, and mutual funds and
other securities. About 46 percent invest in financial markets but, as for retirement accounts,
there are vast differences in financial market participation across income groups. It is
disproportionately those with high income who invest in the stock market. There are also sharp
differences across education groups; those with a college degree are substantially more likely to
invest in stocks than other education groups.

                           Total              Income                         Education
                                                                   Less          Some
                                   <$25K $25-75K >$75K                      HS              College
                                                                   HS            Coll.
 Have stocks, bonds,
mutual funds outside of     46%      17%       47%        72%     23.4%     34%     46%       66%
 retirement accounts

While investing in stocks and bonds exposes individuals to financial market risk, it also allows
people to make their wealth grow and to take advantage of the higher returns offered by the
markets. In the financial literature, lack of participation in the stock market is considered sub-
optimal behavior and an indication of lack of financial sophistication (Campbell, 2006).

Risk preferences

A factor that affects how individuals make financial decisions is their attitude toward risk. This is
an important determinant of portfolio choice and the type of assets into which people choose to
invest their private and retirement wealth.
The data show a strong aversion to risk among Americans, with 26 percent of respondents stating
they are unwilling to take any risk at all (rating 1 on a 10-point scale), and a total of 45 percent
exhibiting low risk tolerance (rating 1 to 3). It is not yet possible to say whether this high
aversion to risk has been influenced by the recent economic crisis. However, the data do reveal a
strong correlation between aversion to risk and knowledge of risk. Specifically, 42 percent of the
respondents who are very risk averse (rating 1 to 3) did not know the answer to a question about
risk and diversification, compared with 33 percent in the general population and 27 percent of
the less risk-averse respondents (rating 8 to 10).


3.4. Financial literacy and self-perceived skills
In order to make financial decisions, individuals have to be equipped with some skills that allow
them to understand and process the information that is often a required input for decisions.
Self-perceptions of financial knowledge
When asked to assess their financial knowledge, most respondents give themselves high scores.
As the chart below indicates, on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 indicates very low and 7 very high
financial knowledge, 38 percent of respondents rate their financial knowledge with scores of 6 or
7. Because many financial decisions require some knowledge of math, respondents are also
asked to rate their math knowledge. And again, self-assessed knowledge of math is high, with 46
percent stating they are very good at math (score of 7). These findings are consistent with the
results of other surveys, such as the TNS Survey and the American Life Panel. When asked to
assess their financial knowledge, individuals gave themselves high rankings (Lusardi and
Tufano, 2009a; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009).


            How would you assess your overall                 I am pretty good at math
                 financial knowledge?                           1 = strongly disagree
                      1 = very low                               7 = strongly agree
                     7 = very high




             20%           18%
                                                  5%
                                                               46%
                                                                                                5%

                                                  3%                         12%
                                    14%
                                                                                                3%
                                                  6%
                                                            18%             11%
           32%                                                        13%                       4%
                               16%



                                                                  1    2    3   4   5   6   7
                   1   2   3    4    5    6   7



Measuring financial literacy
To evaluate financial knowledge, respondents were exposed to a battery of questions covering
fundamental concepts of economics and finance expressed in everyday life, such as simple
calculations about interest rates and inflation, the workings of risk diversification, the
relationship between bond prices and interest rates, and the relationship between interest
payments and maturity in mortgages.4

While the correct response to individual question is sometimes high, less than half of
respondents answered two questions about interest rates and inflation correctly and less than one-
third answered those questions and a question about risk diversification correctly. Less than 10
percent of respondents are able to answer all questions correctly. This is consistent with the
findings documented in a variety of other studies using the same questions or a sub-set of the
questions used in this survey (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006, 2009) and highlight not just that
people lack financial literacy but how little they know about rather basic concepts in economics
and finance.

                                                 Correct Incorrect Don’t Know
                          Interest rate question 65%       21%        13%
                            Inflation question    64%      20%        14%
                          Bond price question     21%      44%        34%
                           Mortgage question      70%      16%        12%
                              Risk question       52%      13%        34%
                        ** These figures do not sum to 100 because of rounding and because of
                           refusal to answer the questions.

         Both interest and inflation        Interest, inflation, and risk        All questions correct
             questions correct                   questions correct
                    46%                                 30 %                               10%

       Not only is financial illiteracy widespread in the population but it is particularly severe
       among some groups. As shown below, financial literacy is low among women, those with
       low education, and among African Americans and Hispanics, as reported in previous work as
       well (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006, 2007, 2009; Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2010; Lusardi
       and Tufano, 2009a,b).




4
    See the appendix for the exact wording of these questions.
                                                                                           Means of Financial Literacy Responses
                                                                                            by Gender, Education, and Ethnicity
                                                                                               Don't Know         Incorrect                                 Correct



                                                                                             2.0         2.3                                                                          2.3          2.1
                                                   2.7                           2.5                                  2.9                                                2.9
                                                                  3.0                                                                                       3.4                                                   3.0
         Means




                                                                                             1.3
                                                                                 1.1                     1.3                                                                          1.6          1.5
                                                   1.1                                                                1.1                                                1.0
                                                                  1.1                                                                                                                                             1.1
                                                                                             1.7                                                            0.9
                                                   1.1                           1.3                     1.3          1.0                                                1.1          1.1          1.3
                                                                  0.8                                                                                       0.6                                                   0.9
                                                  Overall         Male          Female     Less than    HS grad     Some                                 Coll grad Caucasian African             Hispanic        Asian
                                                                                              HS                   College                                   +               American




While there is a correlation between self-perceived knowledge and actual knowledge, for many
individuals, there is a sharp disconnect between perception of their financial and math
knowledge and their responses to the questions measuring both numeracy and financial literacy.
As the charts below indicate, even among those who gave themselves the high score of 7 in
math, only 52 percent were able to do two calculations involving interest rates and inflation.
Similar findings apply to the comparison of self-assessed financial knowledge versus the
knowledge resulting from the answers to a set of financial literacy questions. Even among those
who gave themselves a score of 7 in their self-assessed financial knowledge, about a quarter did
not know the answer to a question about risk diversification that asked respondents whether
investing in a single company stock is safer than investing in a stock mutual fund.

                                 100%                                                                                                             100%
Both inflation and interest rate question




                                                                                                                    "Do not know" risk question




                                            75%                                                                                                   75%
                 correct




                                            50%                                                                                                   50%
                                                                                    50%       52%
                                                                          46%                           46%                                              46%
                                                                                                                                                                   42%
                                                                35%                                                                                                            34%                            34%
                                            25%                                                                                                   25%
                                                    29%                                                                                                                                           26%
                                                                                                                                                                                        25%


                                            0%                                                                                                     0%
                                                   1, 2, or 3     4         5          6        7-      Total                                            1, 2, 3     4          5        6       7 (high)     Total
                                                  (disagree)                                 strongly                                                     (low)
                                                                                              agree
                                                                                                                                                     How would you assess your overall financial knowledge?
                                                                I am pretty good at math
                                                                                                                                                                         1 = very low
                                                                  1 = strongly disagree
                                                                                                                                                                        7 = very high
                                                                   7 = strongly agree




Financial literacy is strongly correlated with behavior that is indicative of financial capability.
Even though these are simple correlations and do not control for other determinants of behavior,
those with higher literacy are more likely to plan for retirement, are more likely to have an
emergency fund, and are less likely to engage in credit card behavior that generates high interest
payments and fees.

Financial literacy is also highly correlated with attitudes toward risk. Those who report being
unwilling to take any risks (ratings of 1 to 3) are also more likely to say they do not know the
answer to the question about risk diversification. Thus, responses to questions on attitudes
toward risk may be a mixture of preferences toward and knowledge of risk.

There is also a disconnect between perceptions and actions in day-to-day financial matters. When
asked how good they are at dealing with day-to-day financial matters such as checking accounts,
credit cards, and tracking expenses, close to half of respondents who have credit cards and
checking accounts (49 percent) gave themselves the top score of 7. However, one-quarter of
these respondents engage in behavior that generates fees or high costs, such as using credit cards
for cash advances, paying a late payment or over-the-limit fee, and overdrawing the checking
account. Among those who gave themselves a score of 6, 40 percent engage in these fee- and
cost-generating behaviors.

                                 100%
                                                                                                     I am good at dealing with day-to-day
                                                                                                      financial matters (respondents with
                                                                                                        credit card and checking account)
                                                                                                               1 = strongly disagree
       Fee generating behavior




                                 75%
                                                                                                                7 = strongly agree



                                 50%
                                                            52%
                                          46%        48%
                                                                       40%
                                                                                             35%           49%
                                 25%                                                                                                    3%
                                                                                 24%
                                                                                                                       7%               2%

                                  0%                                                                           9%
                                                                                                         20% 13%                        4%
                                        1, 2, or 3    4       5         6          7         Total

                                    I am good at dealing with day-to-day financial matters
                                     (respondents with credit card and checking account)
                                                    1 = strongly disagree
                                                      7 = strongly agree
                                                                                                           1   2   3   4    5   6   7




Comparison shopping

To assess the process that generates decision making and the inputs that go into it in addition to
financial knowledge, respondents have also been asked about how much they shop around and
compare offers and terms from different providers.

The findings support evidence of limited searches. Specifically, most respondents (63 percent)
indicated that they don’t shop around for credit cards. Half of those who got auto loans did not
compare offers from different lenders. When looking for a financial professional, 43 percent did
not talk to more than one advisor and 85 percent failed to check with a state or federal regulator
on the background and credentials of that professional. For contracts of very significant financial
consequences, such as mortgages, there is a lot more search and comparison. However, one-third
(33 percent) of those with mortgages did not compare offers from different lenders.

Who are those that shop the least? When examining the distribution of shopping for two different
products, such as credit cards and auto loans, we find that those with low income and low
education shop the least, even though they may be those who benefit the most from getting good
terms.
                                                              Income
                                                  <$25K      $25-75K      $75K+
                 Don’t shop for credit cards       70%          64%        57%
                 Don’t shop for auto-loans         60%          50%        46%

                                                             Education
                                          Less than                 Some        College
                                                           HS
                                             HS                    College
           Don’t shop for credit card       63%           69%        60%          62%
           Don’t shop for auto-loan         59%           51%        52%          45%


Obtaining credit reports and checking credit score

Many individuals are also not informed or have not sought information about their credit report
and their credit score. While credit scores are a critical determinant of the interest rates one will
be charged on mortgages, loans, and other instruments, only 38 percent have obtained a copy of
their credit report and 36 percent have checked their credit score. Moreover, it is those who have
higher credit scores who have sought out the information; about 17 percent of those who checked
their credit score report scores below 620 while the large majority of those who checked their
credit scores (52 percent) report scores higher than 720.


                                                   Total       <$25K        $25-75K     $75K+
  Obtained copy of credit report                     38%         18%          43%         56%
  Checked credit score                               36%         15%          42%         55%

                                         Total     Less than                  Some        College
                                                                   HS
                                                      HS                     College
  Obtained copy of credit report         38%         25%          30%         39%          53%
  Checked credit score                   36%         22%          29%         35%          53%

Those with low income and low education are less likely to have obtained a credit report and to
have checked their credit score, but they are also those more likely to benefit from such
knowledge.

Understanding financial contracts

As already reported above, many individuals display limited knowledge of the terms of their
financial contracts and often cannot state the interest rate they pay on their loans.

For example, about 20 percent of those who have auto loans do not know the interest rate they
pay. About 10 percent do not know the interest rate on their mortgages. Of the 46 percent of
credit-card holders who don’t make their credit card payment in full, 12 percent don’t know the
interest rate on their credit card with the largest balance. Thus, for many consumers, decisions
are made without full knowledge of the price they pay for the contracts they engage in.

As reported above, many individuals also display confusion about the type of mortgages they
have and a large proportion do not know which terms they had. Moreover, many did not know
how the funds in their self-directed retirement accounts are invested.


4. Discussion

The findings from the National Survey paint a troubling picture of the current state of financial
capability in the U.S. adult population. The majority of individuals do not plan for retirement or
make provisions against shocks. Borrowing and debt management often result in sizable interest
payments and fees and it is notable how many individuals have used high-cost methods of
borrowing in the past five years. Levels of financial knowledge are strikingly low and,
moreover, there is a sharp disconnect between how much people think they know and what they
appear to actually know, based on a financial literacy quiz.

The reason lack of planning is important is that many studies have shown that planning is a very
strong predictor for wealth: those who do not plan get close to retirement with half the amount of
wealth of those who have done some planning (Lusardi, 1999, 2009; Lusardi and Beeler 2007,
Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2009; Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy, 2003). And the direction of
causality runs from planning to wealth and not the other way around. While one could argue that
it is wealth that causes more planning, in fact Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) show that exogenous
shocks to wealth did not generate more planning, while planning ends up generating higher
amounts of wealth.

Moreover, the “cost of ignorance” can be high. Lusardi and Tufano (2009a) trace some of the
behavior with credit cards back to debt illiteracy, i.e. lack of knowledge about the workings of
credit cards and the principles of interest compounding. Looking specifically at the credit card
behavior that gives rise to explicit fees or finance charges—paying credit cards late, going over
the credit limit, using cash advances, and paying just the minimum due—they estimate the cost
that can be attributed to lack of knowledge (after accounting for large set of demographics and
individual characteristics, including income and wealth). According to their calculations, as
much as one-third of the charges and fees paid by low literacy individuals can be attributed to
ignorance.
Contrasting the complexities of the mortgages offered in the market with the level of financial
knowledge as measured by the simple quizzes in the survey raises the question of whether
individuals understood the contracts that were offered to them and fully appreciated the risks
involved in adjustable rate mortgages and low or minimal down-payments. In fact, individuals
often were not even able to report the interest rate at which they are borrowing. Lack of
awareness about their low level of financial knowledge also makes individuals more vulnerable
to scams.
It is also worrisome that behaviors leading to high interest payments or fees are most prevalent
among those with low income and low education, i.e., those who can least afford them. It is
possible that these behaviors will put greater strains on existing social safety nets. When people
make poor financial decisions, the cost of those decisions can be passed on to all Americans
through higher prices for financial products and the diversion of economic resources. Lack of
financial capability matters not only for the individual but for society as well. As chairman
Bernanke stated in a recent hearing on April 12, 2011 "The recent crisis demonstrated the critical
importance of financial literacy and good financial decisionmaking, both for the economic
welfare of households and for the soundness and stability of the system as a whole."5




5
    See http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20110420a.htm.
Appendix

Questions to measure financial literacy

1) Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?
More than $102
Exactly $102
Less than $102
Do not know
Refuse to answer

2) Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2%
per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account?
More than today
Exactly the same
Less than today
Do not know
Refuse to answer

3) If interest rates rise, what will typically happen to bond prices?
They will rise
They will fall
They will stay the same
There is no relationship between bond prices and the interest rates
Do not know
Refuse to answer

4) Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. A 15-year mortgage typically requires
higher monthly payments than a 30-year mortgage, but the total interest paid over the life of the
loan will be less.
True
False
Do not know
Refuse to answer

5) Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. Buying a single company’s stock usually
provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.
True
False
Do not know
Refuse to answer
References

Agnew, J., and L. Szykman (2005), “Asset allocation and information overload: The influence of
     information display, asset choice and investor experience,” Journal of Behavioral
     Finance 6, 57-70.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin and John Leahy (2003), “Wealth Accumulation and the
      Propensity to Plan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 68, pp. 1007-1047.

Bernanke, Ben (2011), Statement by Chairman Bernanke on Financial Literacy. Provided for the
      record of a hearing held on April 12, 2011 conducted by the Subcommittee on Oversight
      of Government Management, the Federal Workforce, and the District of Columbia,
      Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate.
      http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20110420a.htm
Bernheim, Douglas (1995), “Do households appreciate their financial vulnerabilities? An
      analysis of actions, perceptions, and public policy,” in Tax Policy and Economic Growth,
      American Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC, pp. 1-30.
Bernheim, Douglas (1998), “Financial illiteracy, education and retirement saving,” in O.
      Mitchell and S. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions, University of
      Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, pp. 38-68.
Campbell, John (2006), “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance 61, pp. 1553-1604.

Christelis, Dimitris, Tullio Jappelli, and Mario Padula (2010), “Cognitive abilities and portfolio
       choice,” European Economic Review 54, pp. 18-38.

Hastings, Justine, and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton (2008), “Financial Literacy, Information, and
       Demand Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico,” NBER Working
       Paper n. 14538.

Hilgert, Marianne, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly (2003), “Household Financial
        Management: The Connection between Knowledge and Behavior,” Federal Reserve
        Bulletin, pp. 309-32.

Lusardi, Annamaria(1999), ‘Information, Expectations, and Savings for Retirement’ in Henry
       Aaron (ed.), Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics. Washington, DC:
       Brookings Institution Press and Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 81-115

Lusardi, Annamaria (2008), “Financial Literacy: An Essential Tool for Informed Consumer
       Choice?,” Working Paper, Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University.

Lusardi, Annamaria (2009), “U.S. Household Savings Behavior: The Role of Financial Literacy,
       Information and Financial Education Programs,” in C. Foote, L Goette, and S. Meier
       (eds), Policymaking Insights from Behavioral Economics, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank
       of Boston.
Lusardi, Annamaria (2010), “Financial Capability in the United States: Consumer Decision-
     Making and the Role of Social Security,” MRRC Working Paper n. 2010-226.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Jason Beeler (2007), “Saving Between Cohorts: The Role of Planning,"
     in B. Madrian, O. Mitchell, and B. Soldo (eds.), Redefining Retirement: How Will Boomers
     Fare? Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007, pp. 271-295.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia Mitchell (2011), “Optimal Financial
       Knowledge and Saving for Retirement,” mimeo.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2006), “Financial Literacy and Planning:
       Implications for Retirement Wellbeing,” MRRC Working Paper n. 2006-144.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007), “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
       Role of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 54, pp. 205-224.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell (2008), “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
       Women Fare?” American Economic Review 98(2), pp. 413-417.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell (2009), “How Ordinary Consumers Make Complex
       Economic Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness,” NBER Working
       Paper n. 15350.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell (2011), “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in
       the United States,” in preparation for a special issue of the Journal of Pensions
       Economics and Finance on “Financial Literacy around the World.”

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto (2010), “Financial Literacy Among the
       Young,” Journal of Consumer Affairs 44(2), pp. 358-380.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Peter Tufano (2009a), “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and
       Overindebtedness,” NBER Working Paper n 14808.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Peter Tufano (2009b), “Teach Workers about the Perils of Debt,”
       Harvard Business Review, November 2009, pp. 22-24.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Daniel Schneider and Peter Tufano (2011), “Financially Fragile
       Households: Evidence and Implications.” Forthcoming Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity. Spring.

Mandell, Lewis (2008), “Financial Education in High School,” in Annamaria Lusardi (ed.),
      Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education
      and Saving Programs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 257-279.
Miles, David (2004), “The UK Mortgage Market: Taking a Longer-Term View,” Working Paper,
       UK Treasury.

Moore, Danna (2003), “Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge,
      Behavior, Attitudes, and Experiences,” Technical Report n. 03-39, Social and Economic
      Sciences Research Center, Washington State University.

National Council on Economic Education (NCEE), 2005, “What American teens and adults
       know about economics,” Washington, D.C.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2005), Improving Financial
      Literacy: Analysis of Issues and Policies, Paris, France.

Perry, Vanessa, and Marlene Morris (2005), “Who Is in Control? The Role of Self-Perception,
       Knowledge, and Income in Explaining Consumer Financial Behavior,” Journal of
       Consumer Affairs 39, pp. 299-313.

Peters, Ellen, Judith Hibbard, Paul Slovic, and Nathan Dieckmann (2007), “Numeracy Skills and
        the Communication, Comprehension, and Use of Risk-Benefit Information,” Health
        Affairs 26(2), pp. 741-748.

President’s Advisory Committee on Financial Literacy. 2008. Annual Report to the President:
       Executive Summary. www.ustreas.gov/offices/domestic-finance/financial-institution/fin-
       education/council/exec_sum.pdf
Smith, Barbara, and Fiona Stewart (2008), “Learning from the Experience of OECD Countries:
       Lessons for Policy, Programs and Evaluations,” in Annamaria Lusardi (ed.), Overcoming
       the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving
       Programs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 345-367.

van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie (2011), “Financial Literacy and Stock
      Market Participation.” Forthcoming Journal of Financial Economic.

Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman (2009), “Exponential Growth Bias and Household
       Finance,” Journal of Finance 64, pp. 2807-2849.

Yakoboski, Paul and Jennifer Dickemper (1997), “Increased Saving but Little Planning. Results
      of the 1997 Retirement Confidence Survey,” EBRI Issue Brief 191.Washington, DC.:
      EBRI.

Yoong, Joanne (2011), “Financial Illiteracy and Stock Market Participation: Evidence from the
      RAND American Life Panel.” Forthcoming in O.S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi, eds.,
      Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace.
      Oxford: Oxford University Press.
