                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MATERNITY LEAVE AND CHILDREN’S COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIORAL DEVELOPMENT

                                            Michael Baker
                                           Kevin S. Milligan

                                         Working Paper 17105
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17105


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




 We have benefited from comments from Josh Angrist and seminar participants at the 2011 AEA meetings,
 UC Davis, Laval, Manitoba, Stavanger, Texas, W.E. Upjohn and Waterloo. We gratefully acknowledge
 the research support of SSHRC (Baker Grant, #410-2008-0346, Milligan Grant #410-2006-0928).
 We thank the staffs of the Toronto and B.C. Research Data Centres for their technical support. This
 paper represents the views of the authors and does not necessarily reflect the views of Statistics Canada
 or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2011 by Michael Baker and Kevin S. Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
Maternity Leave and Children’s Cognitive and Behavioral Development
Michael Baker and Kevin S. Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 17105
June 2011, Revised August 2014
JEL No. I18,J13,J32

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of maternity leave on the cognitive and behavioral development of children
at ages 4 and 5, following up previous research on these children at younger ages. The impact is identified
by legislated increases in the duration of maternity leave in Canada, which significantly increased
the amount of first-year maternal care. Our results indicate no positive effect on indices of children’s
cognitive and behavioral development. We uncover a small negative impact on cognitive scores, which
may indicate the timing of the mother/child separation due to the mother’s return to work plays a role.


Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca

Kevin S. Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
kevin.milligan@ubc.ca
Introduction

        Governments around the world seek to improve child development at young ages as a

means both to promote equity and to improve the efficiency of human capital accumulation.

Policies range from maternal education and nutrition programs to childcare and early childhood

education initiatives.1 Parental leave policies have been central to this push in more developed

countries.2 In many cases, child development is cited as an important basis for legislative

parental leave initiatives. The ‘findings’ preamble to the American Family and Medical leave Act

states “…it is important for the development of children and the family unit that fathers and

mothers be able to participate in early childrearing…”.3 A recent Australian paid parental leave

program was promoted with the claim that “the scheme will give more babies the best start in

life. The payment will enable more parents to stay at home to care for their baby full-time during

the vital early months of social, cognitive and physical development” (Commonwealth of

Australia 2009). An extension of paid maternity leave in the United Kingdom seeks to “…give

children the best start in life…” as the “…evidence confirms the value of consistent one-to-one

care in the first year of a child’s life.” (Employment Relations Directorate 2006, p. 2).

        In this paper, we study a Canadian reform that expanded parental leave entitlement by

about half a year in the first year of life. The reform had a large impact on the time mothers spent

at home in their child’s first year—about two months averaged across all mothers, or 3 months

when averaged across likely eligible mothers.4 We relate this variation in maternal employment

to measures of children’s cognitive and non-cognitive development at ages 4 and 5—

immediately prior to school entry.

1
  See, for example, the report prepared for the World Health Organization (Irwin, Siddiqi, and Hertzman 2007) or
UNICEF (2006).
2
  The policies in OECD countries are documented in Ray (2008).
3
  See Public Law No. 103-3 §2(a)(2). http://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/fmlaAmended.htm
4
  See Baker and Milligan (2008b, 2010) and Hanratty and Trzcinski (2009).


                                                                                                                   2
       Earlier work by Baker and Milligan (2010) examines the effect of this same Canadian

policy reform at ages up to 24 months. In that paper, we find a large shift toward maternal care

and away from home-based care in the first year of life. This extra maternal care in the first year

of life was found to have little impact on health and development indicators up to the age of 24

months. The measures studied in that paper are of parenting and of children’s motor and social

development, exhibited security, temperament and milestones of physical development (e.g., first

steps). As the children affected by this large reform have grown older, we now have the unique

opportunity to further evaluate their development as they hit the critical ages at which ‘school

readiness’ can be assessed.

       Examining the further progress of this cohort of children who received a substantially

larger amount of maternal care is informative for a number of reasons.

   1. While not common in economics, follow up studies have been critical to our

       understanding of the impact of early childhood interventions on child development. For

       example, the near universal acknowledgment of the profound impact of the Perry

       Preschool Study is due to the ongoing longitudinal study of the program’s children that

       repeatedly comes to the same conclusion. In contrast, the uncertain lessons from the Head

       Start program are due to follow up study that suggests the program’s initial impacts fade

       out over time.

   2. It is widely acknowledged that the development of very young children is rapid and

       multidimensional, and that cognitive testing of very young children (2 years or younger)

       is very challenging (e.g., Bradley-Johnson 2001, Saye 2003). As a result, best practice

       counsels evaluating children with multiple assessments at different ages.




                                                                                                   3
    3. There is evidence from previous research that the developmental impact of maternal

         employment may not manifest until the child is aged 3 years or older (Brooks-Gunn et al.

         2002).5

    4. Indicators of cognitive and non cognitive development at ages 4 and 5 have well-

         documented links to future outcomes (e.g., Almond and Currie 2011).

Against this background, many studies of early childhood policies up to now are “one off”

analyses. Therefore, we cannot know whether any documented effects fade out at later ages, or if

evidence of no effect persists.

         Several recent papers have investigated the long-run impact of parental leave expansions

on education attainment and early labor market performance.6 Dustmann and Schonberg (2012)

look into changes to Germany’s paid leave program that increased paid leave from 2 to 6 months

in the late 1970s, and from 6 to 10 months in the mid-1980s.7 They find little evidence that this

expansion of leave affected children’s selective school attendance or wages. Rasmussen (2010)

examines an increase in paid parental leave, from 14 to 20 weeks, in Denmark in the mid-1980s.

She finds no impact on children’s high school enrollment and completion, or on grade point

average. Liu and Skans (2010) investigate an extension of paid parental leave from 12 to 15

months in Sweden in the late 1980s. They report no average impact on children’s test scores and

grades at age 16, although there is a positive effect for the children of well-educated mothers.

Danzer and Lavy (2012) look at the impact on age 15 test scores of a reform in Austria in 1990,

finding no significant impact in the overall sample (although preliminary evidence points to a

positive impact for boys born to highly educated mothers). Finally, and in contrast, Carneiro et


5
  Brooks-Gunn et al. (2002) find that the cognitive impact of maternal employment in the children’s first year of life
manifest by 36 months but not at earlier ages.
6
  A more detailed review of this literature can be found in Baker (2011).
7
  A third reform considered in the analysis is an increase in unpaid leave from 18 to 36 months in the early 1990s.


                                                                                                                     4
al. (2011) find the introduction of 4 months of paid leave in Norway in the late 1970s did have

positive impacts on children’s educational attainment; most notably a reduction in the high

school dropout rate. This long-run evidence does not reveal consistent findings of a significant

long-run impact of parental leave.

         Research on the more immediate effects of maternal employment on child development

during the early years has pointed toward a more negative impact.8 A number of studies report

negative impacts of maternal employment anytime in the first year on cognitive development,

although the estimates vary in magnitude (e.g., Bernal 2008, Hill et al. 2005, James-Burdumy

2005 and Ruhm 2004).9 Waldfogel (2006) in her review of the literature concludes “…children

whose mothers work in the first year of life, particularly if they work full time, do tend to have

lower cognitive test scores at age three and thereafter.” (p. 55) There is also evidence that

entrance into non parental care in the first year can have negative cognitive and behavioral

effects (e.g., O’Brien Caughy et al. 1994, Gregg et al. 2005, Lefebvre et al. 2008, Loeb et al.

2007).10




8
  Lucas-Thompson et al. (2010) provides a summary of some of the research cited here as well as of studies on the
developmental impact of maternal employment from other fields.
9
  Ruhm (2004) reports reductions in PPVT scores of 7-8 percent of a standard deviation from maternal employment
in the first year, with the largest effects from full time employment. James-Burdumy (2005) and Hill et al. (2005)
find maternal employment in the first year has smaller negative effects on math and reading scores measured at ages
5-18 (PPVT and the Peabody Individual Achievement Tests). Finally, Bernal (2008) reports that a full year of full
time maternal employment in the first five years of life reduces test scores by 0.13 of standard deviation (PPVT and
the Peabody Individual Achievement Tests.
10
   O’Brien Caughy et al. (1994) report that entrance into daycare before the first birthday was associated with higher
test scores (Peabody Individual Achievement Tests ) for lower income children and lower test scores for higher
income children. For the U.K. Gregg et al. (2005) find that children who receive informal care from friends and
relatives in the first 18 months of life combined with full time maternal employment have lower cognitive outcomes.
In the Canadian context, Lefebvre et al. (2008) report that Quebec’s universal, low fee childcare program, which
serves children from birth, is related to reductions in PPVT scores of just under one-third of a standard deviation.
Finally, Loeb et al. (2007) find that entry into non-parental center based care before the age of one can lead to
problem behavior. Magnuson et al. (2007), Baker et al. (2008), Datta Gupta and Simonsen (2010), and the research
summarized in Belsky (2006) provide further evidence that non-parental care can have negative behavioral effects in
some contexts.


                                                                                                                    5
       Clearly, the sum of this research yields a mixed message. From it, one could construct a

research base showing that increased maternal care at young ages alternatively has a positive or

no effect. There may be a consistent narrative that links the long and short term research, but

uncovering it would require study of the children in the long term research at younger ages, or of

the children in the short term studies at older ages.

       Four specific features of our analysis enhance its relevance. First, the extension of leave

from 26 to 52 weeks is informative for the many OECD countries that currently have short (i.e.,

12-39 weeks) maternity leave entitlements (see Ray 2008). Second, the income replacement,

provided through the Canadian Employment Insurance system, is relatively modest. It is

comparable to the benefits provided in many jurisdictions including Australia and the United

Kingdom, as well as the paid leave programs in California and New Jersey.11 Third, as we

discuss below, developmental psychologists observe that some key developmental milestones are

achieved in the second 6 months of life. Finally, our primary measure of cognitive development,

the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), is the workhorse of research on the impacts of

maternal employment. Because so much research has used this same measure, we can compare

our results directly to the existing research that has been cited as a rationale for maternity leave

reforms.

       Our analysis offers several interesting findings. We find that the expansion of parental

leave—and the resulting extra time mothers spent with their child in his/her first year of life—

had no positive impact on indices of children’s cognitive and behavioral development at ages 4

and 5; this despite the fact it had substantial impacts on the maternal care and non-licensed non-

parental care children received in their first year, as well as how long they were breastfed. For


11
   See National Partnership for Women and Families (2012) for a comprehensive description of
state-level initiatives across the United States.


                                                                                                       6
our behavioral indices we can rule out all but very modest improvements. For some of our

cognitive measures (PPVT) the estimated impact of the reform is small, negative and statistically

significant. These results provide precedence for the findings that maternity/parental leaves have

no long run impact on children’s cognitive achievement at much older ages.

           Our finding of small negative effects on some cognitive scores leads to a discussion of

how parental leave affects not just the duration, but also the timing, of the mother’s return to

work.12 We speculate that it may be due to the fact that some ages are better than others for

abrupt changes in the parent-child relationship.

           To proceed, we first describe the parental leave reform that forms the basis of our

analysis. We next provide the details of our empirical framework and the data we employ.

Following the presentation of our main estimates, we bring evidence on the exclusion restriction

that underlies our empirical framework and empirically address the impact of some potential

confounding factors. The paper closes with a discussion of our findings within the context of the

duration and timing of parental leave, and a brief conclusion.



The Reform

           Our analysis is based on a reform of Canadian maternity/parental leave (henceforth

maternity leave) laws at the end of 2000.13 Job-protected, uncompensated, maternity leave is

provided by provincial labor standards laws, and historically there has been some variation in its




12
  Several papers look at the impact of timing of the return to work. (See Baydar and Brooks-Gunn (1991); Han et al.
(2001); Brooks-Gunn et al. (2002); Baum (2003); Berger et al. (2005). Lucas-Thompson et al. (2010) provide a
review of studies tracking the timing of return to work.) The novelty we present is interpreting our results of the
impact of parental leave through how it might change the timing of the return to work.
13
     Many of the details are reported in Baker and Milligan (2008a).


                                                                                                                 7
duration across provinces. In contrast, income replacement during the leave is provided through

the federal Employment Insurance (EI) system and there is one standard for the country.

         Before December 31, 2000, the duration of income replacement in the EI system was 25

weeks, subject to a 2 week waiting period in which no benefits are received. This comprised a 15

week leave reserved for the mother and a 10 week leave that could be shared between the

parents. For children born December 31, 2000 and onwards, the shared 10 week component of

the leave was expanded to 35 weeks, bringing total available leave to 50 weeks.14

         The legislation enacting the changes was introduced to Parliament on April 7, 2000, and

received Royal Assent on June 29, 2000. Over the next six months most provinces announced

increases in the duration of job-protected leave to 52+ weeks to commence coincidently with the

change in the EI law.15 In many instances the change was not announced or enacted until

November or December 2000.16 By June 2001, all provinces offered job protection of sufficient

duration to accommodate the new 50 week EI standard.17 The change by province is presented in

table 1. While there is some slight variation across provinces, the impact of the reform is mostly

time series variation before and after 2000/2001.

         Only mothers with sufficient attachment (600 hours over the last year) to the labor force

at the time of application for leave are eligible. Survey evidence (Statistics Canada 2006) for the

2000 to 2005 period suggests that between 70 and 75 percent of mothers with a child age 0 had

14
   Historically, mothers have taken the vast majority of the leave, although this is (slowly) changing in recent years.
Marshall (2008) reports that in 2006, 23 percent of eligible fathers took some parental leave. This average reflects
incidence of 56 percent in Quebec (where there is dedicated leave for fathers) and 11 percent in the rest the country.
As documented below, observations from Quebec are deleted from our analysis sample.
15
   The changes in provincial mandates were from 29-35 weeks to 52-54 weeks with the exceptions of Alberta, where
the change was from 18 weeks to 52 weeks, and Quebec, where the entitlement did not change from a level of 70
weeks.
16
   For example, as late as October 2000 Ontario did not appear on track to make the change but did eventually in
December due to public outcry.
17
   Two provinces, Saskatchewan and Alberta, did not change their job protected leave standards until 2001.
Unfortunately there are not sufficient observations from these provinces over the 2-6 months of delay to take
advantage of this feature of the reform.


                                                                                                                     8
insured employment before childbirth. Of these, between 80 and 85 percent make a claim. These

percentages show a slight increase from 2000 to 2005 that suggests only a small change in the

composition of mothers who take leave before and after the reform (see also Baker and Milligan

2008a).



The Data

        The National Longitudinal Study of Children and Youth (NLSCY) is a nationally

representative survey of Canada’s children. The data we use are based on a longitudinal survey

of successive birth cohorts of children up to age 5. The survey is conducted in biennial cycles, so

cohorts are interviewed at ages <1, 2, 4 or ages 1, 3, 5. To account for sample attrition, a new

top-up sample is added in each cycle to ensure each cycle provides a representative sample of

children aged 0-5. There are approximately 2,000 children of each age in each cycle. The

2008/09 data are the final cycle of the survey.

        The survey offers three measures of the cognitive development of children aged 4-5.

Each of these measures comes from an existing validated model and is comparable to measures

used in other studies. The first measure is the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-revised (PPVT-

R), which has been used extensively in previous studies of child development and is well known

in the literature. The second is the Number Knowledge Test, which was developed by a team led

by Robbie Case at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (Case et al. 1996). The test

consists of 30 questions that are used to rank children on a four point scale.18 It assesses

children’s understanding of the system of whole numbers, probing their ability to count by rote,

quantify small sets of objects, their knowledge of number sequence and their ability to solve

18
  The scale is: 0—the child has not reached the predimensional level, 1—the child has reached the predimensional
level (4 year old equivalent), 2—the child has reached the unidimensional level (6 year old equivalent) and 3—the
child has reached the bidimensional level (8 year old equivalent).


                                                                                                                    9
simple arithmetic problems. The questions and answers are delivered orally, and no aids (e.g.,

pencil and paper) are allowed. Unfortunately the raw and standardized scores on the 30 questions

are only available for later cycles of the NLSCY. The third is the “Who am I?” measure, a test

developed by a team led by Molly de Lemos at the Australian Council for Educational Research

(de Lemos and Doig, 1999). It consists of copying and writing tasks that help reveal children’s

understanding and use of symbols. The copying exercises are intended to assess abilities in

geometry and the writing tasks are intended to investigate knowledge of the use of numbers,

letters and words. The test consists of 10 questions that are each awarded scores between 1 and

4. The overall or total score on the instrument is simply the sum of the scores on the individual

questions and therefore ranges in principle between 10 and 40.

      We also investigate a number of non-cognitive/behavioral indices. These indices are

parent-reported measures based on best practices in the literature.19 These indicies measure

hyperactivity, anxiety, physical aggression and indirect aggression. Each index is built up from a

series of questions about the children’s reactions to other people and different situations. For

each index a higher score implies more problematic behavior. Parent-reported indices are not

without their critics. The online appendix to Baker et al. (2008) provides a detailed discussion of

these measures.

      We select children aged 4 and 5 born in the years 1997-2004. These birth years bracket the

changes to the maternity leave laws, yielding four pre-reform cohorts and four post-reform


19
   The measures are based on questions drawn from the Ontario Child Health Study, the Montreal Longitudinal
Survey, and the Child Behavior Checklist of T. M. Achenbach. The Ontario Child Health Survey questions are
based on items in the Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach and Edelbrock 1983), modified so that that the
symptoms canvassed correspond to the classification of psychiatric disorders in DSM-III-R (the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders of the American Psychiatric Association) (Boyle et al. 1993). The questions
in the Montreal Longitudinal Survey are based on the Social Behavior Questionnaire. This includes 28 items from
the Preschool Behavior Questionnaire (Behar and Stringfield 1974; Tremblay et al. 1992), an adaptation of the
Children’s Behavior Questionnaire (Rutter 1967) and the Prosocial Behavior Questionnaire (Weir, Stevenson, and
Graham 1980; Weir and Duveen 1981).


                                                                                                                10
cohorts. Our objective here is to choose cohorts that are temporally adjacent to the reform to

control as much as possible for unobserved time effects. Each birth cohort is surveyed three

times between the ages of 0 and 5.20 Because the survey is conducted biennially, this means

children from adjacent birth cohorts are of different ages in their first, second and third surveys.

For example, the children of the 2000 birth cohort are surveyed at ages <1, 2 and 4, while the

children of the 2001 birth cohort are surveyed at ages 1, 3 and 5.

      We omit all observations from Quebec, to account for the fact this province’s universal,

low fee child care program was extended to children under the age of two in the fall of 2000, and

so its effect might be easily confused with the effects of change in maternity leave laws. We also

omit children who live in single parent households because concurrent changes in Canada’s

system of child tax benefits, which disproportionately benefited these families, might confound

the inference.21 Therefore, our results are for children in two parent/adult households, who are

the majority beneficiaries of universal maternity leave policies.22 Our sample includes both

mothers who were eligible for the leave and those who might not be eligible. Eligibility depends

on the number of hours worked in the 12 months before a claim is made, and we do not observe

this information in our dataset.

      An overview of our developmental measures for our sample is provided in table 2. We

present the sample means for each measure as well as the means for the pre- and post-reform

children. For each of the cognitive measures there is a decrease in the index with the reform of

between 6 (PPVT) and 13 (Who Am I?) percent of a standard deviation. For the behavioral

20
   To keep the sample representative in a given survey, a top up sample is added to replace lost sample members of
the longitudinal sample.
21
   The proportion of children age 0-5 living with two parents in 2000 in the Labour Force Survey is 92.2%. Single-
parenthood is much less prevalent in Canada than the United States.
22
   Alberta and Saskatchewan did not change their maternity leave provisions to match the change in the federal EI
rules until after December 2000. We therefore also exclude the very small number of children born in Alberta and
Saskatchewan in the months between December 2000 and the point when the provincial maternity leave mandate
changed a few months later.


                                                                                                                 11
measures, in the reform period there is a decrease in both aggression indices and an increase in

anxiety and hyperactivity. For these measures the changes are generally smaller—4-6 percent of

a standard deviation.

      We also use data from the Labour Force Survey (LFS) for the analysis of our exclusion

restrictions presented after the main results. The primary purpose of this monthly survey is to

collect information on the labor force status of Canadians. We make use of the data on labor

force status, as well as questions on reasons for not actively seeking work, weekly and hourly

earnings and family structure. We again exclude observations from the province of Quebec and

from single-parent households.

     Age in years is recorded in the LFS, but exact date of birth is not available. Also, single

year age categories are available for ages 0, 3, 4 and 5, but not for ages 1 and 2. Our methods for

identifying birth year for the analysis of the LFS are reported in the Appendix.



Empirical Framework

      We want to estimate the impact of maternal time on children’s developmental outcomes.

To fix ideas, consider the empirical model

      𝐷𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑇𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖 ,

where 𝐷𝑖 is the developmental outcome, 𝑇𝑖 is the period that the mother provides care after birth

and 𝑢𝑖 is unobserved determinants of the outcome. As has been noted in many previous papers,

OLS estimation of this equation is unlikely to retrieve the causal effect of mother’s time on

development because 𝐸[𝑇𝑖 𝑢𝑖 ] ≠ 0. For example, mothers who return to work early (low values

of 𝑇𝑖 ) may have unobserved characteristics that lead their children to have better or worse

developmental outcomes. We therefore need to find exogenous variation in 𝑇𝑖 to obtain unbiased




                                                                                                   12
estimates of 𝛽.

       Our approach is to use the variation in time at home induced by the maternity leave reform

in an instrumental variables framework. Our first stage equation is

       (1) 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 = 𝑋𝑖 𝜙 + 𝑍𝑖 𝛿 + 𝑣𝑖 ,

where 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 , the number of months the mother is home with her child in the first year of life, now

replaces 𝑇𝑖 as a measure of maternal care,23 X are control variables and Z is the instrument based

on the reform of the maternity leave system.

       We have two candidates for Z: 1) a dummy variable indicating that the child was born after

the change in maternity leave provisions came into effect (i.e., December 31, 2000), and 2) the

number of weeks of job protected maternity leave mandated by a province’s labor standards law

when the child was born, as reported in table 1. Relative to the first instrument, the instrument

based on weeks of mandated leave potentially exploits inter-provincial differences in pre reform

maternity leave provisions. However, if the EI entitlement was greater than the local job-

protection mandate, it is possible the mandates were not well-enforced or followed. Moreover,

the R-squared from a regression of the provincial leave mandates on year effects is 0.88; and the

addition of province effects raises the R-squared to 0.95. This suggests that our first instrument

captures most of the variation in the second. For this reason, in addition to the above-noted issues

with the observance of provincial statutes, we therefore rely primarily on the first instrument in

the analysis.

       Our second stage equation is

       (2) 𝐷𝑖 = 𝑋𝑖 𝜆 + 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 𝜑 + 𝜀𝑖 .

Our specification of X is partly directed by any residual concerns about omitted variables in the

23
  The substitution of 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 for Ti provides a neat solution for observations with censored values of Ti by limiting the
time frame to one year. For example, for children surveyed at older ages, the observation of Ti may be censored
because the mother is still at home at the date of the survey.


                                                                                                                    13
estimation of (2). In particular, the variation in our primary instrument is perfectly correlated

with time. Therefore, it is important to control for any secular trends in the developmental

outcomes across birth cohorts that might contaminate the estimates. Our main strategy to address

this concern is to use polynomials in time defined at the quarter of birth level. Children born over

the eight birth cohorts in our sample (1997-2004) span 32 quarters. We also experiment with

other specifications of these time effects and present graphs of the variation in key variables. The

other control variables are dummy variables for male children, month of birth, single month of

child’s age at the survey date, a dummy variable for whether the child is bilingual, dummies for

the number of older and younger children, province, city size, and the following characteristics

of mothers’ and fathers’: education (4 categories), age (single year), and place of birth (19

countries).24

       Note that some additional potential sources of bias are directly addressed by our choice of

sample. We omit observations from Quebec and for single parent households due to changes in

other policies that might affect developmental outcomes and be picked up by our instruments.

       One assumption—the exclusion restriction—of our instrumental variables strategy is that

the reform of the leave provisions affects child outcomes only through the resulting change in

mothers’ time at home post birth. At least two dimensions of this assumption deserve comment.

First, the exclusion restriction means that any other maternal input (such as breastfeeding—see

Baker and Milligan 2008a) that may change because of the extra time at home will be picked up

by 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 . That is, 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 will reflect not just the direct effect of extra maternal time, but also any

‘downstream’ impacts of the extra maternal time on other inputs. In this sense, care must be


24
  The regressions for age standardized PPVT scores omit the month of birth and single month of child’s age. The
results including these controls are reported in footnotes below. We control for place of birth to account for any
differences in immigration patterns. Over this time period, however, there were no strong shifts in the class or source
of immigration to Canada.


                                                                                                                    14
taken in interpreting the coefficients on 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 . Second, we clearly assume the reform had no

impact on child development by some other conduit. Our direct evidence of the impact of the

reform on other developmental inputs, reported below, provides support for this position.

           The other important assumption for our IV strategy is monotonicity—that the instrument

has a monotonic effect on mothers’ time at home. While in theory it is possible that an increase

in parental lead entitlement could lead some mothers to take longer leaves and others to take

shorter leaves (Klerman and Leibowitz 1997), empirically the latter effect is not important for

the reform we examine (Baker and Milligan 2010). Furthermore, in the current context, theory

predicts that mothers taking shorter leaves due to the leave reform would, pre reform, have taken

leaves in excess of one year. Therefore any negative impact of the leave reform on mothers’

leave would be in the interval > 12 months. Our empirical strategy focuses on the increase in

leave taking due to the reform in the interval 0 through 12 months.

           A visual depiction of our identification strategy is provided in figures 1 and 2. Here we

graph the variation in our measure of maternal care, 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 , and our most well-known outcome,

PPVT, across the reform.25 More specifically we graph estimates of year of birth effects from a

regression of 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 or PPVT on our demographic controls, year of birth effects and no constant.26

The cohorts 2001-2004 are exposed to the new regime. Therefore, these figures provide a view

of the variation identifying our first stage and the reduced form.

           In figure 1 there is clear evidence that the reform increased the amount of time mothers’

were at home in the first year. A regression of the year of birth effects on a constant and a

dummy variable for the reform reveals the pre/post reform increase is 2.218 (0.168) months.

Evidence in Baker and Milligan (2008a) indicates between 65 and 75 percent of women were


25
     The sample for both 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 and PPVT is children aged 4 and 5 with valid PPVT scores.
26
     The polynomials in quarter are not included here given the specification of year of birth effects.


                                                                                                          15
eligible for the leave over this period, leading to the estimated impact for treated women of

between ((1/0.75)*2.218) 2.96 and ((1/0.65)*2.218) 3.41 months.

        We relate this increase in 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 to any corresponding change in our development

indicators. In figure 2 we can clearly see there is no evidence of a corresponding improvement in

PPVT scores. In fact, it appears that these scores are marginally lower after the new leave

provisions. The estimate here of the pre/post reform change is -1.511 (0.206) points.

        Given the time series variation available to us, it might seem natural to implement a

regression discontinuity (RD) design. We do not take this approach for a number of reasons.

First, the sampling design of the NLSCY prevents a straightforward application of the RD

identification strategy to our problem. As noted above, in the NLSCY children of adjacent

cohorts are of different ages in their first, second and third interviews. More specifically, the

children of the last pre-reform cohort (2000) were age 4 when our developmental indicators were

recorded, while the children of the first post reform cohort (2001) were age 5. Therefore a strict

regression discontinuity estimator would rely on the age standardization of the developmental

scores being correct. Rather than relying on this being true, we sample multiple cohorts

symmetrically before and after the reform so that any age effects average out.27 Second, and

related, the sample sizes in the NLSCY, while large for a children’s survey, are relatively modest

compared to the European administrative registers that are the basis of much of the RD evidence

on the long run effects parental leaves. Specifically, the samples in the months directly before

and after the reform are small, so our strategy also allows us to bring sufficient sample sizes to

the estimation. Third, the evaluation of early childhood programs using a strict RD design, which

compares children born months or even days apart, leans very heavily on the assumption that


27
  For example, using the 1999 and 2000 births pre reform and the 2001 and 2002 cohorts post reform ensures that
the development measures for all children in both the pre and post reform samples were recorded at age 4 or 5.


                                                                                                              16
program impacts are not offset by the remedial actions of schools and parents. However, in a

group of children born in such close temporal proximity, comparisons of pre- and post-reform

children could be easily made and would be an obvious reference point for parents and teachers

attempting to discover the developmental progress of a child. Parents appear to use other

children and their parents as reference points to evaluate the development of their own children

(e.g., Glascoe and MacLean 1990). Also, in clinical application parents’ evaluations are found to

be more useful when they are asked to compare their child to other children (Deimann and

Kastner-Koller 2011 and references therein). While our approach is not completely free of these

concerns, by sampling multiple cohorts before and after the reform the impact of any such

remedial action is diluted relative to its impact in a strict RD design. Furthermore, we observe

the children before the remedial opportunities in formal schooling are made available. Finally,

we carefully document any differences in developmental inputs provided to pre- and post-reform

children at ages 0 through 5 years.



Two-Stage Least-Squares estimates of the impact of Mother’s Care on Developmental

Outcomes at Age 4 and 5

       We now present our main results. First are our Two-Stage Least-Squares (TSLS)

estimates, and a demonstration of how they vary with different specifications of the time effects

and in different samples. Next, we gather evidence on the exclusion restriction that assumes time

at home is the channel through which maternity leave has its impact. Finally, we examine how

our results vary with and without controls and investigate the influence of the control variables

on our analysis.




                                                                                                    17
        In table 3 are our main TSLS estimates of the impact of maternal care from the sample of

birth cohorts 1997 through 2004. In column 1 are the results using the dummy variable for

treatment as the instrument and conditioning on the demographic controls and the quartic in time

measured at the quarter of birth level. The corresponding estimates for the instrument from the

first stage are reported in the preceding column. The instrument is very significant in each first

stage regression.

        The estimate for PPVT is negative and statistically significant at the 10 percent level. It

indicates a one month increase in maternal care over the range we study leads to a decrease in

this score of 4.8 percent of a standard deviation.28 Recall that in the discussion of figures 1 and 2

we report estimates of both a first stage and a reduced form for the pre/post variation in the year

of birth effects for 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 and PPVT based on our treatment dummy variable. They are 2.218

months and -1.511 points respectively. The ratio of this reduced form to the first stage is -0.681,

not far off the point estimate of -0.739 in table 3 that is obtained using a different specification of

the time effects. Also, the estimate of the first stage matches well with the estimate in table 3.

The result for Who Am I? is also negative and statistically significant at the 10 percent level. It

indicates a one month increase in maternal care leads to a decrease of 4.7 percent of a standard

deviation. Finally, the estimate for Know Your Numbers is positive, again statistically significant

at the 10 percent level, and indicates an increase in this score of 5.2 percent of the standard

deviation.

        The estimates for the behavioral measures are uniformly small and statistically

insignificant. In each case the estimated standard error is 2.9 percent or less of the standard

deviation of the corresponding measure. This suggests the power to detect changes in the


28
  Adding controls for the child’s age and month of birth the estimate is -0.415 (0.486). As we report below
(footnote 31) this change results from a change in the estimate for girls moving to this specification.


                                                                                                              18
indicators of at least 5.7 percent of a standard deviation at the 5 percent level. Therefore, any

improvement in behavior undetected by our empirical strategy would by implication be quite

small.

         In columns 2 through 4 we experiment with the control for time effects, by specifying, in

turn, a cubic in time, a linear trend in time specified separately for the pre and post reform time

periods, and a quadratic in time specified separately for the pre and post reform time periods.29

The point estimates for PPVT are robust to these innovations although for the pre/post reform

quadratic specification the standard errors are much larger. There is more sensitivity for both the

point estimates and the statistical significance the other two cognitive measures. Finally the

behavioral measures vary in sign and magnitude across specifications, but almost all the

estimates are statistically insignificant.

         In column 5 we use our second instrument, weeks of mandated job protected leave, which

varies at the provincial level. In the preceding column are the estimates for this instrument from

the first stage. As explained above, this instrument exploits variation in the change in leave

mandate by province (see table 1). The estimated impacts for PPVT and Who Am I? are now

larger, but so are their standard errors. The estimate for Know Your Numbers is now negative,

but very small. The results for the behavioral measures are in general quite different than their

counterparts in column 1 although all remain statistically insignificant.

         Overall the estimates for PPVT in table 3 display a good amount of stability across the

specifications. The estimates for Who Am I? display a bit more sensitivity, although none is

positive. The estimates for the other measures vary more significantly across columns, which




29
  The second stage collapses when we specify a quintic in time. The model is not identified when we use quarter of
birth dummy variables since they perfectly predict the instrument.


                                                                                                                19
might be expected given their relatively larger standard errors and lack of statistical

significance.30

         We next examine estimates from a tighter sample around the reform using children born

in 1999 through 2002. These estimates are potentially less affected by any secular differences

between pre and post reform cohorts, but this benefit comes at the cost of a reduction in sample

size of about one-half. The results are reported in table 4. The estimates for PPVT are very

similar to the estimates in the previous table and all statistically significant at the 5 percent level.

The estimates for both Know Your Numbers and Who Am I? are now of opposite sign of the

results in table 3, but in both cases the standard errors are much bigger. For the behavioral

measures the standard errors are again much larger and while the point estimates don’t always

match their counterparts in table 3 are statistically significant. The exception to this conclusion is

the results for Hyperactivity, which are negative now statistically significant at the 10 percent

level in some specifications.

         To try to shed more light on the meaning of the statically significant impacts on some of

the cognitive scores in table 3, in table 5 we report estimates separately by sex. It is clear that the

negative impact on PPVT is experienced exclusively by boys, while any positive impact on

Know Your Numbers is experienced by girls.31

         Considering the sum of evidence in tables 3-5, the estimates for most outcomes are

largely statistically insignificant, typically small, and show some sensitivity to the specifications

of the control for time and of the instrument. The exception to this conclusion is the results for

PPVT which are more robust, typically statistically significant and consistently negative.

30
   The number of observations varies across the different outcomes. Restricting the sample to children with valid
observations on all outcomes leads to similar estimates.
31
   Controlling for child’s age and month of birth the estimate for males is -1.443 (0.743) and for females, 0.953
(0.672).



                                                                                                                    20
Testing for other channels of impact

        A strength of our study is that we can assess the identifying assumption that no other

changes in developmental inputs are correlated with our instrument. Bernal and Keane (2011)

note that few empirical investigations of the relationship of current developmental outcomes to

past environments consider the cumulative impact of past developmental inputs. This is likely

because measures of past inputs are not available in most data sets.

        In this section, we test the validity of our exclusion restriction by investigating

differences in developmental inputs between pre and post reform birth cohorts in the years

intervening the first year and the age at which our developmental outcomes are measured. We

argue that this is a key step to connect the leave reform to the cognitive and non-cognitive

outcomes at ages 4 and 5. As noted in the Introduction, any relationship between leave reforms

and later life outcomes may be accentuated or offset by the remedial actions of parents and

schools. These actions might be expected if due to the timing of the reform, pre and post reform

children were in the same or adjacent grades. Note it is precisely this group of children that are

most “informative” in regression discontinuity analyses of leave reforms.

        In Baker and Milligan (2010), the care arrangements of children at ages 13-24 months

were found to be little changed for the cohorts born after 2000, even though their care

arrangements up to 12 months were sharply different than for earlier cohorts with less access to

leave. Here, we follow up and extend that analysis to study the income and labor supply patterns

in the time following the first year of life.

        To proceed we use both the NLSCY and the LFS. Because we do not observe 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 in the

LFS, we cannot use our instrumental variables strategy for these data. Moreover, we cannot see

quarter of birth, so our strategy for the LFS can only exploit cross-year of birth variation. For




                                                                                                     21
these reasons, we investigate any differences in developmental inputs across birth cohorts using a

different empirical strategy than the IV strategy we use for the analysis of cognitive and

behavioral development that follows.

       For both the NLSCY and the LFS, we estimate the reduced form relationship between the

inputs and our instrument following a two-step procedure outlined in Baker and Milligan (2010).

Briefly, we regress the developmental input on demographic controls and a full set of year of

birth effects omitting the intercept. In the second step we regress the 8 estimated year of birth

effects from the first stage on an intercept and the instrument—a dummy variable that equals one

for birth cohorts exposed to the new maternity leave provisions. The estimates of the parameter

on this dummy variable reported below reveal the average difference in the dependent variable

between pre and post reform birth cohorts.

       We start with the NLSCY data, investigating measures of maternal care in table 6. The

first row contains results for 𝑇𝐹𝑌𝑖 at different ages between 13 and 71 months. The samples at

different ages do not contain all the same children, so the estimated time at home in the first year

may change somewhat. However, absent some bias due to cohort attrition and the survey re-

sampling procedures, the estimates of the increase in time at home in the first year should be

similar when measured at the different points of age. They are in fact very similar varying within

a quarter of a month. The estimated year of birth effects underlying these results are reported in

table A1 of the appendix. For each group there is a clear break in the estimates between the 2000

and 2001 birth cohorts corresponding to the reform.

       In the next row are the results for a 0/1 indicator that the mother has returned to work by

the indicated age. At ages 13-24 there is a marginal but not statistically significant decrease in




                                                                                                     22
the proportion who have returned to work. At ages 25-39 and 48-71 months the point estimates

are effectively zero and statistically insignificant.

         Baker and Milligan (2010) report that the reform had little impact on the non parental

care arrangements of these children at ages 13-24 months, this despite the fact their care

arrangements up to 12 months were sharply affected. Unfortunately we are unable to extend this

analysis to ages 25-71 months due to sampling problems in the non parental care section of the

NLSCY in cycle 6 and a revamp of this section of the survey in cycles 7 and 8.32

         In rows 3 and 4 of table 6 we examine the family circumstances in which the child grew

up, through the presence of older and younger siblings. There is little evidence here that the

reform had a significant effect on the spacing of births or total fertility to this point in this

sample.33 The estimates for all ages are statistically insignificant. Finally in the last row we

report the results using a self reported depression score for the mother as a dependent variable.

Chatterji and Markowitz (2005) report a positive effect of maternity leave on mothers’ maternal

health although at lower durations than the ones under study here. While the estimates for this

variable are negative—indicating lower depression—they are all statistically insignificant.

         The NLSCY does not provide good information on economic outcomes contemporaneous

with the survey such as employment and income. This is in part due to the fact that the survey




32
   Cycles 6-8 are the source of information on the non parental care of post reform children at these older ages.
These sampling issues make the comparison of these responses to the responses of pre reform cohorts from earlier
waves problematic. The issues include a computer glitch that led to missing values for one-quarter of children in
cycle 6.
33
   We investigated the potential impact of differential fertility on the composition of our sample by looking at the
fraction of childless couples, the average number of children among those with children, and the fraction of those
having a child who are married. No differences in the trend after 2000/2001 was observed.


                                                                                                                   23
questions about these outcomes do not have a fixed reference point. 34 We therefore turn to the

LFS to investigate these and other inputs.

         The results for the LFS are reported in table 7, while the underlying year of birth

estimates are reported in Table A2 of the appendix. Note that the age groupings are slightly

different than those in table 6 but span the same interval from 13 to 71 months.35 In the first 4

rows are the results for labor force status as of the survey date. While there is little evidence of

an impact of the reform on mothers’ employment, there is a statistically significant, but small

increase in the probability the employment was full time when the child was between 13 and 59

months of age. Here, full time is defined as working 30 hours per week or more. Note, however,

that there is but a faint echo of this result in the estimates for usual weekly hours of work which

are all positive, but most less than one hour per week.36 We note that this NLSCY and LFS

evidence that the increase in maternity leave had little impact on mothers’ post birth employment

is consistent with the results in Baker and Milligan (2008b) and Schonberg and Ludsteck

(forthcoming).

         The next rows contain the results for real earnings. The results for ages 13-35 months and

36-47 months are after the period of paid leave has ended, but prior to the measurement of

developmental indicators. At these ages there is evidence of an increase in family real earnings

of around $60 per week, although not in mothers’ real earnings or wages. At ages concurrent

with the testing there is evidence of an increase in both mothers’ and families’ real earnings.



34
   In the case of income, the survey respondent (the person most knowledgeable about the child) supplies
information for each member of the family. The reference period for the report is the previous 12 months, which is
not a calendar year and varies across respondents depending on which month of the year they are interviewed.
35
   As noted earlier, the year of birth is not directly reported in the LFS. Instead, we identify the year of birth for
children by selecting a sample of children in December of each year. The regressions also include controls for
province, urban/rural residence, mother’s and spouse’s age and education.
36
   The result for age 36-47 months does echo the larger point estimate for hours for the 25-39 months age group in
the NLSCY data


                                                                                                                     24
           We create real earnings by converting the earnings reports to 2002 dollars using the

Consumer Price Index. In the presence of a general upward trend in wages across years, our

estimates here based on just the time series variation will attribute to the policy what is really just

a trend in real wage growth. For this reason, we have also re-estimated these regressions

deflating earnings by the growth in the Industrial Aggregate Wage from Statistics Canada’s

Survey of Employment Payrolls and Hours (catalogue 72-002-XIB). As can be seen in Appendix

table A3, using these wage-growth adjusted earnings tells a somewhat different story. They

indicate a smaller (by half) increase in family earnings at ages 13-35 months, and little increase

at older ages.

           If the Consumer Price Index-adjusted results are to be given greater weight there is

evidence of a modest increase in family resources for the post reform birth cohorts concurrent

with the measurement of the developmental indices that we study. We might expect this

difference in family resources to lend a small positive developmental advantage to the post

reform cohorts. This would attenuate the negative impact on PPVT we observe in figure 2.

However, if instead the wage adjusted results are more informative, there is little earnings

advantage for the post reform cohorts.

            In the next 5 rows of table 7 are measures of maternal care that are available in the

LFS.37 First up are indicators that the mothers of these children work part-time, are not available

for work or not looking for work because they are caring for their own children. We see little

evidence here of systematic and significant differences in how the children were cared for at ages

13 through 71 months.

           Next are variables that capture whether the mother has been without work since the child

was born. To construct these variables we compare the year the mother last worked to the child’s
37
     The LFS does not provide any direct information on whether the child is in non-parental care.


                                                                                                     25
year of birth. For the “year before birth” (YBB) variable we code the mother as not working

since giving birth if the date of last employment is the year before the year of birth. For the “year

of birth” (YOB) measure we code the mother as not working since giving birth if the date of last

employment is the same as the year of birth. Using the YBB method we miss some mothers who

have in fact stayed at home since their child’s birth. Using the YOB method we code some

mothers as having stayed at home, who might have instead returned to work for a short period

post birth. That said, the two methods lead to very similar conclusions. There is a very modest

increase in staying at home at ages 13-35, and no evidence of an impact of the reform at older

ages. Note the estimates for ages 13-35 are of similar magnitude to, but opposite sign of, the

estimates for the probability the mother has returned to work for this age group in the NLSCY

(table 6).

         Finally, in the last two rows we look for changes in family structure through the presence

of younger or older siblings. Echoing the results from the NLSCY, there is no evidence here of

an impact of the reform on the fertility decisions of mothers in our sample.

        The results in table 6 and 7 tell largely the same story. There is little systematic evidence

in either the NLSCY or LFS data of differences in observable inputs to child development

between the pre- and post-reform birth cohorts at ages 1 through 5. This is consistent with our

exclusion restriction: the leave reform had concurrent effects on the amount of maternal care

children received at ages 0-12 months, but did not affect other inputs across birth cohorts at older

ages. That is, our results on cognitive and behavioral measures can be attributed with some

confidence directly to the increase in maternal care in the first year of life and are not observably

contaminated by changes in other inputs after 12 months.




                                                                                                   26
Robustness Analysis: Trends in Observable Characteristics

        By varying the specification of the control for time and also the sample, we investigate

whether our results are sensitive to how we account for unobserved differences between the pre

and post reform cohorts. In this section we examine any changes in observable characteristics

between the pre and post reform cohorts. As noted above, tables 6 and 7 show there are few

differences in the observable developmental inputs provided to the children between ages 1 and

5. We now focus on changes in the characteristics of their parents and households.

        To start the analysis, in column (1) of table 8 we report the results when we omit all the

control variables from the regressions except those for the child’s age. Beginning with the

cognitive measures, each estimate is negative and statistically significant. The estimate for PPVT

is just over half the size of many of the estimates in table 3. The result for Know Your Numbers

contrasts with mostly positive estimates in table 3. For the behavioral outcomes there are now

negative and statistically significant estimates for aggression and indirect aggression. The results

for anxiety and hyperactivity are both a bit bigger than estimates from table 3 but statistically

insignificant.

        Focusing on the result for PPVT, the difference between the conditional and

unconditional estimates suggest there is some observable characteristic of the children’s families

that is 1) correlated with the reform, and 2) correlated with the outcome variables (e.g.,

positively correlated with PPVT). To investigate we run OLS regressions of each of the

demographic characteristics on dummy variables for year of birth. The results indicate that there

are changes in mothers’ and fathers’ education that appear correlated with the reform. The

estimated year of birth effects for the proportions of mothers and fathers with a high school

diploma and a university degree are reported in table 9. The results indicate a reduction of the




                                                                                                    27
proportion of mothers with a high school diploma, and a corresponding increase in the

proportion with a university degree of roughly 8 percentage points with the 2001 birth cohort.

Corresponding but smaller changes in the educational attainment of fathers are also apparent.

       One survey issue complicating the interpretation of these results is changes in the

questions about education. First in cycle 5 a new open ended category “other education or

training” was added to the question about post secondary attainment. Second in cycle 7 the

number of categories recording educational attainment was increased. Also, for the first time

parents of children who were being followed longitudinally were invited to update their

educational attainment. In cycle 5 are the initial interviews of the last pre reform (2000) and first

post reform (2001) birth cohorts, while Cycle 7 is the survey in which the developmental results

(e.g., PPVT scores) for the first post reform cohorts are observable (birth cohorts 2001 and

2002), so there are changes in the survey questions about educational attainment correlated with

the reform.

       To gain an independent perspective on this issue we examine data from the LFS on the

educational attainment of the mothers of different birth cohorts. There are no changes in the

education questions in the LFS over this period. The results are reported in figures 3 and 4. In

figure 3 we show the proportion of females by year with a university degree from three groups:

1) married/partnered mothers with a child less than 1 years old, 2) married/partnered mothers

with a child aged 1-5, and 3) women of child bearing age (ages 15-45). The first group isolates

mothers with a new born allowing us to examine differences among mothers giving birth across

the reform. Two points are clear. First there is a strong upward secular trend in the proportion of

females and mothers with post-secondary degrees over the period. Second, there is no obvious

jump in mothers’ educational attainment starting in 2001 after the reform is in place. If anything




                                                                                                   28
there is a jump in the last pre reform year (2000), but the increase is not out of line with similar

variation seen in, for example, 1994, 1997 and 2006. Corresponding time series for the

proportion of females with a high school degree are reported in figure 4. Again while there is a

clear secular trend in these data, there is no evidence of an impact of the reform.

         In table 10 are regression results from the LFS corresponding to the table 9 results from

the NLSCY. Here we use the sample of parents of children aged 4-5, the ages at which our

developmental indicators are measured, to match our sample from the NLSCY. First there is no

evidence of significant changes in the education of fathers by the child’s birth cohort. Second,

while there is no evidence of shifts in the proportion of mothers with a high school diploma by

birth cohort, there is evidence of an increase in the proportion of mothers with a university

degree starting with birth cohort 2002, one year after the reform. The increase is roughly half of

the increase in the NLSCY data.

         We interpret these LFS results as suggesting that the story told in table 9 is partly the

result of the changes in the educational questions in the NLSCY, or some other sample issue.38

Mechanically the changes in parental education in the NLSCY do account for the differences in

the conditional and unconditional estimates for PPVT. This can be seen in the second column of

table 8 where we report estimates simply adding mothers’ and fathers’ education as control

variables. This brings the estimate for PPVT in line with the previous results. Note also the

estimated decreases in Know Your Numbers and Who Am I? scores are marginally larger

relative to the unconditional counterparts. The decrease in these scores is larger once we account

for the recorded increase in the education of the parents.

38
   Another change in the survey in cycle 7 is that children being followed longitudinally were interviewed even if
they had not responded in all previous cycles. In previous cycles children followed longitudinally were interviewed
in a current wave only if they had responded in all previous waves. As noted above there is a top up sample in each
cycle to account for any longitudinal attrition in the birth cohorts. In any event omitting these observations from the
sample does not materially affect the results.


                                                                                                                     29
        What accounts for the difference in the conditional and unconditional estimates for Know

Your Numbers and the behavioral measures? The answer is in table 8, column 3. Here we add a

very simple control for any secular trends in the data: a linear trend. With the notable exceptions

of PPVT and Who Am I?, the estimates for most of the other outcomes switch signs and/or lose

statistical significance with this change in specification. Exceptions are indirect aggression and

hyperactivity—in these cases the estimates start to converge to the estimates in table 3 when

higher order terms in time are specified (i.e., a cubic). This implies that the statistically

significant estimates for these outcomes in column 1 of table 8 cannot be distinguished from a

simple trend in the data. More generally the estimates for these outcomes are sensitive to the

specification of controls for secular trends. However, this is not the case for PPVT and to a lesser

extent for Who Am I?.

        We recognize that the changes in parental education over time documented in the LFS

potentially put post reform children at an advantage developmentally, all else equal, to their pre

reform cohorts. This would present a stronger challenge to our inferences if we had found that

the maternity leave reform had resulted in an increase in the developmental scores. We would

not know what part of the effect was due to the reform and what part was due to the increasing

education of the parents. As it is, however, we find no impact on some of our measures and small

negative impacts on others.

        Figures 3 and 4 tell us that a secular trend in mothers’ education over the period in which

the reform was implemented might affect our estimates. The trend appears to be stronger in the

recorded education variables of the NLSCY. It seems likely that this is in part due to the changes

in NLSCY education questions correlated with the reform. Therefore, once we use the NLSCY

education variables as control variables if there is a bias it would be negative—that is our




                                                                                                     30
conditional estimates provide upper bound estimates of a negative impact of the reform on PPVT

and Who Am I? scores. However, given the unconditional estimates for PPVT and Who Am I?

are negative and statistically significant, we can rule out any positive impact of the reform on

these cognitive measures.



Discussion

       The results presented in table 3 provide little evidence that the Canadian maternity leave

reforms had a measurable positive impact on the cognitive and behavioral outcomes of children

at ages 4 and 5. Together with the evidence of Baker and Milligan (2010), the results indicate

that the Canadian reform led to little improvement in a wide variety of measures of young

children’s development and well-being at ages 0 through 5 years. We believe this is a significant

conclusion. First, as noted in the introduction, a positive impact is assumed in legislation

enacting maternity leave in many developed countries. Second, the reforms did have a

substantial impact on the maternal care children receive in their first year of life, with consequent

impacts on inputs thought significant to development such as full time maternal employment,

non-licensed non-parental care, breastfeeding and exclusive breastfeeding duration. Third, these

findings provide precedence for the evidence that there is no impact of maternity leave on

cognitive outcomes measured at older ages (Dustmann and Schonberg 2012, Liu and Skans

2009, Rasmussen 2010). Finally, the stated target of maternity leave policies is often the

developmental outcomes of children at ages just prior to school entry. It is precisely at these ages

that we find no positive effect.

       The point estimates for some of our measures of behavioral development, while

statistically insignificant, are sometimes in the expected direction—better behavior. However, in




                                                                                                   31
general the results for these outcomes are quite unstable across changes in sample and

specification. Also, the standard errors are small enough to rule out changes in these outcomes of

more than 5½ percent of a standard deviation, so any improvement in behavior is by implication

small.

         While our results are consistent with analyses of the impacts of this Canadian reform at

younger ages, and more generally with studies of the impact of maternity leave reforms on long

run outcomes, they do contrast with the results of the cited literature on the impact of maternal

employment on child outcomes. One possible account of this disagreement is the different

identification strategies used in these two literatures. Most of the direct evidence of the impact of

maternity leave is based on policy reforms, which are arguably exogenous to unobserved

determinants of child outcomes. Studies of the impact of maternal employment on child

outcomes more commonly attempt to account for the possible endogeneity of maternal

employment by controlling for an extensive array of observable characteristics.

         We also note that the reform we examine not only increased the duration of leave but also

reduced the minimum employment needed for benefit entitlement from 700 hours to 600 hours in

the 12 months preceding the claim. This change was made in response to advocacy claiming that

given the typical spacing of births, many women were unable to work enough after giving birth

to establish entitlement for a subsequent birth. It is possible that the women newly entitled under

this part of the reform are so selected from the population to generate a bias to our estimates.

Unfortunately the NLSCY does not have sufficient information on the pre birth employment of

mothers to pursue this hypothesis.

         The results for PPVT and Who Am I? are not of the expected sign and are statistically

significant. In interpreting these negative impacts it is important to note that they are small. In




                                                                                                      32
the conditional results the impact on PPVT is 4.8 percent of a standard deviation, while the

impact on Who Am I? is 4.7 percent of a standard deviation. Given the previous discussion of

the recording of parental education in the NLSCY, these estimates are likely to be upper bounds.

       We argue that the relative impacts by sex add credibility to the inference. PPVT captures

skills in vocabulary, a precursor to reading. As reported by Fryer and Levitt (2010), males

persistently score lower in reading tests in the primary years, as early as at fall enrollment in

kindergarten. It is therefore perhaps not surprising that for these skills it is males who suffer the

greater consequence to an “upset” to developmental progress in the early years.

       A remaining question is why an increase in maternal care could have a negative, albeit

small, impact on cognition. One possibility is the post-reform increase in maternal care the

children experienced at ages 0-12 months. It is certainly true that some observational studies find

early childhood education, for which maternal care is often a substitute, has positive impacts on

cognition. However, it is not obvious what sort of critical early childhood instruction is provided

to children at ages 0-12 months when in non-parental care. Another possibility is some impact of

the reform on development inputs children received after their mothers’ returned to work.

However, as documented in Baker and Milligan (2010), the reform did not change the care

arrangements children were in at ages greater than 12 months. Also, the analysis in table 7

directly tests and rejects the hypothesis that there were systematic changes in a variety of other

developmental inputs. Finally, the reform we examine not only increased the duration of leave

but also reduced the minimum employment needed for benefit entitlement from 700 hours to 600

hours in the 12 months preceding the claim. This change was made in response to advocacy that

claimed that given the typical spacing of births, many women were unable to work enough to

establishment entitlement before their second, third, or subsequent birth. It is possible that the




                                                                                                     33
women newly entitled under this part of the reform are so selected from the population to

generate the negative impact on children’s cognitive scores. Unfortunately the NLSCY does not

have sufficient information on the pre birth employment of mothers to pursue this hypothesis.

           We think a potentially promising avenue starts at the widely held, but to our knowledge

not well researched, assumption that child development is monotonically increasing in the

amount of maternal care in the first year. Importantly, parental leave expansions not only change

the duration of maternal care but also the timing of the date of separation. It is possible that these

two effects push against each other at certain ages. More care may be better, but the

developmental consequences of mothers’ return to work may vary in an unrestricted way over

the first year. Simply put, that there may be better and worse times to make this transition over

the first year from a developmental perspective.

           The reform we analyze increased the maternal care in the first year by about 3 months for

the treated, changing the return to work on average from just short of 6 months post birth to just

shy of 9 months. Developmental psychologists observe that some key milestones are achieved in

the second 6 months of life. Potentially important here are the development of stranger anxiety

and separation anxiety.39 Stranger anxiety, which is generally observed emerging around 6-8

months, is the tendency of the child to express distress and wariness at the approach of a

stranger. In earlier months such an approach might be met instead with a smile and curiosity.

Separation anxiety refers to a child’s distress from being separated from his/her parent or

primary caregiver. It is thought to relate to the development of object permanence—the

appreciation that objects and people continue to exist when out of sight—and emerge around the

8th month.



39
     Our brief discussion of these milestones follows Scher and Harel (2009).


                                                                                                    34
         At a mother’s return to work, a child is separated from a parent and in many cases

introduced to a stranger. Relative to a return to work before 6 months, a return between 6 and 12

months places these events in precisely the interval in which a child develops anxiety about

them. More precisely, the impact of the maternity leave reform we study potentially increases the

stress a child experiences when attaching to a new non parental caregiver.

         Neither the direct impact on stress indicators nor any consequences for cognitive and

behavioral development of the mechanism we investigate have, to our knowledge, been directly

investigated (see Gunnar and Quevedo 2007 for a general discussion of stress and development

in infancy). There is evidence that maternal stress transmitted to the child in utero (O’Dinnell et

al. 2009, Bergman et al. 2010) or post-natally through breast milk (Glynn et al. 2007) can

negatively impact cognitive behavioral development (see also Glover 2011 and the references

therein). Also, after the emergence of “separation protest”, entry into non parental care leads to

persistent elevation of cortisol levels (Ahnert et al. 2004). Furthermore the expression of stranger

or separation anxiety may increase parental stress that may in turn have consequences for the

child.

         While the additional stress from parent/child separation at the 9th month rather than the

5th provides a potential mechanism for the small, negative cognitive effects we find, or an offset

of otherwise positive effects, the means to test this hypothesis are not available in our data. We

do observe that the maternity leave reform we analyze does not have a statistically significant

impact on our measure of anxiety at ages 4 and 5 (table 3), although this is clearly not definitive.

However, from a developmental perspective further research on this and associated issues is

clearly critical to initiatives to refine maternity and parental leave provisions in many countries.

Among other impacts, maternity leave reform typically affects the timing of mothers’ return to




                                                                                                     35
work, and therefore of the parent/child separation, over the first year. Our reading of the

literature is that open questions remain on how child development varies with the timing of this

separation.



Conclusions

       We investigate the impact of a change in Canada’s maternity leave laws on children’s

cognitive and behavioral development at ages 4 and 5. The change in the law increased the

duration of job-protected, partially-compensated leave from approximately 6 months to one year.

This led to large contemporaneous changes in important inputs to children’s development:

maternal care, maternal full time employment, unlicensed non-parental care, and breastfeeding

duration.

       We find that these changes had no positive impact on indices of behavioral and cognitive

development. For our behavioral indices we can rule out all but very modest improvements. Our

estimates for the cognitive indices are small, negative, and statistically significant in two of three

cases. For example, for PPVT we estimate that a one month increase in maternal care over the

range we examine leads to a reduction of at most 5.7 percent of a standard deviation. These

findings together with those in Baker and Milligan (2010) provide a fairly comprehensive

document of how the Canadian reform had little positive impact on a wide variety of

developmental indices for children at ages 0-5 years. Follow-up study of these children at older

ages will clearly further enhance our understanding of this reform.

       This said, we cannot rule out impacts on still more outcomes. For example we are unable

to investigate the impact of our reform on children’s health outcomes because Canada does not




                                                                                                    36
have an ongoing survey of children’s health. Ruhm (2000) and Tanaka (2005) provide evidence

of a positive impact of maternity leave on child health.

        Our results provide precedence for findings in the literature that maternity leave reforms

have no impact on cognitive outcomes measured at high school or later. They also highlight the

possibility that child development is not monotonically increasing in the amount of maternal care

received in the first year—there may be better and worse times for mothers to make the transition

back to work in this period. Because “more is better” appears to be the working assumption of

maternity leave laws in many countries, there is clearly a need to better understand the

developmental consequences of mothers’ return to work over the ages typically spanned by these

policies.




                                                                                                 37
References

Achenbach, T. M., and C. Edelbrock (1983), Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist and
Revised Child Behavior Profile. Burlington, VT: Queen City Printers.

Ahnert, Lieselotte, Megan R. Gunnar, Michael E. Lamb, and Martina Barthel (2004), “Transition
to Child Care: Associations With Infant–Mother Attachment, Infant Negative Emotion, and
Cortisol Elevations” Child Development, Vol. 75, No. 3, pp. 639 – 650.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2011), “Human Capital Development before Age Five,” in
David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b, pp. 1315-
1486. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Baker, Michael, (2011), “Universal early childhood interventions: what is the evidence base?”,
Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 44, No. 4, pp. 1069–1105

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2008a), “Maternal Employment, Breastfeeding, and Health:
Evidence from Maternity Leave Mandates,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 27, July, pp.
871-887.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2008b), “How does job-protected maternity leave affect
mothers’ employment?” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 655-691.

Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2010), “Evidence from maternity leave expansions of the
impact of maternal care on early child development,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 45,
Winter, pp. 1-32.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2008), “Universal Childcare, Maternal
Labor Supply, and Family Well-being,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 116, No. 4, pp. 709-
745.

Baum, Charles L., (2003) “Does Early Maternal Employment Harm Child Development? An
Analysis of the Potential Benefits of Leave Taking”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 21 No. 2
pp. 409-448.

Baydar, N., and J. Brooks-Gunn (1991), “Effects of maternal employment and child-care
arrangements on preschoolers’ cognitive and behavioral outcomes: Evidence from the children
of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.” Developmental Psychology, Vol. 27, pp. 932–
945.

Behar, Lenore, and Samuel Stringfield (1974), “A Behavior Rating Scale for the Preschool
Child,” Developmental Psychology Vol. 10 (September), pp. 601–10.

Belsky, J. (2006), “Early child care and early child development: Major findings of the NICHD
study of early child care,” European Journal of Developmental Psychology, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp.
95-110.



                                                                                                 38
Berger, L. M., J. Hill, and J. Waldfogel (2005), “Maternity leave, early maternal employment
and child health and development in the US.” Economic Journal, Vol. 115, pp. F29–F47.

Bergman, Kristin, Pampa Sarkar, Vivette Glover, and Thomas G. O’Connor (2010),
“Maternal Prenatal Cortisol and Infant Cognitive Development: Moderation by Infant–Mother
Attachment”, Biological Psychiatry, Vol. 67, pp. 1026–1032.

Bernal, R. (2008), “The Effect of Maternal Employment and Child Care on Children’s Cognitive
Development.” International Economic Review, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 1173-1209.

Bernal R and Michael P. Keane, (2011) “Child Care Choices and Children’s Cognitive
Achievement: The Case of Single Mothers”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp.
459-512.

Boyle, Michael H., David R. Offord, Yvonne Racine, Jan E. Fleming, Peter Szatmari, and
Mark Stanford (1993), “Evaluation of the Revised Ontario Child Health Study Scales,”
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry Vol. 34 (February), pp. 189–213.

Bradley-Johnson, Sharon (2001) “Cognitive Assessment for the Youngest Children: A Critical
Review of Tests” Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment 2001 Vol. 19: 19-44.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Wen-Jui Han, and Jane Waldfogel (2002), “Maternal Employment and
Child Cognitive Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life: The NICHD Study of Early Child
Care,” Child Development, Vol, 73, No. 4, pp. 1052-1072.

Carneiro, Pedro, Loken, Katrine and Kjell G. Salvanes, (2011) “A Flying Start? Maternity
Benefits and Long Run Outcomes of Children”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 5793.

Case, Robbie, Yukari Okamoto, Sharon Griffin, Anne McKeough, Charles Bleiker, Barabara
Henderson, Kimberly Marra Stephenson, Robert S. Siegler, and Daniel P. Keating, (1996). The
role of central conceptual structures in the development of children’s thought. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 61,1/2.

Chatterji, Pinka and Sara Markowitz (2005), “Does The Length Of Maternity Leave Affect
Maternal Health?,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 16-41.

Commonwealth of Australia (2009), Australia’s Paid Parental Leave Scheme, CanPrint
Communications Pty Ltd.

Danzer, Natalia and Victor Lavy (2012), “ Parental Leave and Medium-Run Cognitive Child
Outcomes: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Large Parental Leave Reform,” preliminary
draft, cited with permission.

Datta Gupta, Nabanita and Marianne Simonsen (2010), “Non-cognitive child outcomes and
universal high quality child care,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 94, No. 1-2, pp. 30-43.



                                                                                                39
de Lemos, M. and B. Doig (1999), Who Am I?: Developmental Assessment: Melbourne.
Australian Council for Educational Research.

Deimann, Pia., and Ursala Kastner-Koller, (2011). Maternal evaluations of young children’s
developmental status: A comparison of clinic- and non-clinic-groups. Psychological Test and
Assessment Modeling, 53(2), 214–227.

Dustmann, Christian, and Uta Schonberg (2012), “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and
Children’s Long-Term Outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 4,
No. 3, pp. 190-224.

Employment Relations Directorate (2006), The Maternity and Parental Leave (Amendment)
Regulations 2006 and the Paternity and Adoption Leave (Amendment) Regulations 2006, Full
Regulatory Impact Assessment, London: Department of Trade and Industry, June.

Fryer, Roland G Jr. and Steven D. Levitt (2010), “An empirical analysis of the gender gap in
mathematics,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 210-240.

Glascoe, Frances P. and William E. MacLean, (1990), “How Parents Appraise their Child’s
Development”, Family Relations, 39(3), 280-283.

Glover, Vivette (2011), “Annual Research Review: Prenatal Stress and the Origins of
psychopathology: an evolutionary perspective” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry Vol.
52, No. 4, pp. 356–367.

Glynn LM, EP Davis, CD Schetter, A Chicz-Demet, CJ Hobel, and CA Sandman (2007),
“Postnatal maternal cortisol levels predict temperament in healthy breastfed infants.” Early
Human Development Vol. 83, No. 10, pp. 675-81.

Gregg, Paul, Elizabeth Washbrook, Carol Propper, and Simon Burgess (2005), “The Effects of a
Mother’s Return to Work Decision on Child Development in the UK,” Economic Journal, Vol.
115, No. 501, pp. F48-F80.

Gunnar M and Quevedo K, (2007), “The neurobiology of stress and development” Annual
Review of Psychology, Vol. 58, pp. 145-73.

Han, W. J., J. Waldfogel,, and J. Brooks-Gunn (2001), “The effects of early maternal
employment on later cognitive and behavioral outcomes.” Journal of Marriage and the Family,
Vol. 63, pp. 336–354.

Hanratty, Maria and Eileen Trzcinski (2009), “Who Benefits from Expanded Paid Parental
Leave? Impact of Parental Benefit Expansions in Canada on Mothers’ Employment after Birth,”
Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 1432-1475.

He, Daihai and David J.D. Earn (2007), “Epidemiological effects of seasonal oscillations in birth
rates,” Theoretical Population Biology, Vol. 72, No. 2, pp. 274-291.


                                                                                               40
Hill, J., Jane Waldfogel, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and W.-J. Han (2005), “Maternal Employment
and Child Development: A Fresh Look Using Newer Methods,” Developmental Psychology,
Vol. 41, No. 6, pp. 833-850.

Irwin, Lori G., Arjumand Siddiqi, and Clyde Hertzman (2007), “Early Child Development: A
Powerful Equalizer,” World Health Organization.

James-Burdumy, Susanne (2005), “The Effect of Maternal Labor Force Participation on Child
Development,” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 177-211.

Klerman, Jacob Alex and Arleen Leibowitz, (1997), “Labor supply effects of state maternity
leave legislation.” In Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace, eds. Francine D. Blau and
Ronald G. Ehrenberg. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Lefebvre, Pierre Merrigan, Philip and Matthieu Verstraete, (2008) Childcare Policy and
Cognitive Outcomes of Children: Results from a Large Scale Quasi-Experiment on Universal
Childcare in Canada, CIRPEE, Cahier de recherche/Working Paper 08-23.

Liu, Qian and Oskar Nordstrom Skans (2010) “The Duration of Paid Parental Leave and
Children’s Scholastic Performance,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 10(1)_
(Contributions), Article 3.

Loeb, Susanna, Margaret Bridges, Daphna Bassok, Bruce Fuller, and Russell W. Rumberger
(2007), “How much is too much? The influence of preschool centers on children’s social and
cognitive development,” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 52-66.

Lucas-Thompson, Rachel G., Wendy A. Goldberg, and JoAnn Prause, (2010) “Maternal Work
Early in the Lives of Children and its Distal Association with Achievement and Behavior
Problems: A Meta Analysis” Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 136, No. 6, pp. 915–942.

Magnuson, Katherine A., Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2007), “Does prekindergarten
improve school preparation and performance?” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 26, No. 1,
pp. 33-51.

Marshall, Katherine (2008), “Father’s use of Paid Parental Leave, Perspectives on Labour and
Income, June, pp. 5-14.

National Partnership for Women and Families (2012), “Expecting Better: A State-by-State
Analysis of Laws that Help New Parents.” 2nd edition, May.

O’Brien Caughy, Margaret, Janet DiPietro, and Donna Strobino (1994), “Daycare Participation
as a Protective Factor in the Cognitive Development of Low-income Children,” Child
Development, Vol. 65, pp. 457-471.

O’Dinnell, K., T.G. O’Connor, and V. Glover, (2009) “Prenatal Stress and Neurodevelopment of



                                                                                               41
the Child: Focus on the HPS Axis and the Role of Placenta”, Developmental Neuroscience, Vol.
31, pp. 285-292.

Rasmussen, A.W., (2010) “Increasing the length of parents' birth-related leave: The effect on
children's long-term educational outcomes”, Labour Economics, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 91-100.

Ray, Rebecca (2008), A Detailed Look at Parental Leave Policies in 21 OECD Countries,
Washington DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research, September.

Ruhm, Christopher J. (2000) “Parental Leave and Child Health,” Journal of Health Economics
19(6) 931–60.

Ruhm, Christopher J. (2004) “Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development,” Journal
of Human Resources, Vol. 39, No 1, pp. 155-192.

Rutter, Michael (1967), “Children’s Behavior Questionnaire for Completion by Teachers:
Preliminary Findings,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry Vol. 8, pp. 1–11.

Saye, Kimberley B. (2003) “Preschool intellectual assessment”. In: Reynolds Cecil R, Kamphaus
Randy W, (eds.) Handbook of Psychological and Educational Assessment of Children, 2nd
edition. New York: Guilford, pp. 187–203.

Scher, Anat and Judith Harel (2009), “Separation and Stranger Anxiety” in Janette B. Benson
and Marshall M. Haith (eds.) Social and Emotional Development in Infancy and Early
Childhood, Oxford, Academic Press, pp. 380-389.

Schonberg, Uta and Johannes Ludsteck, (forthcoming) “Expansions in Maternity Leave
Coverage and Mothers’ Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth”, Journal of Labor
Economics.

Statistics Canada (2006), “Employment Insurance Coverage Survey,” The Daily, Nov. 1st.

Tanaka, Sakiko (2005) “Parental Leave and Child Health across OECD Countries,” Economic
Journal 15 F7–F28

Tremblay, R. E., F. Vitaro, C. Gagnon, C. Piche, and N. Royer (1992), “The Prosocial Scale
for the Preschool Behaviour Questionnaire: Concurrent and Predictive Correlates,”
International Journal of Behavioural Development Vol. 15, pp. 227–45.

UNICEF (2006), “Programming Experiences in Early Child Development,” Early Child
Development Unit, UNICEF, United Nations. First edition, November.

Waldfogel, Jane (2006), What Children Need, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

Weir, Kirk, and Gerard Duveen (1981), “Further Development and Validation of the Prosocial
Behaviour Questionnaire for Use by Teachers,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry


                                                                                                42
Vol. 22, pp. 357–374.

Weir, Kirk, J. Stevenson, and P. Graham (1980), “Behavioral Deviance and Teacher Ratings of
Prosocial Behavior,” Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry Vol. 19, No. 1, pp.
68-77.




                                                                                           43
Table 1: Mandated, Job Protected, Unpaid Maternity/Parental Leave by Province

Province               Weeks Pre Reform      Weeks Post Reform       Date of Change
Newfoundland                   29                    52             December 31 2000
P.E.I.                         34                    52             December 31 2000
Nova Scotia                    34                    52             December 31 2000
New Brunswick                  29                    54             December 31 2000
Quebec                         70                    70
Ontario                        35                    52             December 31 2000
Manitoba                       34                    54             December 31 2000
Saskatchewan                   30                    52               June 14 2001
Alberta                        18                    52              February 7 2001
British Columbia               30                    52             December 31 2000

Notes: The reform of the Employment Insurance benefit entitlement for maternity/parental leave
increased the duration of benefits from 25 to 50 weeks effective December 31 2000.




                                                                                            44
Table 2: Mean Values of Developmental Indicators


Indicator                N           Full Sample        Pre Reform       Post Reform
PPVT                   9950             101.87            102.28            101.40
                                        (15.37)           (15.15)           (15.62)
Know Your              9970               1.37              1.39              1.34
Numbers                                  (0.58)            (0.59)            (0.58)
Who Am I?              9478              24.77             25.16             24.35
                                         (6.29)            (6.04)            (6.53)
Aggression            10971               1.64              1.68              1.60
                                         (1.88)            (1.91)            (1.85)
Indirect              10766               0.52              0.55              0.48
Aggression                               (1.08)            (1.09)            (1.07)
Anxiety               10971               1.98              1.95              2.01
                                         (1.93)            (1.90)            (1.97)
Hyperactivity         10945               3.93              3.88              3.98
                                         (2.65)            (2.66)            (2.65)

Notes: The data are from the NLSCY. Full sample are means for the birth cohorts 1997-2004.
Pre reform denotes the 1997-2000 birth cohorts, while post reform denotes the 2001-2004 birth
cohorts. Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                                                            45
Table 3: Two Stage Least Squares Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Care on Developmental Outcomes, 1997-2004 sample

Instrument                                                     Treatment                                              Leave
                                   st                                                                          st
                      N          1 Stage            1              2              3                4         1 Stage              5
PPVT                 9950        2.216***        -0.739*        -0.681*       -0.692**          -0.635       0.056***          -0.941
                                  (0.218)        (0.382)        (0.377)        (0.294)         (0.411)        (0.009)         (0.600)
                                 [103.23]                                                                     [41.09]
Know Your            9970        2.019***        0.030*          0.024         0.025*           0.023        0.047***          -0.007
Numbers                           (0.234)        (0.018)        (0.017)        (0.014)         (0.019)        (0.009)         (0.028)
                                  [74.13]                                                                     [27.14]
Who Am I?            9478        2.098***        -0.297*         -0.235       -0.521***         -0.179       0.049***         -0.497*
                                  (0.241)        (0.163)        (0.153)         (0.132)        (0.175)        (0.009)         (0.277)
                                  [75.52]                                                                     [27.46]
Aggression           10971       2.090***         -0.010         -0.000         -0.027          0.007        0.047***          -0.014
                                  (0.223)        (0.053)        (0.052)        (0.043)         (0.059)        (0.009)         (0.092)
                                  [87.42]                                                                     [30.03]
Indirect             10766       2.072***         0.009          0.019         0.048**          0.015        0.046***          0.030
Aggression                        (0.226)        (0.028)         (0.27)        (0.023)         (0.031)        (0.009)         (0.048)
                                  [84.27]                                                                     [28.84]
Anxiety              10971       2.083***         0.007          0.013          0.019           0.019        0.047***          0.117
                                  (0.223)        (0.056)        (0.055)        (0.045)         (0.061)        (0.009)         (0.097)
                                  [87.24]                                                                     [30.14]
Hyperactivity        10945       2.087***         0.000          0.007          0.079           -0.013       0.047***          0.177
                                  (0.224)        (0.076)        (0.076)        (0.063)         (0.085)        (0.009)         (0.137)
                                  [87.04]                                                                     [31.92]
Control for                                      Quartic         Cubic         Pre/Post       Pre/Post                        Quartic
Time                                                                            Policy         Policy
                                                                                Linear        Quadratic

Notes: The data are from the NLSCY. All estimates are from two stage least squares regressions using the indicated instrument
controlling for demographic characteristics and the indicated specification of time effects. 1st stage estimates are for the TSLS
estimates in column (1) and (5). *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Standard
errors in parentheses, F-stats in square brackets. N is number of observations.


                                                                                                                                        46
Table 4: Two Stage Least Squares Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Care on
Developmental Outcomes, 1999-2002 sample

Instrument                                                                Treatment
                        N                      1                   2                     3
PPVT                   4049               -0.769**            -0.781**              -0.811**
                                           (0.377)             (0.377)               (0.379)
Know Your              4051                 -0.088              -0.087                -0.088
Numbers                                    (0.148)             (0.145)               (0.149)
Who Am I?              3832                 0.385               0.225                 0.274
                                           (0.814)             (0.785)               (0.795)
Aggression             4540                 0.067               0.049                 0.053
                                           (0.138)             (0.133)               (0.134)
Indirect               4445                 0.039               0.037                 0.039
Aggression                                 (0.076)             (0.075)               (0.075)
Anxiety                4543                 -0.048              -0.041                -0.040
                                           (0.152)             (0.145)               (0.147)
Hyperactivity          4523                 -0.309             -0.348*               -0.334*
                                           (0.205)             (0.199)               (0.200)
Control for                                Linear             Quadratic          Pre/Post Policy
Time                                                                                  Linear

Notes: The data are from the NLSCY. All estimates are from two stage least squares regressions
using the indicated instrument controlling for demographic characteristics and the indicated
specification of time effects. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% levels respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. N is number of observations.




                                                                                               47
Table 5: Two Stage Least Squares Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Care on
Developmental Outcomes by Sex, 1997-2004 sample


Instrument                               Treatment
                          Male Child                   Female Child
                   Estimate          N            Estimate         N
PPVT              -1.516***         5057            0.244        4893
                    (0.571)                       (0.523)
Know Your             0.021         5066           0.048*        4904
Numbers             (0.025)                       (0.026)
Who Am I?            -0.372         4837           -0.214        4641
                    (0.237)                       (0.219)
Aggression            0.053         5592           -0.091        5379
                    (0.076)                       (0.077)
Indirect             -0.017         5500            0.051        5266
Aggression          (0.039)                       (0.042)
Anxiety               0.031         5593           -0.041        5378
                    (0.077)                       (0.081)
Hyperactivity         0.048         5580           -0.060        5365
                    (0.112)                       (0.107)

Notes: The data are from the NLSCY. . All estimates are from two stage least squares
regressions using the indicated instrument controlling for demographic characteristics and the
quartic specification of time effects. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% levels respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. N is number of observations.




                                                                                                  48
Table 6: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on observable inputs to
childhood development from the NLSCY


                          Age 13-24 Months Age 25-39 Months Age 48-71 Months
Time mother home in             2.015**              2.194**               2.278**
first year                      (0.131)              (0.139)               (0.130)
N                                 8307                 8520                 11111
Mother returned to               -0.025                -0.001               0.002
work post-Birth                 (0.019)               (0.026)              (0.014)
N                                 8307                  8520                11111
Child has younger                -0.016                0.003                -0.006
sibling(s)                      (0.017)               (0.021)              (0.016)
N                                 8307                 8520                 11111
Child has older                  -0.015                -0.014               -0.003
sibling(s)                      (0.015)               (0.010)              (0.026)
N                                 8307                  8520                11111
Depression Score -               -0.165                -0.136               0.117
Mother                          (0.144)               (0.177)              (0.157)
N                                 7283                  7327                9963

Notes: The reported statistics are from an 8 observation regression of the indicated input by year
of birth on a constant and a dummy variable for birth cohorts exposed to the new maternity leave
provisions. N indicates the number of observations from the first step regression. * and **
indicate statistical significance at the 10% and 5% levels respectively. Standard errors in
parentheses.




                                                                                                49
Table 7: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on observable inputs to
childhood development from the LFS

                                 Age 13-35        Age 36-47       Age 48-59       Age 60-71
                                  Months           Months          Months          Months
Mother Employed                    -0.001           0.030           -0.003          -0.002
                                  (0.005)          (0.018)         (0.011)         (0.007)
Mother Employed Full Time         0.026**          0.043**         0.032**           0.004
                                  (0.008)          (0.014)         (0.011)          (0.006)
Mother’s Usual Weekly             0.765**          0.923**          1.078*           0.428
Hours                             (0.290)          (0.324)          (0.443)         (0.353)
Mother Not in the Labor             0.000           -0.018           0.003           0.009
Force                              (0.005)         (0.017)          (0.011)         (0.007)
Mother’s Real Weekly               23.616           21.721         42.953**        29.605*
Earnings                          (12.015)         (22.924)        (11.480)        (13.314)
Mother’s Real Hourly                0.237           0.242          0.737**          0.646*
Earnings                           (0.211)         (0.409)         (0.241)          (0.301)
Economic Family’s Real            29.820**         64.879*         62.024**        63.874**
Weekly Earnings                   (11.060)         (28.620)        (18.603)        (10.136)
Mother working PT to care          -0.021*          -0.010           -0.015          0.008
for own children                   (0.010)         (0.007)          (0.011)         (0.007)
Mother not available for          0.0013**        0.0014**          -0.0002         -0.0005
work-caring for own children      (0.0004)        (0.0003)         (0.0010)        (0.0013)
Mother not looking for work-       0.0020           0.0003          0.0009           0.005
caring for own children           (0.0019)         (0.0016)        (0.0028)         (0.003)
Stay at Home Mother (YBB)         0.016**           -0.012           0.002         -0.018**
                                  (0.006)          (0.008)          (0.012)         (0.004)
Stay at Home Mother:              0.019**           -0.010           -0.000          -0.011
(YOB)                             (0.007)          (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.007)
Mother has younger children         0.006           0.022            0.016           0.005
                                   (0.007)         (0.009)          (0.010)         (0.010)
Mother has older children           0.006           -0.021         -0.018**          -0.014
                                   (0.005)         (0.015)          (0.006)         (0.020)

Notes: The reported statistics are from an 8 observation (7 for ages 13-35) regression of the
indicated input by year of birth on a constant and a dummy variable for birth cohorts exposed to
the new maternity leave provisions. * and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10% and 5%
levels respectively.




                                                                                               50
Table 8: Two Stage Least Squares Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Care on
Developmental Outcomes, 1997-2004 sample, Robustness Analysis

Instrument                                          Treatment
                           N                   1                 2                    3
PPVT                      9950            -0.405***         -0.784***            -0.684**
                                            (0.135)           (0.130)             (0.310)
Know Your                 9970            -0.021***         -0.032***             0.025*
Numbers                                     (0.005)           (0.005)             (0.014)
Who Am I?                 9478            -0.222***         -0.335***           -0.410***
                                            (0.052)           (0.050)             (0.137)
Aggression                10971           -0.063***         -0.054***              -0.044
                                            (0.017)           (0.017)             (0.044)
Indirect                  10766           -0.039***         -0.034***            0.050**
Aggression                                  (0.009)           (0.009)             (0.023)
Anxiety                   10971              0.029             0.016               0.001
                                            (0.018)           (0.017)             (0.045)
Hyperactivity             10945              0.032           0.057**               0.055
                                            (0.025)           (0.024)             (0.063)
Demographic                                   No             Parents’            Parent’s
Controls                                                    Education           Education
Control for Time                             None              None               Linear

Notes: The data are from the NLSCY. All estimates are from two stage least squares regressions
using the indicated instrument controlling for the indicated specifications of demographic
characteristics and time effects. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% levels respectively. Standard errors in parentheses. N is number of observations.




                                                                                                 51
Table 9: Mothers and Fathers Educational Attainment by Child’s Birth Cohort - NLSCY

YOB                 Mother High            Mother             Father High       Father University
                    School Grad        University Grad        School Grad              Grad
1998                    0.006               0.015                 -0.009              -0.000
                       (0.014)             (0.014)               (0.014)             (0.014)
1999                    -0.000              0.016                 0.002               -0.011
                       (0.014)             (0.015)               (0.025)             (0.014)
2000                    0.000              0.026*               -0.027*               -0.010
                       (0.015)             (0.016)               (0.015)             (0.016)
2001                 -0.072***           0.098***              -0.051***            0.048***
                       (0.013)             (0.016)               (0.014)             (0.015)
2002                 -0.072***           0.074***              -0.059***             0.035**
                       (0.013)             (0.016)               (0.014)             (0.016)
2003                 -0.067***           0.098***              -0.071***            0.057***
                       (0.012)             (0.014)               (0.013)             (0.014)
2004                 0.084***            0.109***              -0.048***             0.032**
                       (0.013)             (0.017)               (0.015)             (0.016)

Notes: The data are from the NLSCY. All estimates are from regressions of the indicated dummy
variable for educational attainment on dummy variables for the child’s year of birth. 1997 is the
omitted birth cohort. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels
respectively.




                                                                                               52
Table 10: Mothers and Fathers Educational Attainment by Child’s Birth Cohort-LFS

YOB                  Mother High      Mother University       Father High       Father University
                     School Grad            Grad              School Grad              Grad
1998                     0.005             0.013                 0.001                -0.008
                       (0.022)            (0.019)               (0.022)              (0.018)
1999                     0.010             -0.014                0.039                -0.024
                       (0.022)            (0.018)               (0.022)              (0.018)
2000                    -0.013             0.002                 -0.033               0.015
                       (0.024)            (0.020)               (0.024)              (0.021)
2001                     0.003             0.009                 0.025                -0.016
                       (0.023)            (0.019)               (0.022)              (0.018)
2002                    -0.018           0.058***                0.004                0.006
                       (0.023)            (0.020)               (0.023)              (0.019)
2003                     0.007            0.049**                0.011                0.015
                       (0.023)            (0.020)               (0.023)              (0.019)
2004                     0.016            0.045**                0.022                0.019
                       (0.023)            (0.020)               (0.023)              (0.019)

Notes: The data are from the LFS. All estimates are from regressions of the indicated dummy
variable for educational attainment on dummy variables for the child’s year of birth. 1997 is the
omitted birth cohort. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels
respectively.




                                                                                                53
Figure 1: Number of Months Mother at Home in First Year: Estimated Year of Birth
Effects

   12



   10



         8
Months




         6



         4



         2



         0
             1997   1998     1999      2000    2001        2002      2003       2004
                                          Birth Year


Notes: Estimates are from a regression of mothers’ time at home in the first year on demographic
controls and year of birth effects (no constant). The data are from the NLSCY.




                                                                                             54
Figure 2: PPVT: Estimated Year of Birth Effects

  110

  109

  108

  107

  106
Months




  105

  104

  103

  102

  101

  100
          1997        1998        1999       2000      2001          2002        2003        2004
                                                Birth Year



Notes: Estimates are from a regression of children’s age standardized PPVT score on
demographic controls and year of birth effects (no constant). The data are from the NLSCY.




                                                                                             55
Figure 3: Changes in the Proportion of Females with a University Degree – LFS Data

 45



 40



 35



 30



 25



 20



 15



 10



  5



  0
      1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                                       Year

             Wom en Aged 15-45    Married Mothers with Children Age d<1   Married Mothers with Children Age d 1-5




Notes: Graphed is the proportion of females with a university degree using data from the LFS.
The three categories graphed are all women aged 15-45, married mothers with children age less
than 1, and married mothers with children age 1 to 5.




                                                                                                                    56
Figure 4: Changes in the Proportion of Females with a High School Diploma – LFS Data

 45



 40



 35



 30



 25



 20



 15



 10



  5



  0
      1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
                                                       Year

             W om en Aged 15-45   Married Mothers with Children Age d<1   Married Mothers with Children Age d 1-5




Notes: Graphed is the proportion of females with a high school diploma using data from the LFS.
The three categories graphed are all women aged 15-45, married mothers with children age less
than 1, and married mothers with children age 1 to 5.
.




                                                                                                                    57
Appendix

Data Methods for the Labour Force Survey Sample

      Age in years is recorded in the LFS, but exact date of birth is not available. By sampling

from either the December or January surveys we can identify year of birth with a relatively small

amount of error for single year categories.40 For the December sample, we assume the birthday is

in the current year. For the January sample, we assume the birthday was in the previous year.

Since the reference week for the monthly survey is the week containing the 15th day. This means

our coding will miss people born in the first half of January (for the January sample) or the last

half of December (for the December sample). Any impact of this error is attenuated by the fact

that our ultimate objective is to divide the cohorts by whether they faced the new maternity leave

regime. However, the miscoding between the 2000 and 2001 birth cohorts means that some

children will erroneously be designated as “treated” and vice versa. We report results using the

December sample, but the results are very similar using the January samples.

      Single year age categories are available for ages 0, 3, 4 and 5, but not for ages 1 and 2. As

a result in the December 2000 or January 2001 surveys, those aged 2 will have been exposed to

the original leave regime while those aged 1 will have been born during the reform period. To

address this problem we do not sample from the December 2000 or January 2001 surveys for this

age group. Denoting cohorts by the birth year of the one year olds, for this age group we use four

cohorts before the reform (1997 to 2000) and three cohorts born after the reform (2002 to 2004).




40
  January and December are at the trough of the seasonal birth cycle in Canada. Compared to the
U.S. the peak in monthly births in Canada occurs earlier than in the U.S., and the relative
distance between peak and trough is greater. See He and Earn (2007).


                                                                                                     58
Table A1: Estimates of Measures of Developmental Inputs by Year of Birth: NLSCY Data

                      N        1997        1998       1999       2000        2001       2002      2003      2004
13-24 months
Time mother          8307      8.436       8.061      8.624      8.297      10.501     10.325    10.382    10.258
home in first year            (0.305)     (0.381)    (0.322)    (0.378)     (0.317)    (0.378)   (0.323)   (0.386)
Mother returned      8307      0.779       0.834      0.749      0.792       0.743      0.766     0.772     0.772
to work post-                 (0.040)     (0.050)    (0.042)    (0.048)     (0.042)    (0.050)   (0.042)   (0.051)
Birth
Child has younger    8307      0.166       0.175      0.121      0.137       0.104      0.158     0.132     0.141
sibling                       (0.025)     (0.031)    (0.026)    (0.029)     (0.026)    (0.031)   (0.026)   (0.026)
Child has older      8307      0.483       0.493      0.506      0.515       0.515      0.459     0.496     0.467
sibling                       (0.042)     (0.053)    (0.044)    (0.051)     (0.044)    (0.052)   (0.044)   (0.053)
Depression Score-    7283      3.857       4.061      4.236      4.474       3.859      3.919     4.095     4.095
Mother                        (0.408)     (0.515)    (0.431)    (0.519)     (0.428)    (0.513)   (0.437)   (0.529)
25-39 months
Time mother          8520      8.242       8.085      8.711      8.298      10.444     10.524    10.635    10.508
home in first year            (0.276)     (0.305)    (0.302)    (0.316)     (0.299)    (0.306)   (0.291)   (0.316)
Mother returned      8520      0.934       0.926      0.854      0.959       0.930      0.949     0.892     0.898
to work post-                 (0.032)     (0.036)    (0.035)    (0.037)     (0.035)    (0.037)   (0.035)   (0.037)
Birth
Child has younger    8520      0.412       0.355      0.323      0.356       0.360      0.336     0.380     0.381
sibling                       (0.034)     (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.039)     (0.036)    (0.038)   (0.036)   (0.038)
Child has older      8520      0.491       0.519      0.511      0.491       0.508      0.479     0.487     0.483
sibling                       (0.037)     (0.041)    (0.040)    (0.043)     (0.040)    (0.042)   (0.039)   (0.042)
Depression Score-    7327      3.154       3.182      2.821      2.705       3.175      2.806     2.796     2.540
Mother                        (0.373)     (0.410)    (0.424)    (0.437)     (0.410)    (0.425)   (0.397)   (0.434)
48-71 months
Time mother          11111     7.621       7.525      8.089      7.644      10.007      9.914    10.083     9.988
home in first year            (0.293)     (0.315)    (0.308)    (0.339)     (0.307)    (0.337)   (0.307)   (0.345)
Mother returned      11111     0.961       0.969      0.925      0.967       0.966      0.977     0.953     0.933
to work post-                 (0.030)     (0.032)    (0.032)    (0.035)     (0.032)    (0.035)   (0.032)   (0.035)
Birth


                                                                                                                   59
Child has younger      11111        0.499        0.481         0.468        0.491        0.457        0.453        0.489        0.489
sibling                            (0.038)      (0.041)       (0.040)      (0.044)      (0.040)      (0.033)      (0.040)      (0.040)
Child has older        11111        0.631        0.626         0.630        0.581        0.666        0.584        0.637        0.570
sibling                            (0.037)      (0.041)       (0.040)      (0.044)      (0.040)      (0.044)      (0.040)      (0.045)
Depression Score-      9963         3.726        3.673         3.412        3.965        3588         3.813        3.744        4.103
Mother                             (0.352)      (0.384)       (0.377)      (0.416)      (0.376)      (0.429)      (0.373)      (0.425)

Notes: Each row presents analysis of the indicated dependent variable. Reported are the regression coefficients on year of birth effects
for the indicated cohort. Estimates are conditional on the other demographic controls described in the text. N is sample size. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses.


Table A2: Estimates of Measures of Developmental Inputs by Year of Birth: LFS Data

                         N          1997          1998         1999         2000         2001         2002         2003         2004
Age 13-35
months
Mother Employed        12260         0.257        0.257        0.251        0.245        N.A.         0.249        0.260         0.244
                                    (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.029)                   (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.029)
Mother Employed        12260         0.263        0.269        0.277        0.275        N.A.         0.282        0.299         0.309
Full Time                           (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.029)                   (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.029)
Mother’s Usual         7801         35.139       35.447       35.814       36.027        N.A.        36.096       36.224        36.796
Weekly Hours                        (1.056)      (1.066)      (1.062)      (1.097)                   (1.071)      (1.065)       (1.072)
Mother Not in the      12260         0.610        0.608        0.617        0.619        N.A.         0.614        0.606         0.621
Labor Force                         (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.028)                   (0.028)      (0.029)       (0.029)
Mother’s Real          6656        230.796      233.557      240.716      244.111        N.A.       249.198      248.631       284.904
Weekly Earnings                    (21.776)     (21.809)     (22.121)     (22.208)                  (22.298)     (22.618)      (22.831)
Mother’s Real          6656          6.027        5.903        6.228        6.086        N.A.         6.086        6.100         6.711
Hourly Earnings                     (0.516)      (0.516)      (0.528)      (0.530)                   (0.534)      (0.543)       (0.545)
Economic               10309       440.903      471.176      469.782      468.963        N.A.       479.446      489.800       508.334
Family’s Real                      (34.576)     (33.938)     (35.223)     (35.140)                  (34.980)     (35.519)      (36.408)
Weekly Earnings
Mother working         12260        -0.074       -0.068       -0.091       -0.094        N.A.        -0.093       -0.097        -0.118


                                                                                                                                       60
PT to care for              (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.017)    (0.017)               (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)
own children
Mother not          12260    -0.0008    0.0003     0.0008     0.0003     N.A.       0.0014     0.0015     0.0013
available for               (0.0013)   (0.0016)   (0.0015)   (0.0014)              (0.0017)   (0.0020)   (0.0012)
work-caring for
own children
Mother not          12260    0.048      0.047      0.041      0.049      N.A.       0.050      0.049      0.047
looking for work-           (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)               (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)
caring for own
children
Stay at Home        12260    0.250      0.233      0.239      0.248      N.A.       0.260      0.264      0.251
Mother (YBB)                (0.025)    (0.024)    (0.025)    (0.025)               (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.025)
Stay at Home        12260    0.312      0.299      0.307      0.310      N.A.       0.338      0.319      0.321
Mother (YOB)                (0.027)    (0.026)    (0.027)    (0.027)               (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.027)
Mother has          12260    0.091      0.105      0.095      0.111      N.A.       0.113      0.109      0.097
younger children            (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)               (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)
Mother has older    12260    0.454      0.452      0.458      0.455      N.A.       0.455      0.470      0.458
children                    (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.030)    (0.029)               (0.029)    (0.030)    (0.030)
Age 36-47
months
Mother Employed     7212      0.296      0.281      0.322      0.245      0.300      0.338      0.319      0.309
                             (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.038)    (0.039)
Mother Employed     7212      0.296      0.279      0.309      0.265      0.300      0.340      0.335      0.346
Full Time                    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.040)
Mother’s Usual      4660     36.442     36.644     36.681     37.039     36.904     37.397     37.940     38.258
Weekly Hours                 (1.367)    (1.437)    (1.384)    (1.410)    (1.396)    (1.381)    (1.392)    (1.394)
Mother Not in the   7212      0.590      0.593      0.559      0.628      0.588      0.554      0.567      0.591
Labor Force                  (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.037)    (0.038)
Mother’s Real       3956    237.859    205.605    217.505    232.668    191.999    233.719    259.744    295.058
Weekly Earnings             (28.527)   (28.603)   (28.994)   (29.559)   (28.562)   (29.400)   (29.113)   (30.961)
Mother’s Real       3956      5.760      5.254      5.482      5.657      4.768      5.570      6.234      6.548
Hourly Earnings              (0.681)    (0.678)    (0.685)    (0.700)    (0.682)    (0.697)    (0.693)    (0.737)
Economic            6105    494.583    460.088    474.153    441.590    492.074    487.521    552.507    597.828


                                                                                                               61
Family’s Real              (45.345)   (44.620)   (45.616)   (46.533)   (45.408)   (46.799)   (46.419)   (50.744)
Weekly Earnings
Mother working      7212    -0.062     -0.070     -0.061     -0.088     -0.079     -0.073     -0.085     -0.084
PT to care for             (0.024)    (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.023)    (0.024)
own children
Mother not          7212    0.0018     0.0016     0.0018     0.0028     0.0038     0.0030     0.0040     0.0029
available for              (0.0039)   (0.0038)   (0.0037)   (0.0047)   (0.0044)   (0.0039)   (0.0043)   (0.0039)
work-caring for
own children
Mother not          7212    0.049      0.049      0.043      0.045      0.047      0.046      0.045      0.049
looking for work-          (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.013)    (0.015)
caring for own
children
Stay at Home        7212    0.140      0.146      0.138      0.165      0.137      0.125      0.133      0.145
Mother (YBB)               (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.028)    (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.029)
Stay at Home        7212    0.151      0.159      0.157      0.187      0.163      0.133      0.156      0.161
Mother (YOB)               (0.031)    (0.031)    (0.031)    (0.032)    (0.031)    (0.031)    (0.031)    (0.032)
Mother has          7212    0.378      0.401      0.391      0.404      0.420      0.424      0.396      0.421
younger children           (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)
Mother has older    7212    0.393      0.387      0.376      0.376      0.392      0.338      0.381      0.339
children                   (0.041)    (0.040)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.042)
Age 48-59
months
Mother Employed     7390     0.263      0.275      0.235      0.245      0.249      0.266      0.253      0.237
                            (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.039)
Mother Employed     7390     0.335      0.295      0.315      0.333      0.333      0.360      0.357      0.356
Full Time                   (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.040)     (0.41)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.040)
Mother’s Usual      4881    38.227     36.779     37.812     38.630     38.560     38.658     39.361     39.179
Weekly Hours                (1.449)    (1.463)    (1.417)    (1.448)    (1.463)    (1.450)    (1.460)    (1.440)
Mother Not in the   7390     0.618      0.604      0.651      0.641      0.628      0.623      0.639      0.637
Labor Force                 (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.039)
Mother’s Real       4090   288.641    298.639    305.781    312.933    317.327    339.985    358.829    361.668
Weekly Earnings            (31.054)   (31.896)   (31.659)   (32.278)   (33.181)   (32.415)   (33.198)   (32.728)


                                                                                                              62
Mother’s Real       4090     6.067      6.644      6.349      6.300      6.497      7.073      7.265      7.471
Hourly Earnings             (0.737)    (0.743)    (0.746)    (0.763)    (0.768)    (0.763)    (0.786)    (0.784)
Economic            6253   581.289    613.982    590.096     603.777    623.027    637.142    690.544    686.527
Family’s Real              (47.916)   (48.551)   (48.701)   (49.431.)   (49.311)   (50.440)   (50.771)   (50.571)
Weekly Earnings
Mother working      7390   -0.085     -0.048     -0.092      -0.093     -0.091      -0.091     -0.091    -0.105
PT to care for             (0.023)    (0.025)    (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.024)
own children
Mother not          7390    0.0083     0.0086     0.0076     0.0086      0.0062     0.0076     0.0076     0.0108
available for              (0.0048)   (0.0047)   (0.0046)   (0.0052)    (0.0046)   (0.0047)   (0.0052)   (0.0059)
work-caring for
own children
Mother not          7390    0.044      0.050      0.045      0.042       0.042      0.046      0.052      0.045
looking for work-          (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.011)
caring for own
children
Stay at Home        7390    0.129      0.145      0.170      0.127       0.153      0.154      0.147      0.126
Mother (YBB)               (0.027)    (0.027)    (0.028)    (0.027)     (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.027)
Stay at Home        7390    0.150      0.166      0.191      0.144       0.173      0.160      0.165      0.152
Mother (YOB)               (0.029)    (0.030)    (0.030)    (0.030)     (0.030)    (0.030)    (0.031)    (0.030)
Mother has          7390    0.485      0.496      0.487      0.499       0.483      0.504      0.530      0.514
younger children           (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.041)     (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.040)
Mother has older    7390    0.358      0.372      0.373      0.358       0.358      0.343      0.337      0.352
children                   (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.041)     (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.041)
Age 60-71
months
Mother Employed     7298    0.263      0.244      0.253      0.256       0.246      0.270      0.242      0.251
                           (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.041)    (0.040)     (0.040)    (0.040)    (0.041)    (0.040)
Mother Employed     7298    0.280      0.276      0.287      0.287       0.276      0.293      0.279      0.300
Full Time                  (0.041)    (0.040)    (0.041)    (0.041)     (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.042)    (0.041)
Mother’s Usual      4883   38.156     38.717     38.758     38.524      38.789     39.541     38.126     39.410
Weekly Hours               (1.560)    (1.621)    (1.589)    (1.581)     (1.606)    (1.613)    (1.613)    (1.635)
Mother Not in the   7298    0.612      0.631      0.624      0.632       0.640      0.618      0.641      0.635


                                                                                                                  63
Labor Force                         (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.040)      (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.039)      (0.040)       (0.039)
Mother’s Real          4059        254.137      262.654      270.864      272.714      285.921      284.383      276.456       332.030
Weekly Earnings                    (37.917)     (37.683)     (38.266)     (37.485)     (38.723)     (38.617)     (39.055)      (41.693)
Mother’s Real          4059          6.243        6.186        6.517        6.549        7.004        6.603        6.637         7.834
Hourly Earnings                     (0.820)      (0.807)      (0.831)      (0.825)      (0.834)      (0.834)      (0.837)       (0.888)
Economic               6136        515.362      498.161      527.541      531.564      574.278      576.359      575.050       602.437
Family’s Real                      (53.217)     (52.856)     (53.975)     (53.241)     (54.202)      (54.263)    (55.103)      (55.738)
Weekly Earnings
Mother working         7298         -0.080       -0.095       -0.103       -0.087        -0.078      -0.078        -0.078       -0.098
PT to care for                      (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.025)      (0.024)      (0.025)      (0.025)      (0.025)       (0.024)
own children
Mother not             7298         0.0009       0.0020       0.0057       0.0029       0.0031       0.0010       0.0045        0.0010
available for                      (0.0039)     (0.0047)     (0.0041)     (0.0035)     (0.0044)     (0.0038)     (0.0045)      (0.0038)
work-caring for
own children
Mother not             7298         0.048        0.046         0.045        0.042        0.048        0.051        0.043        0.057
looking for work-                  (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.013)
caring for own
children
Stay at Home           7298         0.117        0.112         0.121       0.106         0.098        0.102        0.093        0.090
Mother (YBB)                       (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)
Stay at Home           7298         0.154        0.160         0.157       0.139         0.153        0.144        0.138        0.132
Mother (YOB)                        (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.029)      (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.030)       (0.030)
Mother has             7298         0.629        0.676         0.644        0.657        0.650        0.657        0.657        0.661
younger children                   (0.041)      (0.040)       (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.041)
Mother has older       7298         0.264        0.318         0.307        0.296        0.280        0.241        0.318        0.291
children                           (0.041)      (0.041)       (0.042)      (0.041)      (0.042)      (0.042)      (0.042)      (0.019)

Notes: Each row presents analysis of the indicated dependent variable. Reported are the regression coefficients on year of birth effects
for the indicated cohort. Estimates are conditional on the other demographic controls described in the text. N is sample size. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. N.A. not applicable.




                                                                                                                                        64
Table A3: Estimated impact of longer maternity leave mandates on family real earnings from the LFS - Estimates based on a
wage deflator



                                 Age 13-35       Age 36-47       Age 48-59        Age 60-71
                                   Months          Months         Months           Months
Mother’s Real Weekly             27.476**          7.920         20.464**           4.465
Earnings                          (10.139)        (17.152)        (7.377)          (9.963)
Mother’s Real Hourly              0.368*            -0.173          0.049           -0.121
Earnings                          (0.172)          (0.259)         (0.160)         (0.243)
Economic Family’s Real           38.037**         37.723*          17.429          13.395
Weekly Earnings                  (12.737)         (18.407)        (10.435)         (7.776)


Notes: The reported statistics are from an 8 observation regression of the indicated input by year of birth on a constant and a dummy
variable for birth cohorts exposed to the new maternity leave provisions. The wage deflator is according to Industrial Aggregate Wage
from Statistics Canada’s Survey of Employment Payrolls and Hours (catalogue 72-002-XIB). * and ** indicate statistical significance
at the 10% and 5% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                                   65
