NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL LITERACY, RETIREMENT PREPARATION AND PENSION EXPECTATIONS
IN THE NETHERLANDS
Rob J. Alessie
Maarten van Rooij
Annamaria Lusardi
Working Paper 17109
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17109

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

We thank Franco Peracchi, the participants in the CeRP Workshop on Financial Literacy around the
World (Turin, Italy, December 2010), and the participants in the Mathematical and Statistical Methods
for Actuarial Sciences and Finance conference (Ravello, Italy, April 2010) for useful comments and
suggestions. We are grateful to the staff of CentERdata and, in particular, Stephanie Mertens for their
assistance in setting up the survey and the field work. Financial support from Netspar is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Dutch Central Bank or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Rob J. Alessie, Maarten van Rooij, and Annamaria Lusardi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Literacy, Retirement Preparation and Pension Expectations in the Netherlands
Rob J. Alessie, Maarten van Rooij, and Annamaria Lusardi
NBER Working Paper No. 17109
June 2011
JEL No. D14,D91
ABSTRACT
We present new evidence on financial literacy and retirement preparation in the Netherlands based
on two surveys conducted before and after the onset of the financial crisis. We document that while
financial knowledge did not increase from 2005 to 2010, significantly more individuals planned for
their retirement in 2010. At the same time, employees’ expectations about the level of their pension
income are high compared to what retirement plans may realistically provide. However, financially
knowledgeable employees report lower expected replacement rates and acknowledge higher levels
of uncertainty. Moreover using instrumental variables estimates for financial knowledge, we find a
positive effect of financial literacy on retirement preparation. Employing the panel feature of our dataset,
we show that financial knowledge has a causal impact on retirement planning. Our findings suggest
that the formation of pension expectations might be an important mechanism contributing to the impact
of financial literacy on planning.

Rob J. Alessie
University of Groningen
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 800
9700 AV Groningen
r.j.m.alessie@rug.nl
Maarten van Rooij
Dutch Central Bank
P. O. Box 98
1000 AB Amsterdam
The Netherlands
M.C.J.van.Rooij@DNB.NL

Annamaria Lusardi
George Washington School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu

1. Introduction
The typical Dutch employee reports confidence of receipt of a generous pension benefit upon
retirement, in sharp contrast with what pension funds can realistically promise to future
retirees. This “expectation gap” is the subject of much policy debate in the Netherlands and an
important part of the discussions on the need to redesign pension contracts. Current pension
arrangements are too ambitious and changes will most likely result in either lower
replacement rates or increased dependency upon investment risk, or both. In either case, there
is an increasing need for employees to inform themselves and to invest in retirement
preparation.
Of great concern is whether Dutch workers have the financial knowledge and skills to
collect and process the relevant pension information and save adequately. For example, the
government has decided to abolish the so-called AOW partner allowance. Currently, residents
aged 65 and older with a partner below age 65 are, under certain conditions, entitled to a
supplement on their AOW, i.e., the pay-as-you-go financed state benefit in the Netherlands.
The abolishment of the partner allowance will become effective as of 2015. Although
announced in 1995, awareness of this policy change seems very limited; yet affected
households will forgo up to tens of thousands of euros of pension wealth. Based on a 2005
survey, about two out of three Dutch households have not thought much about their
retirement, a measure of retirement planning that is shown to be correlated to saving behavior
and wealth accumulation in both the Netherlands and the United States (Van Rooij, Lusardi
and Alessie, 2011b; Lusardi and Mitchell 2007). In this paper, we investigate whether levels
of financial literacy and retirement preparedness changed in the five years between 2005 and
2010. During that period, discussions of the low solvency of Dutch pension funds, restoring
the sustainability of the Dutch pension system, and increasing the pension age may have
encouraged retirement preparation in the Netherlands. At the same time, the government and
the financial sector developed several initiatives to increase financial awareness. Moreover, in
this period we witnessed the biggest financial crisis since the Great Depression.
We commissioned a new survey on financial literacy and retirement preparedness in
summer 2010, as part of the Dutch Central Bank Household Survey (DHS). Our main
conclusions are as follows: There are vast differences in levels of financial knowledge among
the Dutch population: women and those with low levels of education often display a lack of
basic financial skills. Moreover, despite the financial crisis and several initiatives to enhance

1

financial skills, the overall level of financial literacy has not improved compared to the results
of the 2005 survey. Nevertheless, based on 2010 results, individuals seem to have increased
their preparation for retirement. This might be the result of the policy debate on the future of
the Dutch pension system and the deterioration of the solvency position of pension funds.
However, when we employ the variation in the financial situation of older siblings and
parents, we find that financial literacy is an important determinant of retirement readiness.
Moreover, higher levels of financial literacy go hand in hand with lower expected
replacement rates given income, age, education, etc. In addition, the perceived level of
uncertainty surrounding the estimated replacement rate is higher for employees with more
financial knowledge. This suggests that overly high expectations of future retirement benefits
are concentrated among individuals with lower levels of financial literacy. An important
policy implication is that while the Dutch pension system is about to transfer much more
responsibility for retirement financial security to employees, it is important to develop
programs to increase financial literacy and pension knowledge and awareness, especially in
the more vulnerable groups of the population.
This research is part of an international project on financial literacy around the world.
While the financial literacy scores for respondents in the Netherlands are among the highest
of participating countries, it should be stressed that it cannot be concluded that the Dutch are
better equipped to make financial decisions. The comparison between countries may be
hampered by things such as differences in survey methods.
The richness of our data set enables us to come up with a number of novel
contributions to the research. First, by employing information on literacy levels and financial
situations of parents and siblings of respondents, we are able to go beyond highlighting
associations and can make causal inferences on the effect of literacy on retirement planning.
Second, in collecting the same type of information in 2005 as in 2010, we are able to exploit
the panel component of our survey to circumvent the problem of unobserved individual
heterogeneity in studying the effect of financial literacy on retirement planning. Third, by
studying pension expectations we are able to shed more light on the mechanism underlying
the relationship between literacy and retirement planning. Individuals with low levels of
financial knowledge have difficulty forming correct expectations about future replacement
rates and do not know at what age to retire. Fourth, an interesting feature of our data set is the
fact that it includes information on religion. This enables us to explore the correlation of

2

financial literacy and retirement planning with religion, a relationship that no other scholars
have yet explored.
The outline of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, we briefly explain and describe the
Dutch pension system, the current policy debate on pension arrangements, and recent
initiatives to increase levels of financial knowledge. In section 3, we provide information on
our survey data. In section 4, we introduce the questions used to measure financial literacy
and present the distribution of financial knowledge across demographics. In section 5, we
discuss to what extent Dutch citizens plan for retirement and the relationship of planning to
overall measures of financial literacy. In section 6, we employ the panel component of our
survey so as to take into account unobserved individual heterogeneity in assessing the
relationship of financial literacy to planning. In section 7, we explore the relationship between
financial literacy and the formation of pension expectations. In section 8, we discuss policy
implications.

2. The Dutch pension system
Internationally, the Dutch pension system is often set as an example for other countries. There
is a pay-as-you-go financed state pension, the AOW, which provides a flat, relatively
generous benefit based on the number of years of residence in the Netherlands between the
ages of 15 and 65. Beyond that, more than nine out of ten employees save compulsory for an
additional pension benefit in their workplace (Van Els, Van Rooij and Schuit 2007). On
average, the company pension benefit and the AOW benefit are about equal. The average
gross replacement rate provided by these two arrangements combined has been above 80
percent (OECD 2009), a level that makes the additional third pillar savings of minor
importance.
Company retirement plans have historically provided little freedom of choice (Van
Rooij, Kool, and Prast 2007). Trade unions determine the level of pension contributions and
pension funds decide the investment policy. Until the start of the new century, the majority of
retirees were entitled to a retirement benefit of 70 percent of their final salary after 35–40
years of work. As the number of retirees was low compared to the number of workers,
pension funds were able to exploit intergenerational solidarity among their participants to
protect the retirees from shocks to investment returns or longevity. While the ageing of the

3

population led to a steady increase in the ratio of retirees to workers, a period of strong
investment returns in the 1990s enabled pension funds to make payments without
endangering solvency ratios. After the dot-com crash, these ratios decreased dramatically and
pension funds overwhelmingly exchanged career final wage pension plans for career average
wage plans with conditional indexation for active participants and retirees. As these
indexation decisions are dependent on solvency ratios, this policy change introduced an
important DC element into the Dutch pension system. At the same time, many plan sponsors
got rid of the obligation to make additional premium payments to remedy solvency problems.
Meanwhile, pension funds communicated that nominal pension rights were guaranteed and
that their premium and investment policy was geared to meeting the indexation ambitions
with a high level of certainty.
During the financial crisis, pension funds incurred huge investment losses, especially
in 2008. And low interest rates plus upward revisions in longevity expectations increased
pension costs to unprecedented levels. The government appointed a committee of pension
experts that concluded that the current system is not sustainable and that pension ambitions
need to be lowered in terms of either the level of benefits or the degree of certainty of
receiving this benefit. Either way, it became obvious that it was increasingly important for
households to prepare for retirement and to maintain or acquire the necessary financial skills
to do so.
The need for increasing financial knowledge and skills was recognized by the
Treasury department, which created CentiQ, a platform enabling many partners to work
together to increase the financial awareness and skills of Dutch consumers. Many initiatives
have been developed, often focused on specific target groups (several examples are given by
Lusardi and Van Rooij, 2010). If deemed effective, these education programs will be
important for household financial behavior and savings outcomes, as previous research using
Dutch data has documented a causal link between financial literacy and investment decisions
(Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie 2011a).

3. Data set
To study the relationship between financial knowledge and retirement preparation after the
financial crisis and the emergence of solvency problems for pension funds, we fielded a new

4

survey among participants in the CentERpanel between June 25 and July 6, 2010. This panel
is run by CentERdata at Tilburg University and contains approximately 2,000 households
whose members fill out short questionnaires via the internet on a weekly basis. Annually,
panel members provide information on “income, wealth, health, employment, pensions,
savings attitudes, and savings behavior” for the DNB Household Survey (DHS), providing
researchers with a rich set of background information on the respondents. Households are
recruited based upon careful selection procedure to safeguard the representativeness of the
Dutch population. The availability of a computer or internet connection is not a prerequisite
of the selection procedure, which is done by a combination of recruiting randomly selected
households over the phone and by house visits. After having agreed to participate, panel
members receive explanation on survey administration, which is conducted via the internet. If
necessary, either a computer with internet access or alternative equipment such as a set-top
box for communication through the television is provided to respondents. Participants do not
receive financial incentives to fill out questionnaires.
To investigate the extent of financial literacy and planning for retirement, we have
selected members of the CentERpanel aged 25 years and older, including both the household
head and partner, if present. A total of 1,665 respondents have completed the questionnaire, a
response rate of 65.4 percent. The average age of respondents is 55 years, 53.0 percent is
male, and 4.8 percent did not attain a school diploma after primary education, while 12.7
percent attained a university degree. As high-income respondents are somewhat
overrepresented, we use weights to present statistics representative of the Dutch population.
Since we fielded a similar survey to the CentERpanel five years earlier, we are able to
compare the financial knowledge and intensity of retirement planning well before and after
the onset of the financial crisis. Moreover, in our empirical analysis we are able to exploit the
panel component for those respondents who participated in both the 2005 and 2010 survey. In
particular, we are able to test for attrition bias and for the presence of “learning” among
respondents who answered the 2005 questions and to run fixed effect regressions controlling
for unobserved individual heterogeneity.

5

4. Empirical evidence
4.1 How much do individuals know?
We measure financial literacy by using the three questions which were first proposed by
Lusardi and Mitchell (2006) for the 2004 U.S. Health and Retirement Study. The first two
questions are rather basic and measure respondents’ ability to perform simple calculations and
understand the effect of inflation. To be able to classify respondents according to different
levels of financial sophistication, a third and more complicated question has been added to the
module. This question measures understanding of risk diversification. The precise wording of
the questions is as follows:
1) Understanding of Interest Rate (Numeracy)
Suppose you had €100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to
grow? (i) More
than €102; (ii) Exactly €102; (iii) Less than €102; (iv) Do not know; (v)
Refusal.
2) Understanding of Inflation
Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was
2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this
account? (i) More than today; (ii) Exactly the same; (iii) Less than today; (iv) Do not
know; (v) Refusal.
3) Understanding of Risk and Diversification
Do you think that the following statement is true or false? Buying a company stock usually
provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund. (i) True; (ii) False; (iii) Do not know; (iv)
Refusal.
Van Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie (2011a) designed a financial literacy module for the DHS in
2005 that contained the three questions presented above, in addition to other questions. To
assess the relevance of the wording financial literacy questions, they inverted the wording of
the question on risk diversification and exposed two randomly chosen groups of respondents
to the same question but with the different wording. The precise wording is as follows:
3a) Buying a company stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund. True
or false?
3b) Buying a stock mutual fund usually provides a safer return than a company stock. True
or false?
Van Rooij et al. (2011a) found that the pattern of answers changed dramatically when the
order of the wording was inverted. The number of correct answers was very low when
respondents were asked whether “buying a stock mutual fund usually provides a safer return

6

than a company stock,” but it doubled when respondents were asked the same question but in
inverted order. In this study, we do not do any randomization to keep the data for the
Netherlands as comparable as possible with the data collected by the other countries
participating in the international comparison. However, the results of Van Rooij et al. (2011a)
show that our measures of financial literacy (such as the number of correct answers) are rather
noisy proxies for the true level of financial knowledge. We will address the problem of
measurement error when we assess the effect of financial literacy on retirement planning.
Responses to the three financial literacy questions collected in the 2010 survey are
reported in Table 1. Most respondents (84.8 percent) have at least some idea about interest
rate calculations, with the percentage of incorrect answers at only 5.2 percent (Table 1a).
About 10 percent of individuals refuse or do not know how to respond to this question. About
seventy-seven percent of the respondents answer the inflation question correctly and about 11
percent respond incorrectly (Table 1b). To answer the second question correctly, individuals
need to have some basic understanding of the concept of inflation and its impact on
purchasing power. Obviously, this basic understanding could be higher had the Dutch
population gone through a time of high inflation. However, well before the start of the EMU
in 1999, the Dutch Central bank closely followed the monetary policy of the German
Bundesbank. As Bucher-Koenen and Lusardi (2010) point out, German monetary policy has
been quite strict during recent decades. As a result, inflation has been quite low from the mid
1980s onwards.
The proportion of correct answers decreases considerably, to a little more than 50
percent, when we consider the more complex question on risk diversification (Table 1c). Note
also that a sizable fraction (35 percent) of respondents either refuse to or are not able to
answer the risk diversification question. In order to interpret the low percentage of correct
answers, one should realize that the questionnaire is representative of the Dutch population,
aged 25 years and older, on an individual level and not on the household level. The sample
contains respondents who know much about the household financial situation but also by
respondents whose partner is in charge of the household finances. Moreover, one should be
aware that the overwhelming majority of the Dutch population neither holds company stocks
nor stock mutual funds (see e.g. Alessie, Hochguertel and Van Soest 2002). Furthermore,
concepts like “stock mutual funds” are typically not covered in (lower secondary) high
schools.

7

Given the low percentage of correct answers to the risk diversification question, it is
not surprising that only 45 percent of respondents answered all questions correctly (Table 1d).
A considerable fraction of respondents (73 percent) provided a correct answer to both the
interest rate and the inflation question. About 96 percent (73.36/76.86*100) of the
respondents with a correct answer to the inflation question also answered the interest rate
question correctly. Since this percentage is considerably higher than the overall percentage of
correct answers to the interest rate question (84.8 percent), one can conclude that there is a
strong positive association between the ability of respondents to answer to these two basic
literacy questions correctly.

4.2 Who knows the least?
Financial literacy varies widely across demographic variables such as age, gender, education,
and socioeconomic status (Table 2).1 Interestingly, the 65 plus cohort - who actively
experienced the high inflation period in the 1970s - scores somewhat better on the inflation
question than younger respondents, while the reverse is true for the other two questions and
the overall score. Overall, however, differences across age are not statistically significant.
These results differ from those found in a number of other studies, which typically show a
hump-shaped age profile for financial literacy. See, for example, Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix,
and Laibson’s (2009) work on financial literacy in the United States.
In line with results of other studies, we find large and significant gender differences in
financial literacy in the Netherlands: women display much lower knowledge than men, and
differences are statistically significant. Notice, however, that women do not give many more
incorrect answers than men. Instead they state “do not know” much more often. As expected,
financial literacy increases strongly and significantly with level of education. About a third of
respondents with primary or lower secondary education answered all literacy questions
correctly. Around half of those individuals answered at least one of the three literacy
questions with “do not know” or “refuse to answer”. Conversely, the majority (70 percent) of
respondents with a university degree gave a correct answer to all literacy questions.

1

Furthermore, financial literacy is significantly and positively correlated with income and home ownership. We
do not observe a statistically significant relationship, however, between financial literacy on the one hand and
region of residence or urbanization grade on the other hand. These results are not reported in Table 2 but are
available from the authors upon request.

8

Financial literacy is significantly correlated with socioeconomic status. Self-employed
respondents not only have higher overall literacy scores but also more often provide a correct
answer to each individual literacy question than those who are employed, retired, or
unemployed (other than retirees). This is important since the self-employed in the Netherlands
have to take care of their own retirement savings, while employees typically participate in
their employer’s mandatory retirement plan. Employees seem more financially literate than
retirees (including those who have retired early), who in turn score much better than
unemployed respondents. The latter group includes those who are unemployed but looking for
a job, those who are not able to work and receive a disability benefit, and housewives and
househusbands.

4.3 Financial literacy across religion
Renneboog and Spaenjers (2010) have used the DHS panel to investigate the differences in
economic attitudes and financial decisions between religious and non-religious Dutch
households. They find the Netherlands to be an important case study to examine the effect of
religion on individual decision making, for two reasons. First, there is considerable variety in
religious beliefs in the Netherlands: Catholicism, different types of Protestantism, and several
other beliefs (e.g., Islam). Nevertheless, Christian religions dominate in the Netherlands. An
essential difference between Catholics and Protestants is that “the former rely on salvation by
works with enforcement by the Church and the latter on salvation from divine grace with
enforcement from social interaction” (Arruñada 2010). Second, the distinction between
religious and non-religious individuals is probably easier to make in the Netherlands than in
other countries. Generally, those who claim affiliation with a specific religious denomination
also practice their religion.
Renneboog and Spaenjers (2010) find that religious households consider themselves
more trusting, have a stronger bequest motive, and—most important for our work—a longer
planning horizon. Given this last finding, one would expect that religious individuals put
more emphasis on retirement planning than those who are non-religious. We will return to
this issue in Section 5 of the paper. Furthermore, Catholics invest less in the stock market. At
the same time, in line with the differences between the two Christian religions, Protestants
seem to have a weaker internal locus of control than Catholics (i.e. they feel less able to
influence the course of their life) but a higher awareness of individual financial responsibility.
9

Especially in light of the last result, one may expect differences in the level of financial
literacy across religious groups. As our survey contains information on religion, we are able
to explore this relationship. Our religion variable measures affiliation and does not necessarily
capture upbringing and religious attendance. With respect to religion, we make a distinction
between no religion (including humanists), Catholic, Protestant (including Evangelicals2), and
“other” religions. The last category contains Muslims and other smaller religious groups.
Table 3a shows that individuals with religions designated “other” display the least financial
literacy. However, we do not find that Protestants are more financially literate than Catholics
or non-religious individuals. Individuals of “other” religion report that they “do not know” the
answer more often than other groups.

5. Thinking about retirement
5.1 Descriptive evidence
Our main interest is explaining why some households prepare for retirement better than
others. To that end, we included the following question in our surveys: How much have you
thought about retirement: A lot, some, little, or hardly at all? This question was included in
the 2005 DHS questionnaire on financial literacy and in the U.S. HRS (Lusardi and Mitchell
2006), and it is also included in the 2010 DHS questionnaire. As we stated in the introduction,
the recent financial crisis has shown that the Dutch pension system is vulnerable to financial
market shocks. As a result, Dutch policymakers have proposed additional pension reforms,
such as an increase in the statutory retirement age. A key element of the proposals is more
individual choice concerning the timing of retirement. Furthermore, the market risk of
pension investments will be deferred away from employers, meaning individuals will face
more uncertainty with their second pillar pension. In this respect one would expect that in the
years since the 2005 survey, individuals will have taken more responsibility in preparing for
retirement.

2

Evangelicals are conservative Protestants who share a strong belief in a literal interpretation of the Bible and
the importance of rebirth. The group of Evangelicals is rather small and we therefore decided to lump them
together with the other Protestants.

10

Table 3b indeed suggests that in 2010 respondents think significantly more about their
retirement than they did in 2005 (see the results of the  2 -tests).3 This is a comforting result.
Nonetheless it should be made clear that about a third of respondents acknowledge that they
have thought a little (28.1 percent in 2005; 21.9 percent in 2010) or hardly at all (7 percent in
2005 and 2010) about retirement. Only a small group of respondents (12.9 percent in 2005;
17.1 percent in 2010) has thought a lot about retirement. The majority (about 50 percent) take
an intermediate position and report to have thought some about retirement, although not a lot.
The picture is even more dramatic if we consider the subsample of non-retirees. Obviously,
this is the group of individuals who should be preparing for retirement. Compared with the
whole sample, relatively more respondents in this subgroup think hardly at all or not at all
about retirement.
Overall, most respondents seem to prepare only to a limited extent for retirement.
Moreover, one may debate whether respondents who think a lot or some about retirement are
actually thinking about the sufficiency of retirement savings rather than of ways to enjoy life
after retirement. Psychological research, however, has shown that having a concrete picture in
mind induces action and has a positive effect on the likelihood of taking concrete steps
(McCrea et al. 2008). Indeed, the Dutch data show that respondents who think more about
retirement not only find it more important to save but also manage to save more (Van Rooij,
Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011b). Lusardi and Mitchell (2007) report evidence from the United
States showing households who think a little, somewhat, or a lot about retirement accumulate
substantially more wealth than those who do not think about retirement at all. For the median
household, planners on the verge of retirement hold twice as much wealth as non-planners.
Table 3c summarizes changes in financial literacy between 2005 and 2010. As
mentioned in Section 4, we randomized the risk diversification question in 2005 so that half
of the sample answered the same question but with an inverted order. Hence, the results
presented in left panel of Table 3c should be interpreted with some caution. In the right panel
of Table 3c we present a more appropriate comparison, restricting the 2005 sample to
respondents who got exactly the same question on risk diversification as the members of the
2010 sample. Table 3c shows that the 2010 respondents have somewhat more trouble in
3

There are some differences in the composition of the 2005 and 2010 samples. In 2005, the financial literacy
questionnaire was only filled out by the household member in charge of household finances, whereas in 2010 we
selected all household members aged 25 and older, including both the household head and partner, if present. In
order to have comparable results, we consider in Table 3b the same group of individuals in 2005 and 2010, i.e.
individuals aged 25 or over in charge of household finances.

11

answering the interest rate and risk diversification questions correctly than the 2005
respondents. This is a worrisome result in light of the fact that given events in the years 2005–
2010 and changes at the policy level, individuals should be taking on more responsibility for
retirement preparation. 4
Exploring the correlation between financial literacy and thinking about retirement, we
find that respondents who think a lot or some about retirement have, on average, a similar
level of financial literacy.5 Moreover, these respondents are more financially literate than
individuals who think less about retirement. Based on this evidence, in our multivariate
analysis we construct a dummy variable for retirement planning that takes on the value 1 if
the respondent thinks “a lot” or “some” about retirement and zero otherwise. Table 4 reports
the relationship between this dummy variable and financial literacy, showing there is a strong
positive correlation between financial literacy and thinking about retirement.

5.2 Multivariate analysis of retirement preparation
In this section, we perform a multivariate analysis of the relationship between retirement
planning and financial literacy. We use two different measures for financial literacy: (1) a
dummy variable that equals one if a respondent correctly answered all three financial literacy
questions, and (2) a variable counting the number of correct answers to these three questions.
We include dummy variables that control for age, education, gender, marital status, net
monthly household income quartiles, home ownership, and religion to take into account
individual heterogeneity that might affect the relationship between retirement planning and
financial literacy.
In Table 5 we first report the results of a simple Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
regression of retirement planning on socioeconomic controls and financial literacy. In this
analysis we only consider the 2010 sample. Moreover, we select all respondents who are 65
or younger and not yet retired. Notice that our analysis not only refers to individuals in charge
of household finances but also to other household members. The results in the first two

4

Interestingly, the number of incorrect answers is not so much higher in 2010, rather it is the number of do not
know answers that has increased. This suggests that there might be less guessing and overconfidence than was
present in 2005.
5
Results are available from the authors upon request.

12

columns of Table 5 show that there is a strong positive relationship between retirement
planning and financial literacy. The size of the estimated coefficient for the number of correct
questions (0.102, see the second column) suggests that one extra correct answer is associated
with an increased probability (by 10 percentage points) of having thought (some or a lot)
about retirement. The OLS results also indicate that respondents do not tend to think much
about retirement when they are young and retirement is a distant concept. After controlling
for literacy, there is no role for education in explaining retirement planning once we control
for other individual characteristics. While in raw data men think more often about retirement
than women, the effect of gender disappears in the multivariate setting. Interestingly,
Catholics think more about retirement than others. This finding is consistent with the results
of Renneboog and Spaenjers (2010) who find that, compared with respondents with “other”
religions or without religion, Catholics attach more importance to thrift and are more risk
averse.
Based on these simple estimates, we cannot yet give a causal interpretation of the
relationship between financial literacy and planning. The literacy variable might be
endogenous due to reverse causality (by planning more for retirement one becomes more
literate) and omitted variables (ability, for example). On the basis of these arguments, one
might state that the estimated literacy coefficient is biased upward. On the other hand, Van
Rooij et al. (2011a) show that financial literacy is rather difficult to measure. It is likely that
financial knowledge is measured with substantial error, which might lead to a downward bias
in the estimated financial literacy coefficient.6 In either case, we cannot simply rely on the
OLS estimates reported in Table 5 to assess the effect of literacy on retirement planning. To
remedy this problem, we have collected additional information that can serve as instruments
for advanced financial literacy. For this purpose, we asked respondents about the financial
experiences of their siblings and parents.7 Specifically, we collected information on whether
the financial situation of the oldest sibling is “better,” “the same,” or “worse” than the
financial situation of the respondent. The experience of siblings is not under the control of the
respondent, but respondents can learn from those around them and increase their own
financial literacy. One may argue that the experience of siblings can proxy for a common set
of preferences or for a family fixed effect. While plausible in theory, the first stage results

6

However, it should be realized that since retirement planning and financial literacy are discrete variables,
measurement errors are non-classical. In other words, a measurement error in financial literacy might
not necessarily lead to attenuation in the estimated financial literacy coefficient but possibly to an upward bias.
7
Van Rooij et al. (2011a) also use these instruments.

13

reported in the second column of Table 6 show that, in fact, if siblings are in worse financial
condition than the respondents, respondents are more likely to have higher financial literacy.
In addition to the financial situation of siblings, we also consider parents’ understanding of
financial matters as perceived by the respondent.
The first stage regressions reported in Table 6 show that if one takes the number of
correct answers as the measure of financial literacy, the F-statistic is very high and well above
the value of 10 recommended to avoid the weak instrument problem (Staiger and Stock 1997;
Bound, Jaeger, and Baker 1995). The first-stage results also continue to confirm the
relationship between financial literacy and demographic characteristics such as education and
gender, reported in Table 2. The estimates in the second stage reported in the third and fourth
column of Table 5 show that the relationship between literacy and retirement planning
remains positive and statistically significant in the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM)
regression. Moreover, the results of the exogeneity test indicate that the OLS estimates differ
significantly from the GMM estimates and that therefore the OLS estimates are inconsistent.
Moreover, the Hansen’s J test does not indicate rejection of the over-identifying restrictions.
Overall, our GMM estimates show that financial literacy is an important determinant of
retirement planning: Those who have low financial knowledge are less likely to plan for
retirement.

6. Financial literacy and retirement planning: Panel estimation results
We next exploit the longitudinal nature of our data set. By merging the 2005 and 2010
survey, we can control for an individual fixed effect and thereby address the problem of
omitted variables (such as ability) that could bias our estimates.8 Before estimating such
models, we checked whether or not respondent attrition from the survey is random. Such a
check is important because the attrition rate over the five-year period is rather high (somewhat
more than 50 percent in the DHS panel). We split the 2005 sample into two parts: (1) the
“stayers,” i.e., individuals who are in the data in both 2005 and 2010 and (2) the “movers,”
i.e., individuals who took part in the survey in 2005 but not in 2010. The attrition is random
if, on average, there are no significant differences in retirement planning between the two

8
In the fixed effects regressions we only consider respondents who are in charge of household finances as this
selection criterion was used in the 2005 survey.

14

subgroups. The result of an  2 test indicates that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
attrition is random (  2 (1)  0.513 ). Given this result, we can estimate a fixed effects model
with some confidence. In the fixed effects models we control for a large number of
background characteristics, as we did in the cross-sectional models. Moreover, we include a
time dummy and a binary variable, taking into account that in 2005 the risk diversification
question was randomized.
Table 7 shows the results of the fixed effects regressions. If we take the number of
correct answers as the relevant measure of financial literacy, we find that the “within
estimate” of the financial literacy coefficient is positive and statistically significant. In other
words, even after controlling for background characteristics and for correlated unobserved
heterogeneity, we still find that financial literacy has a significant positive effect on retirement
planning. One should however be aware that the fixed effect estimate is possibly still biased
due to reverse causality. Moreover, the problem of measurement error is normally
exacerbated in a fixed effect regression. In this respect, it is worth noting that we still find a
significant estimate of the effect of financial literacy on retirement planning.
The problem of reverse causality can be addressed by relating retirement planning in
2010 with financial literacy in 2005, since time spent thinking about retirement in 2010
should not affect the level of financial knowledge five years earlier. In columns 3 and 4 of
Table 7, we show the results of an OLS regression that reports the relationship between
thinking about retirement in 2010 and financial literacy level in 2005 (and other explanatory
variables measuring personal characteristics and the socioeconomic situation in 2010). Again
we find that financial literacy affects retirement planning. The coefficient of the number of
correct answers to the three financial literacy questions is significant and is comparable to the
coefficient in the fixed effect regressions. It suggests that one additional correct answer on the
three financial literacy questions increases the probability of planning for retirement by 6
percentage points.

7. Relationship between financial literacy and pension expectations
The empirical estimates convincingly show that financial literacy is an important determinant
of retirement planning. This suggests that implementing policy changes in the Netherlands
and shifting investment risk to individuals, as well as introducing uncertainty about

15

replacement rates should go hand in hand with programs to increase pension knowledge and
awareness. For this purpose it is important to better understand the relationship between
financial literacy and planning. In this section we explore the relationship between financial
literacy and retirement expectations as this might provide information on how financial
literacy affects planning for retirement.

7.1 Expected retirement age
We merge our data on financial literacy and retirement planning with information available
for employees younger than 65 (from an additional module on pension expectations collected
by CentERdata in the autumn of 2010). This survey includes the question: “At which age do
you expect to retire?” Respondents can either provide an age or choose the “do not know”
option. Table 8 shows the responses. The current statutory retirement age is 65. At the end of
2009, the government proposed a two-step increase in the statutory retirement age: to age 66
in 2020 and to age 67 in 2025. According to this proposal, individuals born in 1959 will
receive the public pension (AOW) from age 67 onward and individuals born between 1955
and 1958 will receive the AOW from age 66 onward. The proposal did not imply a change in
the statutory retirement age for older generations. Results shown in Table 8 suggest that 22
percent of respondents expect to retire early (i.e., before age 65), a considerable fraction
expect to retire after age 65, and, notably, many (more than 25 percent) expect to retire at age
67. A possible explanation for these findings is that the proposed pension reform has led
Dutch employees to revise their expectations concerning retirement age.
We investigate the association between financial literacy and the formation of
retirement expectations using a multivariate model. In this model we should take into account
that a substantial subgroup (10.5 percent) of the respondents answers “don’t know” to the
retirement expectation question. It seems likely that the financially illiterate are
overrepresented in this subgroup. Therefore we have estimated a two-part model. The first
part is a linear probability model that associates the incidence of a do not know answer with a
measure of financial literacy, controlling for a large set of background characteristics as done
in the analysis of retirement planning behavior. We then select the subsample of respondents
who report an expected pension (age) and we regress the expected pension age on a measure

16

of financial literacy and background characteristics.9 The results of the first part of the model
are summarized in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9. In the previous sections we have seen that
financially illiterate individuals have a lower tendency to think about retirement. Given this
result it is not surprising that financial literacy is negatively correlated with the probability of
answering don’t know on the retirement age expectation question. This result holds true even
if we control for education, income, and other individual characteristics (see column 2 of
Table 9). Women, younger respondents, those with a low monthly income, and those with
“other” religion (e.g., Islam) are more likely to answer the expected retirement age question
with don’t know.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 9 show that, conditional upon reporting a retirement age, a
financially literate respondent expects to retire later. However, this effect is not significant.
The estimation results suggest that to some extent employees take the policy proposal to
change the statutory retirement age into account in reporting their expected retirement age.
For example, employees born before 1955 expect to retire 1.6 years earlier than workers born
after 1975. In line with the policy proposal, those born between 1955 and 1958 expect to
retire one year earlier than young employees (year of birth > 1975). Perhaps surprisingly,
there is no difference in the retirement age expectation between the group born between 1959
and 1975 and the group born between 1955 and 1958. The estimation results suggest that the
expected retirement age is negatively associated with income and that there is no significant
relationship with religion.

7.2 Expected replacement rate
Assuming that the typical Dutch employee expects a replacement rate of 70 percent of their
final wage income, the Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets (AFM) asserts that
Dutch employees hold overly optimistic expectations. The AFM, in charge of the supervision
on pension fund communication and information, has reported a number of calculations
showing that for different reasons these replacement rates are not feasible for many Dutch
workers. Our survey includes the following question from which the subjective distribution of
the replacement rate can be inferred (note that RET_AGE is the retirement age provided by
the respondents themselves):

9

As we only look at observed correlations, we do not account for selectivity.

17

Suppose now that you retire at age RET_AGE. Think about your total pension income
from public and private pension entitlements. What is the minimum and maximum gross
pension income you expect to receive as a percentage of your gross income just before
retirement?



I expect the gross pension income to be at least … percent of my gross income just
before retirement
I expect the gross pension income to be at most … percent of my gross income just
before retirement
Responses confirm the findings of the AFM. On average, Dutch workers expect to

receive a replacement rate upon retirement of between 70 and 80 percent of their final wage,
and hence the majority of respondents seem overly optimistic. We have estimated a two-part
model to shed light on the relationship between expected replacement rates and individual
characteristics. The first part concerns the probability that the respondent is not able to answer
this question (i.e., the probability that the respondent chooses the “do not know” option).
About 20 percent of respondents answer “do not know.” The second part associates
respectively the minimum replacement rate, the range (i.e., the difference between the
maximum and minimum replacement rates), and the expected replacement rate on a large
number of background characteristics among which are financial literacy and expected
retirement age.
Keeping other factors constant, financial literacy is negatively associated with the
probability of a do not know answer on the replacement rate question (column 1 of Table 10).
This is again a sign that financially literate individuals are more likely to think about
retirement and consequently are more likely to report pension expectations than other
workers. As in the case of the expected retirement age, women, low-income workers, and
employees with “other” religion have a higher tendency to respond “do not know” to
replacement rate questions.
Conditional upon giving a valid answer, financial literacy seems to be partially
negatively correlated with the (minimum) expected replacement rate (Table 10, columns 2
and 3). Given that most workers are too optimistic about their future pension income, one
would expect that financially literate respondents would indeed report a lower expected
replacement rate. As the Dutch public pension (AOW) basically provides a minimum flat
retirement income for everyone, the replacement rate is likely to be higher for employees with
low permanent income. This feature of the Dutch pension system is confirmed in the
regression results, provided that one accepts level of education as a proxy for permanent

18

income: workers with low educational attainment expect higher (minimum) replacement rates
than workers with higher levels of education. Financial literacy is negatively associated with
the expected replacement rate even if we correct for permanent income proxies such as
education. The expected retirement age does not appear to have an effect on the (minimum)
expected replacement rate. This result seems to be a bit odd as future pension entitlements
would increase if one continued to work longer. However, anticipation of a high replacement
could induce workers to retire before the statutory retirement age. Note that Protestants and
Catholics expect a lower minimum replacement rate than respondents without a religion.
The recent financial crisis has shown that the Dutch occupational pension system is
vulnerable to shocks in financial markets. Pension reforms that are shifting investment risk to
retirement plan participants are being discussed. Even without reforms, a number of pension
funds have decided to curtail current and future pension benefits due to solvency problems. In
order to investigate whether employees realize the uncertainty about current and future
pension benefits, we run a regression using the difference between the expected minimum and
maximum replacement rates (i.e., a measure of the perceived riskiness of future pensions) on
the number of correct answers to the financial literacy questions and other background
variables (Table 10, column 4).
Respondents with greater financial sophistication report more uncertainty about future
pension benefits than those who are financially illiterate, keeping other factors such as
education constant. Compared with workers with low levels of education, those with a
university degree are more likely to indicate a higher degree of uncertainty around future
benefits. While this is consistent with the uncertainty that is particularly evident among
younger well-educated employees regarding the trajectory of their career path, it may in part
reflect greater awareness of the increasing imbalance of the pension system and uncertainty
about the response by politicians and pension fund boards. The regression results also show
that older workers anticipate less variability in future replacement rates than younger workers.
This is a plausible result not only because older individuals are closer to retirement, but also
because the current Dutch pension system is a defined benefit system, and most pension
reform proposals do not affect the pension rights of older individuals in the same way as they
affect those of younger workers.

19

8. Discussion and implications for policy
Our empirical results convincingly show a causal relationship of financial knowledge upon
thinking about retirement. We use innovative instrumental variables based upon information
about the financial situation and financial knowledge of siblings and parents to correct for
reverse causality, and we exploit the panel component of our survey to correct for ability bias
and further unobserved individual heterogeneity. These findings are based upon the responses
to three financial literacy questions, devised by Lusardi and Mitchell (2006) for the Health
and Retirement Survey in the United States, which have proved to provide reliable
information on respondents’ level of financial knowledge.
Despite several policy initiatives to increase financial awareness and financial
knowledge, our research shows that there has been little improvement between 2005 and
2010. Nevertheless, individuals’ propensity to plan for retirement has increased. This change
is not surprising once we realize that worsening pension fund solvency is not only heavily
debated in the Netherlands but also directly affects workers and retirees. For a few years now,
accumulated pension rights and benefits have often not been indexed to price and wage
developments, reducing their value in real terms, and sometimes even nominal pension
benefits have been cut. In fact, there is a broad consensus that current pension arrangements
are not sustainable and an intense debate is taking place on the design and implementation of
new pension contracts.
Our findings show that many Dutch workers hold replacement rate expectations that
will likely turn out to be overly optimistic. On top of that, employees are quite confident that
they will obtain these overly optimistic replacement rates. It is evident that pension fund
companies have, so far, not been successful in effectively communicating what employees
can expect from their retirement plan. This will make the transition to new pension contracts
entailing reduced replacement rates or reduced levels of certainty even more difficult. The
good news is that more literate workers are more likely to be prepared for retirement and are
better equipped to form correct pension expectations. More knowledgeable households expect
significantly lower replacement rates and recognize that any expectations entail a significant
amount of uncertainty. These results are suggestive of more literate household holding more
realistic retirement expectations.
The Dutch pension system is about to change from offering retirement plans with little
freedom of choice and high levels of benefit certainty to new pension arrangements with
20

vastly different but as-yet uncertain characteristics. Therefore, it is important to make sure
that employees form realistic expectations and that - given limited levels of financial literacy newly designed pension contracts contain adequate mechanisms to prevent employees from
easily making large mistakes in saving for retirement. At the same time, changes in retirement
plans could benefit from programs directed at increasing financial literacy and pension
knowledge as increased knowledge has been shown to contribute to the formation of realistic
retirement expectations and effectively increase planning for retirement among the Dutch
population.

21

References
Agarwal, S., J. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson (2009), The Age of Reason: Financial
Decisions over the Lifecycle and Implications for Regulation, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall: 51-117.
Alessie, R., S. Hochguertel, S., and A. Van Soest (2002), Household Portfolios in the
Netherlands. In: Guiso, L. Haliassos, M., Jappelli, T. (Eds.), Household Portfolios, MIT
Press, Cambridge: 341-388.
Arruñada, B. (2010), Protestants and Catholics: Similar Work Ethic, Different Social Ethic,
Economic Journal, 120: 890-918.
Bound, J., D. Jaeger, and R. Baker (1995), Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation
when the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variable is
Weak, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90: 443-450.
Bucher-Koenen, T., and A. Lusardi (2010), Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in
Germany, mimeo, MEA, University of Mannheim.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell (2006), Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
Retirement Wellbeing, Pension Research Council Working Paper, 1, The Wharton School.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell (2007), Baby Boomers Retirement Security: The Role of
Planning, Financial Literacy and Housing Wealth, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: 205224.
Lusardi, A., and M. van Rooij (2010), Financial Literacy, Evidence and Implications for
Consumer Education, Netspar Panel Paper, 16, Netspar, Tilburg University.
McCrea, S., N. Liberman, Y. Trope, and S. Sherman (2008), Construal Level and
Procrastination, Psychological Science, 19: 1308-1314.
OECD (2009), Pensions at a glance 2009: Retirement- income systems in OECD countries,
Paris, France.
Renneboog, L., and C. Spaenjers (2010), Religion, Economic Attitudes, and Household
Finance, mimeo, Tilburg University.
Staiger, D., and J. Stock (1997), Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,
Econometrica, 65: 557-586.
Van Els, P., M. van Rooij, and M. Schuit (2007), Why Mandatory Retirement Saving? In: O.
Steenbeek and S. van der Lecq (Eds.), Costs and Benefits of Collective Pension Systems,
Springer, Berlin: 159-186.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie (2011a), Financial Literacy and Stock Market
Participation, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie (2011b), Financial Literacy and Retirement
Planning in the Netherlands, Journal of Economic Psychology, forthcoming.
Van Rooij, M., C. Kool, and H. Prast (2007), Risk-Return Preferences in the Pension Domain:
Are People Able to Choose?, Journal of Public Economics, 91: 701-722.

22

Table 1a. Interest Question
Weighted percentages
More than 102 euro
Exactly 102 euro
Less than 102 euro
Do not know
Refuse to answer
Number of observations

Whole sample
84.83
3.44
1.74
8.90
1.08
1665

Age 25-65
85.54
3.01
2.11
8.26
1.08
1324

Table 1b. Inflation Question
Weighted percentages
Whole sample
2.74
5.65
76.86
13.54
1.20
1665

Age 25-65
3.09
5.77
75.90
14.01
1.24
1324

Whole sample
51.91
13.32
33.20
1.57
1665

Age 25-65
53.29
11.98
32.86
1.87
1324

Table 1d. Answers across Questions
Weighted percentages
Whole sample
Interest & Inflation correct
73.36
All correct
44.83
No correct
10.46
At least 1 “Do not know”
37.60
All “Do not know”
8.07
Number of observations
1665

Age 25-65
73.11
46.18
10.45
37.25
8.24
1324

More
Exactly the same
Less
Do not know
Refuse to answer
Number of observations

Table 1c. Risk Question
Weighted percentages
Correct “false”
Incorrect “true”
Do not know
Refuse to answer
Number of observations

23

Table 2. Distribution of Financial Literacy across Demographics
Weighted percentages
Interest question
Inflation question
Risk question
Correct
DK
Correct
DK
Correct
DK
Age
35 and younger
84.67
8.89
76.17
16.70
52.51
32.29
36 to 50
85.13
10.68
74.24
17.32
52.71
35.89
51 to 65
86.57
8.22
77.48
12.04
54.43
35.16
Older than 65
82.10
12.44
80.60
12.79
46.56
34.92
Gender
Male
86.63
9.31
81.91
11.06
62.03
27.50
Female
83.10
10.63
71.99
18.30
42.14
41.79
Education
Primary
70.24
18.29
65.62
19.49
41.68
48.53
Lower secondary
79.81
15.18
66.00
20.73
45.76
40.89
Middle secondary
85.30
8.90
75.28
16.55
47.43
34.87
Upper secondary
91.48
4.95
88.00
7.54
59.42
25.86
Higher vocational
89.45
6.78
85.80
9.52
59.70
29.68
University
95.66
2.63
94.79
4.81
72.40
23.19
Self-employed, non-employed, workers, and retired
Self-employed
86.54
8.99
78.30
13.13
55.34
33.28
Non-employed
87.84
6.66
84.39
13.54
65.53
23.99
Workers
78.94
12.49
68.05
21.63
40.90
43.43
Retired
85.86
10.81
80.31
11.89
50.82
32.58
Table 3a. Distribution of Financial Literacy across Religion
Weighted percentages
Interest question
Inflation question
Correct
DK
Correct
DK
No religion
86.03
9.47
78.92
13.34
Roman-catholic
84.79
9.84
74.32
16.58
Protestant
83.48
9.59
78.94
10.64
Other religion
81.74
14.58
69.18
26.94
Table 3b. Retirement Planning across Years
Weighted percentages
Whole sample
Thought about retirement
2005
2010
A lot
12.9
17.1
Some
51.1
52.4
Little
28.1
21.9
Hardly at all
7.2
7.0
Do not know/Refusal
0.8
1.7
Number of observations
1498
1138
2
 - statistic (p-value)
15.73 (0.0034)

Risk question
Correct
DK
53.57
34.42
54.20
32.29
50.50
31.73
37.08
54.92

Total
14.7
51.6
25.4
7.1
1.1
2636

45.97
45.83
46.70
39.57

34.32
38.34
38.07
38.94

55.06
34.96

29.04
45.85

28.01
35.10
41.66
54.40
55.38
69.76

54.36
44.88
38.07
26.56
30.81
24.11

50.15
57.96
28.30
44.97

34.39
28.14
50.14
35.24

Overall
3 correct >= 1 DK
46.97
36.35
44.82
36.26
43.82
35.84
35.15
54.92

Non-retired, age 65 and younger
2005
2010
Total
9.7
13.2
11.2
51.6
53.1
52.3
28.7
24.7
27.0
9.0
6.7
8.0
1.0
2.2
1.5
1028
769
1797

Note: Respondents are in charge of household finances and at least 25 years old

24

Overall
3 correct >= 1 DK

9.77 (0.0444)

Table 3c. Financial Literacy across Years
Weighted fractions
Whole sample
Interest question
Year
N of obs.
Correct
DK
2005
1498
0.91
0.04
2010
1138
0.86
0.09
Total
2636
0.89
0.06
23.17 (0.0000)
 2 -statistic (p-value)

Inflation question
Correct
DK
0.83
0.81
0.82

0.09
0.12
0.10

4.94 (0.1760)

Risk question
Correct
DK
0.48
0.56
0.52

0.27
0.33
0.30

Overall
3 correct >= 1 DK
0.43
0.50
0.46

0.30
0.35
0.32

76.90 (0.0000)

2005 sample restricted to respondents who got the same risk question as 2010 sample
Interest question
Inflation question
Risk question
Overall
Year
N of obs.
Correct
DK Correct
DK Correct
DK
3 correct >= 1 DK
2005
755
0.91
0.04
0.82
0.08
0.63
0.24
0.56
0.27
2010
1138
0.86
0.09
0.81
0.12
0.56
0.33
0.50
0.35
Total
1893
0.88
0.07
0.81
0.11
0.59
0.30
0.52
0.32
14.00 (0.0029)
4.49 (0.2127)
11.99 (0.0024)
 2 -statistic (p-value)
Note: Respondents are in charge of household finances and at least 25 years old

Table 4. Financial Literacy by Retirement Planning
Weighted percentages
Planners
Non-planners
Interest question
90.61
77.14
Correct
4.24
17.32
Do not know
Inflation question
81.00
67.32
Correct
9.06
25.48
Do not know
Risk question
62.15
39.05
Correct
25.74
48.93
Do not know
Overall
77.85
64.86
Interest and inflation correct
52.96
34.88
All correct
At least one DK

28.67

25

51.00

Table 5. Multivariate Analysis of Retirement Planning
OLS
All three correct
0.126***
(0.0308)
Number correct
Age
Age squared
Female

GMM
0.595***
(0.173)

0.0210
(0.0159)
-0.000166
(0.000168)
-0.0276
(0.0280)

0.0147
(0.0178)
-0.000107
(0.000188)
0.0573
(0.0447)

Education dummies (base: primary education)
Lower secondary

OLS

GMM

0.101***
(0.0175)
0.0219
(0.0156)
-0.000178
(0.000165)
-0.0235
(0.0275)

0.175***
(0.0448)
0.0217
(0.0155)
-0.000180
(0.000164)
-0.000530
(0.0300)

0.104
0.0562
0.0982
(0.0791)
(0.0862)
(0.0766)
Middle secondary
0.0900
0.00511
0.0721
(0.0823)
(0.0941)
(0.0800)
Upper secondary
0.0745
-0.0593
0.0466
(0.0881)
(0.108)
(0.0856)
Higher vocational
0.159*
0.0390
0.141*
(0.0812)
(0.0976)
(0.0789)
University
0.125
-0.0420
0.101
(0.0869)
(0.112)
(0.0845)
Quartile dummies monthly net household income (base: lowest quartile)
Second income quartile
0.0217
0.0202
0.00883
(0.0542)
(0.0576)
(0.0530)
Third income quartile
0.0214
-0.0570
5.78e-05
(0.0573)
(0.0700)
(0.0565)
Highest income quartile
0.111*
0.0326
0.0929
(0.0610)
(0.0733)
(0.0595)
Income not known
-0.0181
-0.0636
0.00937
(0.146)
(0.114)
(0.130)
Home-owner
0.0789**
0.0219
0.0786**
(0.0397)
(0.0495)
(0.0391)
Marital status (base: single)
Married, no children
0.0122
0.0707
0.00473
(0.0470)
(0.0552)
(0.0460)
Married, children
-0.0812
0.00528
-0.0813
(0.0721)
(0.0814)
(0.0707)
Single parent, other
-0.0866
-0.0265
-0.0729
(0.0847)
(0.0929)
(0.0825)
Number of children
-0.00161
-0.00740
-0.000379
(0.0279)
(0.0293)
(0.0275)
Socio-economic status (base: employee)
Self-employed
0.0252
0.00374
0.0171
(0.0511)
(0.0598)
(0.0514)
Non-employed
-0.0501
-0.0341
-0.0560
(0.0377)
(0.0421)
(0.0373)
Religion (base: no religion)
Roman-catholic
0.0781**
0.0776**
0.0787**
(0.0342)
(0.0371)
(0.0338)
Protestant
0.0179
0.0139
0.0190
(0.0396)
(0.0426)
(0.0389)
Other religion
-0.0332
-0.0234
-0.0257
(0.0597)
(0.0667)
(0.0608)
Constant
-0.211
-0.194
-0.356
(0.374)
(0.413)
(0.368)
Number of observations
1166
1166
1166
R-squared
0.095
-0.112
0.113
p-value age, age squared
0.00216
0.0314
0.00331
p-value education
0.280
0.328
0.269
p-value income
0.117
0.233
0.131
p-value marital status
0.504
0.503
0.581
p-value socio-economic status
0.328
0.710
0.279
p-value religion
0.0860
0.153
0.0892
F-statistic first stage regression
9.608
p-value exogeneity test
0.00760
p-value Hansen OIR test
0.170
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the household level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

26

0.0887
(0.0759)
0.0452
(0.0813)
0.00244
(0.0889)
0.105
(0.0802)
0.0584
(0.0876)
0.00445
(0.0529)
-0.0254
(0.0598)
0.0683
(0.0620)
0.0215
(0.112)
0.0696*
(0.0400)
0.0115
(0.0457)
-0.0593
(0.0703)
-0.0436
(0.0821)
-0.00270
(0.0272)
0.00413
(0.0527)
-0.0556
(0.0374)
0.0833**
(0.0335)
0.0218
(0.0385)
-0.0179
(0.0620)
-0.483
(0.370)
1166
0.095
0.00685
0.258
0.169
0.735
0.316
0.0698
19.37
0.0817
0.198

Table 6. First Stage Regressions
All three correct
Number correct
Financial situation oldest sibling (base: no sibling, do not know)
Worse
0.0849*
0.338***
(0.0469)
(0.0970)
The same or better
0.0422
0.307***
(0.0417)
(0.0899)
Parents‘ understanding of financial matters (base: low)
Intermediate or high
0.00360
0.0385
(0.0394)
(0.0691)
DK
-0.238***
-0.759***
(0.0586)
(0.132)
Age
0.0166
0.0204
(0.0159)
(0.0287)
Age squared
-0.000155
-0.000152
(0.000169)
(0.000305)
Female
-0.186***
-0.292***
(0.0284)
(0.0477)
Education dummies (base: primary education)
Lower secondary
0.0820
0.148
(0.0656)
(0.138)
Middle secondary
0.149**
0.304**
(0.0696)
(0.142)
Upper secondary
0.249***
0.509***
(0.0769)
(0.151)
Higher vocational
0.203***
0.355**
(0.0692)
(0.140)
University
0.310***
0.530***
(0.0726)
(0.143)
Quartile dummies monthly net household income (base: lowest quartile)
Second income quartile
-0.00152
0.0831
(0.0487)
(0.0990)
Third income quartile
0.156***
0.354***
(0.0526)
(0.104)
Highest income quartile
0.162***
0.338***
(0.0578)
(0.111)
Income not known
0.123
-0.0724
(0.145)
(0.365)
Home-owner
0.127***
0.165**
(0.0365)
(0.0682)
Marital status (base: single)
Married, no children
-0.137***
-0.0973
(0.0455)
(0.0841)
Married, children
-0.166**
-0.176
(0.0683)
(0.134)
Single parent, other
-0.0827
-0.208
(0.0752)
(0.155)
Number of children
0.00406
-0.0127
(0.0262)
(0.0495)
Socio-economic status (base: employee)
Self-employed
0.0189
0.0365
(0.0530)
(0.0867)
Non-employed
-0.0196
0.0264
(0.0385)
(0.0699)
Religion (base: no religion)
Roman-catholic
0.0145
0.0166
(0.0350)
(0.0630)
Protestant
0.00763
-0.0218
(0.0401)
(0.0722)
Other religion
-0.00600
-0.0445
(0.0557)
(0.101)
Constant
-0.100
1.024
(0.372)
(0.684)
Number of observations
1166
1166
R-squared
0.170
0.237
p-value age, age squared
0.282
0.110
p-value education
2.57e-05
2.76e-05
p-value income
0.000683
0.00121
p-value marital status
0.0143
0.449
p-value socio-economic status
0.791
0.880
p-value religion
0.972
0.919
F-statistic first stage regression
9.608
19.37
Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

27

Table 7. Retirement Planning and Financial Literacy: Fixed Effects and Dynamic Regressions
Fixed Effects Regressions
All three correct
0.0133
(0.0424)
All three correct in 2005
Number correct

Dynamic Regressions

0.0700
(0.0447)

0.0573**
(0.0278)

Number correct in 2005
Time dummy (equals 1 in 2010)
Dummy for alternative risk question in 2005

0.0609**
(0.0283)
0.221*
(0.124)
0.0630
(0.0529)

0.216*
(0.123)
0.0472
(0.0514)

Age
Age squared

-0.000410
(0.000276)

-0.000402
(0.000274)

Female
Education dummies (base: primary education)
Lower secondary

0.0703***
(0.0265)
-0.000676**
(0.000277)
0.0625
(0.0449)

-0.0924
-0.0744
0.0332
(0.124)
(0.128)
(0.107)
Middle secondary
0.0430
0.0405
0.0694
(0.133)
(0.136)
(0.108)
Upper secondary
0.292
0.304
0.0435
(0.220)
(0.222)
(0.113)
Higher vocational
0.190*
0.219*
0.0678
(0.111)
(0.117)
(0.106)
University
0.553**
0.553**
0.0493
(0.257)
(0.257)
(0.114)
Quartile dummies monthly net household income (base: lowest quartile)
Second income quartile
0.0744
0.0539
0.0339
(0.0785)
(0.0773)
(0.0729)
Third income quartile
-0.0422
-0.0633
0.140*
(0.104)
(0.103)
(0.0778)
Highest income quartile
0.118
0.0857
0.202**
(0.137)
(0.137)
(0.0865)
Marital status (base: single)
Married, no children
0.0744
0.0539
0.0339
(0.0785)
(0.0773)
(0.0729)
Married, children
-0.0422
-0.0633
0.140*
(0.104)
(0.103)
(0.0778)
Single parent, other
0.118
0.0857
0.202**
(0.137)
(0.137)
(0.0865)
Number of children
-0.0979*
-0.0971*
0.0645
(0.0579)
(0.0579)
(0.0398)
Socio-economic status (base: employee)
Self-employed
-0.0501
-0.0735
0.0938
(0.134)
(0.131)
(0.0628)
Non-employed
-0.114
-0.126
-0.0364
(0.0790)
(0.0798)
(0.0595)
Constant
1.366**
1.243**
-1.312**
(0.567)
(0.562)
(0.618)
Number of observations
1784
1784
472
R-squared
0.080
0.088
0.115
p-value age, age squared
0.137
0.142
0.00347
p-value education
0.248
0.205
0.980
p-value income
0.0265
0.0404
0.0491
p-value marital status
0.105
0.107
0.00407
p-value socio-economic status
0.350
0.288
0.228
Number of unique respondents
1338
1338
472
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the household level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

28

0.0700***
(0.0266)
-0.000675**
(0.000278)
0.0588
(0.0439)
0.0334
(0.106)
0.0629
(0.106)
0.0250
(0.112)
0.0565
(0.104)
0.0343
(0.112)
0.0337
(0.0724)
0.128
(0.0779)
0.196**
(0.0861)
0.0337
(0.0724)
0.128
(0.0779)
0.196**
(0.0861)
0.0672*
(0.0390)
0.0928
(0.0632)
-0.0375
(0.0593)
-1.391**
(0.618)
472
0.119
0.00444
0.986
0.0675
0.00375
0.236
472

Table 8. Expected Retirement Age of Employees
Weighted percentages
Expected Retirement Age
Frequency
Percentages
50
4
0.64
55
7
1.11
56
2
0.29
58
5
0.73
59
1
0.08
60
30
4.63
61
4
0.60
62
53
8.01
63
27
4.09
64
9
1.42
65
198
30.07
66
57
8.62
67
169
25.73
68
11
1.72
70
9
1.41
75
2
0.37
Do not know
69
10.48
Total
657
100.00

29

Cumulative
0.64
1.75
2.03
2.76
2.84
7.47
8.08
16.09
20.18
21.60
51.67
60.30
86.02
87.74
89.16
89.52
100.00

Table 9. Financial Literacy and Pension Retirement Expectations
Expected Retirement Age Unknown
Expected Retirement Age
Number correct
-0.0734***
-0.0613***
0.0843
0.0859
(0.0161)
(0.0150)
(0.130)
(0.137)
Year of birth (base: birth year > 1975)
1959 <= year of birth <= 1975
-0.0300
-0.910**
(0.0337)
(0.429)
1955 <= year of birth <= 1958
-0.0179
-1.019**
(0.0398)
(0.434)
Year of birth < 1955
-0.0591*
-1.559***
(0.0311)
(0.385)
Female
0.0414**
-0.368*
(0.0202)
(0.217)
Education dummies (base: primary education)
Lower secondary
-0.0737
-0.252
(0.0811)
(0.498)
Middle secondary
-0.0291
-0.520
(0.0822)
(0.511)
Upper secondary
-0.0113
-0.156
(0.0880)
(0.549)
Higher vocational
-0.0729
0.108
(0.0801)
(0.506)
University
-0.0646
-0.00437
(0.0821)
(0.620)
Quartile dummies monthly net household income (base: lowest quartile)
Second income quartile
-0.0395
-0.171
(0.0354)
(0.360)
Third income quartile
-0.0342
-0.370
(0.0364)
(0.360)
Highest income quartile
-0.0831**
-0.893**
(0.0360)
(0.371)
Income not known
0.289
1.521***
(0.241)
(0.490)
Marital status (base: single)
Married, no children
0.0189
-0.173
(0.0325)
(0.380)
Married, children
0.0212
0.0864
(0.0468)
(0.536)
Single parent, other
-0.00919
0.506
(0.0511)
(0.525)
Number of children
0.00293
0.0198
(0.0173)
(0.187)
Religion (base: no religion)
Roman-catholic
-0.0205
-0.457*
(0.0195)
(0.250)
Protestant
0.00292
-0.122
(0.0249)
(0.337)
Other religion
0.171**
-0.235
(0.0760)
(0.444)
Constant
0.242***
0.288***
64.54***
66.35***
(0.0440)
(0.107)
(0.332)
(0.825)
Number of observations
657
657
611
611
R-squared
0.068
0.142
0.001
0.071
p-value year of birth
0.163
0.000167
p-value education
0.419
0.438
p-value income
0.208
2.06e-05
p-value marital status
0.870
0.506
p-value religion
0.0680
0.335
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the household level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

30

Table 10. Financial Literacy and Replacement Rate Expectations
Do not Know Expected
Expected
Expected Minimum
Replacement Rate
Replacement Rate
Replacement Rate
Number correct
-0.110***
-1.232*
-1.972***
(0.0207)
(0.736)
(0.688)
Expected Retirement Age
0.00496
0.0804
0.231
(0.00582)
(0.264)
(0.269)
Year of birth (base: yob > 1975)
1959 <= year of birth <= 1975
-0.0121
-4.827***
-2.798
(0.0444)
(1.802)
(1.822)
1955 <= year of birth <= 1958
0.0540
-1.446
1.395
(0.0570)
(2.145)
(2.220)
Year of birth < 1955
-0.0374
-1.389
2.811
(0.0484)
(1.942)
(1.958)
Female
0.0655**
-1.078
-1.187
(0.0322)
(1.205)
(1.209)
Education dummies (base: primary education)
Lower secondary
-0.00756
-9.878*
-10.44*
(0.120)
(5.839)
(5.871)
Middle secondary
-0.0461
-9.617*
-9.253
(0.119)
(5.788)
(5.838)
Upper secondary
-0.0116
-11.30*
-12.31**
(0.123)
(6.169)
(6.171)
Higher vocational
-0.0458
-9.559
-10.65*
(0.117)
(5.989)
(6.009)
University
-0.0499
-14.22**
-15.32**
(0.118)
(6.066)
(6.100)
Quartile dummies monthly net household income (base: lowest quartile)
Second income quartile
-0.113
-3.238
-2.814
(0.0752)
(4.399)
(4.242)
Third income quartile
-0.155**
-2.098
-2.113
(0.0759)
(4.380)
(4.238)
Highest income quartile
-0.217***
-2.737
-2.350
(0.0780)
(4.625)
(4.477)
Income not known
0.349
-15.71***
(0.270)
(4.755)
Marital status (base: single)
Married, no children
-0.0122
-1.227
-1.040
(0.0511)
(1.960)
(1.896)
Married, children
0.0360
-1.404
-0.617
(0.0726)
(2.854)
(2.744)
Single parent, other
0.0708
1.151
2.859
(0.0919)
(3.366)
(3.686)
Number of children
-0.0244
1.042
0.896
(0.0259)
(1.067)
(1.076)
Religion (base: no religion)
Roman-catholic
0.00262
-1.745
-1.646
(0.0353)
(1.589)
(1.537)
Protestant
0.0593
-2.134
-2.481*
(0.0381)
(1.295)
(1.334)
Other religion
0.188**
-0.348
-1.087
(0.0853)
(2.641)
(2.772)
Constant
0.276
87.92***
72.13***
(0.414)
(18.48)
(18.79)
Number of observations
649
497
527
R-squared
0.173
0.0770
0.111
p-value year of birth
0.367
0.0183
0.00170
p-value education
0.916
0.0287
0.00715
p-value income
0.00924
0.819
2.49e-05
p-value marital status
0.799
0.747
0.649
p-value religion
0.0752
0.361
0.302
Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the household level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

31

Range
Replacement Rate
1.354***
(0.437)
-0.0136
(0.195)
-4.689***
(1.234)
-4.938***
(1.433)
-8.547***
(1.305)
1.160
(0.777)
2.161
(1.476)
1.212
(1.443)
3.520**
(1.699)
3.159**
(1.466)
4.208**
(1.633)
-1.496
(1.971)
-0.687
(2.098)
-1.755
(2.135)
-1.127
(2.399)
-0.981
(1.223)
-1.907
(1.646)
-4.312**
(2.189)
0.232
(0.572)
-0.567
(0.883)
0.267
(0.882)
0.960
(1.798)
14.46
(12.79)
526
0.174
1.13e-10
0.0663
0.700
0.271
0.800

