                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS TRAVEL:
                                AN ENGINE OF INNOVATION?

                                         Nune Hovhannisyan
                                          Wolfgang Keller

                                         Working Paper 17100
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17100


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




We thank two anonymous referees, Jeff Furman, Ben Jones, Jim Markusen, Keith Maskus, Marc Muendler,
Jim Rauch, and David Weil, as well as participants at presentations at the University of Colorado,
the CEPR GIST (Ljubljana 2010), and the American Economic Association (Denver 2011) conferences
for useful comments. We thank Erik Stuen and especially Jennifer Poole for help with the data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Nune Hovhannisyan and Wolfgang Keller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Business Travel: An Engine of Innovation?
Nune Hovhannisyan and Wolfgang Keller
NBER Working Paper No. 17100
May 2011, Revised September 2012
JEL No. F, 20,J61,O33

                                               ABSTRACT

While it is well known that managers prefer in-person meetings for negotiating deals and selling their
products, face-to-face communication may be particularly important for the transfer of technology
because technology is best explained and demonstrated in person. This paper studies the role of short-term
cross-border labor movements for innovation by estimating the recent impact of U.S. business travel
to foreign countries on their patenting rates. Business travel is shown to have a signi…cant e¤ect up
and beyond technology transfer through the channels of international trade and foreign direct investment.
On average, a 10% increase in business travel leads to an increase in patenting by about 0.2%, and
inward business travel is about one fourth as potent for innovation as domestic R&D spending. We
show that the technological knowledge of each business traveler matters by estimating a higher impact
for travelers that originate in U.S. states with substantial innovation, such as California. This study
provides initial evidence that international air travel may be an important channel through which cross-country
income di¤erences can be reduced.


Nune Hovhannisyan
Department of Economics, Boulder, CO 80309
Nune.Hovhannisyan@colorado.edu

Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado-Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu
1    Introduction

Throughout history the international flows of skills embodied in people had major eﬀects on

innovation and growth across countries. A case in point is the year 1789. Despite the fact

that England at the time had banned the international movement of skilled craftsmen to ensure

that its technology would not spread elsewhere, a certain Samuel Slater disguised himself and

succeeded to slip out on a ship to the United States. There, he built the first water-powered

textile mill and became known as the father of the American Industrial Revolution. Today,

in contrast, blueprints can be transferred electronically within seconds over the Internet. Does

this mean that skills embodied in people play no role anymore for innovation? In this paper

we provide evidence on this question by studying the impact of international business travel on

innovation.


    Business trips bring local entrepreneurs into personal contact with foreigners and their tech-

nology. This may stimulate innovation locally because technology is incremental in nature, with

knowledge of prior art helping to generate new technology. Technological knowledge tends to

also be tacit–it is diﬃcult to fully characterize.1 The face-to-face communication with foreign

business travelers could thus be crucial for transferring technology, ahead of methods such as

telephone calls or video-conferencing. Consistent with that, surveys typically find that business

executives prefer face-to-face meetings over phone or web-based communication (Forbes 2009,

Harvard Business Review 2009). Nevertheless, to date we know quite little on these issue. This

paper’s goal is to fill this gap.

   1
     Polanyi (1958) discusses the tacitness of technological knowledge. See Koskinen and Vanharanta (2002) on
the role of face-to-face communication in overcoming problems arising from the tacitness of technology.



                                                     1
       We employ a new dataset to examine the impact of business travelers from the United States

on patenting in 34 countries, both rich and poor, over more than a decade (the years 1993 to

2003). One challenge we face is that business travelers might arrive in a country for systematic,

non-random reasons, which would bias our findings. Our analysis addresses endogeneity con-

cerns by contrasting the behavior of business travelers with that of friends and family travel.

Central is the idea that while business travel might be aﬀected by changes in economic return

to traveling (e.g., changes in the business climate), family travel is not. In our analysis, we find

that business travel has a positive impact on that country’s rate of innovation. Quantitatively,

a 10% increase in business travelers raises patenting on average by about 0.2%, and in a typical

case business travel from the United States accounts for about 10% of the total diﬀerence in

patenting across countries. Moreover, we find evidence that the impact of business travel on

patenting is increasing in the technological knowledge carried by each particular traveler.


       Trade in services today is very important for many countries, and still we know very little

about service trade.2 With our study of air travel we broaden existing perspectives that tend to

focus on trade in goods to shed light on the role played by service trade. Moreover, in contrast

to the small but growing literature on the role of business travel in facilitating international

goods trade (Poole 2010, Cristea 2011), our analysis links business travel to innovation while

accounting not only for changes in goods trade but also in foreign direct investment (FDI). From

a policy perspective, this paper highlights the potential gains from services liberalization, such

as the Open Skies Agreement, in terms of innovation and growth.3

   2
     For example, services exports are close to 40% of goods exports in the United States. News release of the
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, May 11, 2011.
   3
     The Open Skies Agreement seeks to liberalize air travel to and from the United States, see
http://www.state.gov/e/eeb/tra/ata/. This paper is also relevant for multilateral service liberalizations; see


                                                      2
    The diﬀusion of knowledge is central to macroeconomics because of its implications for the

long-run convergence of incomes (Lucas 1993, Aghion and Howitt 1998, Howitt 2000, Jones

2002). Specifically, some recent research assumes that knowledge is entirely embodied in people

(Burstein and Monge-Naranjo 2009) so that international travel is crucial for knowledge diﬀusion.

Empirically, it is an open question whether eﬀective knowledge transfer is possible by simply

providing (non-rival) blueprints or whether knowledge embodied in people is needed, and if the

latter, whether people need to meet in person or not. Our contribution to this literature is to

provide initial evidence on it.

    The importance of personal contacts for international technology transfer has been analyzed

in empirical work in a number of papers. Common ethnicity may lower the cost of transfer-

ring knowledge from one country to another (Kerr 2008).4 Moreover, movements of scientists

themselves can be a conduit of international knowledge flows (Oettl and Agrawal 2008, Kim,

Lee, and Marschke 2006). Our research is complementary to this body of work. In contrast to

the usually fairly small samples of previous work, this paper studies knowledge transfer through

face-to-face meetings in more than 100,000 of business trips, as well as providing causal evidence

by addressing the potential endogeneity of business travel.

    A number of authors have considered air travel as a conduit for technology transfer, with

mixed results. Gambardella, Mariani, and Torrisi (2009) find that, controlling for other factors,

air passengers are not significantly related to productivity diﬀerences across European regions. In

contrast, Andersen and Dalgaard (2011) employ information from the World Tourism Organiza-

WTO (2006) which discusses key multilateral issues.
   4
     Network membership often lowers the costs of interaction (Rauch 2001), and to verify membership face-to-
face meetings will often be useful. See also Singh (2005), Agrawal, Cockburn, and McHale (2006), and Agrawal,
Kapur, and McHale (2008).


                                                     3
tion to show that the number of air travelers can explain cross-country productivity diﬀerences.5

We improve on this literature by employing better data on air travel. Even if it were the case

that tourists—which are the bulk of the air travelers in the typical existing study— are important

for international knowledge diﬀusion, since data on tourism to date are not comparable across

countries empirical work based on them is unlikely to yield robust results. In contrast, our air

traveler measure is consistent because it comes from one survey. Moreover, we can separate

business travelers from tourists and other travelers. This is useful because one would expect

business travelers to matter more for technology diﬀusion than tourists and other travelers.6


      Our research also employs an unusually detailed measure of innovation. In particular, we

know the identity and countries of residence of all patentees in the sample. Thus we can ask

whether business travel from a country that is the home country of one of the patent owners

is more potent in its eﬀect on innovation than business travel in general (we do not know

whether the business traveler was in fact the patentee). In contrast, most existing studies focus

on productivity as the measure of innovation. That has certain advantages, chief perhaps that

economic eﬀects are easily quantified. At the same time, productivity measures tend to confound

several factors that have diﬀerent implications, something we avoid in this study by working with

patent data.7


      The remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section motivates the analysis in terms of

theory and also it discusses the key empirical issues. The following section 3 introduces the main

  5
     Related work includes Le (2008) and Dowrick and Tani (2011).
  6
     The data is described in section 3 below.
   7
     Productivity often captures not only technical eﬃciency but also demand shocks and market power, factor
market distortions, and product mix changes (Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson 2008, Hsieh and Klenow 2009,
and Bernard, Redding, and Schott 2010, respectively). See also Keller (2004) for more discussion.



                                                     4
features of the data as well as their sources, with more details on the construction of the data

set given in the Appendix. Section 4 presents the estimation results and quantifies the implied

eﬀect of business travel on innovation. A number of concluding observations are collected in

section 5.



2    International business travel and innovation: a framework for

     analysis

Our goal is to assess the impact of international business travel on the rate of innovation across

countries. To do so, this section provides a theoretical motivation and also discusses a number

of key choices we make in terms of data, identification, and estimation technique.


    As a point of departure in terms of theory, it is useful to think of a model in which techno-

logical knowledge diﬀuses abroad through business travel and other channels. Keller and Yeaple

(2012) analyze firms that decide whether to produce intermediate goods for their final good

either at home or abroad. Since home managers have the necessary know-how for production,

the manufacturing of any intermediate at home entails only the trade cost as the intermediate

is shipped for assembly abroad. If, however, the intermediate is to be produced abroad the

know-how has to be transferred between home and foreign country managers, which is subject

to communication frictions because technological knowledge is tacit.


    This model posits a trade-oﬀ of technology transfer in embodied form through trade and

through direct communication associated with FDI production. A role for business travel in

enhancing technology transfer naturally arises when home country managers can travel to the



                                                5
host country. Face-to-face time enhances technology transfer at the same time that it might lead

to learning on the part of unaﬃliated host country agents (perhaps through labor turnover).8

This learning is what may raise the host country’s rate of patenting.


       In terms of empirics the goal is to estimate the relationship between the rate of innovation and

inward business travelers from abroad. We measure innovation using data on patenting at the

level of 37 industries in 34 countries.9 Our business travel information is on outward business

travel from the United States and covers mostly U.S. citizens. We do not know whether a

particular traveler is involved with innovation in the country he or she is flying to, but we do

know the U.S. state (and county) of where the traveler is originating from. This will allow us to

contrast the impact of business travelers from states such as California, where knowledge levels

and patenting rates are relatively high, with states such as Nebraska, where they are generally

lower.


       Next we turn to identification. Let  denote the number of patents of country  and ̃ its

number of inward business travelers. In estimating the impact of business travelers on patenting

several issues will have to be addressed. First, to account for the fact that the number of patents

is aﬀected by many factors, such as the size of country c, we include a set of variables  that

reduces concerns arising from omitted variables. Second, our approach eliminates the influence

of unobserved factors at the country-, industry-, and year-level by including the corresponding

fixed eﬀects.

   8
      The incentive of knowledge owners will typically be to prevent leakage of the knowledge to others. This by
itself may be a reason for reducing the number of face-to-face meetings, except in cases where the technology
transfer is intended as in the case of joint ventures.
    9
      The industry dimension is important because industries vary greatly in terms of patenting activity. A list of
the industries is given in Appendix Table A1.




                                                        6
       This leaves the possibility that ̃ is endogenous due to time-varying factors (for example,

changes in a country’s tax code boost patenting and also trigger more inward business travel).

This would leave ̃ correlated with the error of the regression and yield inconsistent estimates.

In this paper two methods are employed to address such concerns. The first method adds on

the right-hand side of the equation a control function (CF) such that ̃ may be endogenous

without the CF but it is exogenous once the CF is included, and hence, the coeﬃcient on ̃

with CF is consistent. Control function approaches have been widely used in empirical work

recently, for example in the estimation of production functions (see Olley and Pakes 1996 and

related extensions). The second method we employ is instrumental variable (IV) estimation,

specifically the approach developed in Mullahy (1997). Both the control function and the IV

strategies employed here are well-established methods and covered in standard econometrics

textbooks such as Wooldridge (2002).

       While the two estimation strategies diﬀer in general, they are related in that for either

to work certain exclusion restrictions must be satisfied. For the IV strategy this means the

instrument must be valid. In our case, we will mainly rely on friends & family travel as an

instrument for business travel. The exclusion restriction is that friends & family travel does not

aﬀect patenting in a country.10 Analogous to the requirement that the instrument is valid in the

IV strategy, the CF approach requires that the CF itself is appropriate. In our case the control

function will typically be the residual from a regression of business travel on friends & family

travel. Then, the exclusion restriction is, similar to the IV case, that friends & family travel is

not a determinant of patenting, conditional on all covariates. Because friends & family travel is

  10
    The full condition is that friends & family travel does not aﬀect patenting and that it is not correlated with
any determinants of patenting; see Wooldridge (2002, Ch. 19.5.1).


                                                        7
determined by factors that are quite diﬀerent from business travel, and moreover, these factors

typically do not change from year to year, we consider it to be very likely that our approach

towards possible endogeneity is successful. We will return to this issue below.


      This section is concluded by discussing the regression techniques employed below. The fact

that our dependent variable  the number of patents, is non-negative and has no upper bound

suggests to use count data models which rely on the exponential function,  (|) = exp (xβ) 

Within this class the assumption that  given  has a Poisson distribution has been most common

given the eﬃciency properties of its maximum likelihood estimators.11 At the same time, making

the Poisson distributional assumption has been criticized because it implies restrictions on the

conditional moments of  in particular  (|) = (|) that are typically rejected in the

data (also here). However, it is well-known that a Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood estimator

(QMLE) is fully robust to distributional misspecification in the sense that it obtains consistent

coeﬃcient estimates of β for the conditional mean,  (|) = exp (xβ), irrespective of whether

the Poisson distributional assumption was correct or not. In this paper a QMLE approach is

employed throughout. We present results for two alternative distributional assumptions, (1) that

 is distributed Poisson given x and (2) that  is distributed Negative Binomial given x While

both estimators yield consistent estimates, the specific distributional assumption determines

how the variance-covariance matrix is calculated. As we will show below, the results using

either assumption are generally very similar.


      The following section gives an overview of the data that will be employed.

 11
      See Wooldridge (2002, Ch. 19).




                                                 8
3     Data

    Innovation The dependent variable in our analysis is the number of U.S. patents to foreign

country inventors in the years 1993 to 2003 in 37 industries as recorded by the United States

Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO). As noted above, focusing on foreign patents in the U.S.

ensures that all inventions surpass the same quality standard, and moreover, patent protection

in the United States will typically be important for major inventions given the importance of

the U.S. market. This data comes from the custom data extracts of the USPTO database,

which has information on country of residence for each of possibly several inventors per patent,

original USPTO patent classification, as well as the application year.12 In the case of   1

inventors, we assign a fraction of 1 to each inventors country of residence. Based on USPTO

classification, patents are assigned to NBER 37 technological subcategories (or, industries).13

A list of industries is provided in Table A1 of the Appendix. The main dependent variable in

the empirical analysis is the sum of these fractional patent counts aggregated by foreign country

and industry for each year 1993 to 2003.14


    In addition, we employ the USPTO individual inventor database to separate out foreign

patents that have a U.S. coinventor. These patents are of particular interest because the traveler

might in fact be the U.S. coinventor on that patent. For this reason, the relationship between

business travel and domestic innovation might be particularly strong for these patents. How

frequent are patent applications that have a U.S. coinventor? We find that on average about

  12
     We focus on the date of application as opposed to the date of when the patent is granted; this ensures that
diﬀerences in the processing time of patents do not play a role.
  13
     See Hall, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg (2001).
  14
     The use of fractions means that our data is not strictly speaking count data; despite this we prefer to employ
count data regression models. More information on the patent data construction is given in the Appendix.



                                                        9
one in 50 of all foreign patent applications in the United States during the sample period had

foreign and U.S. coinventors.

      It is well-known that a principal determinant of a country’s innovation its R&D expenditures.

We have obtained this data from OECD Statistics.15 We also include another measure of inno-

vation, namely the patent applications by residents of each country (source: World Intellectual

Property Organization).16 These variables control for innovative cycles in each country that

are general in the sense that they are not specifically related to inward business travel from the

United States. In addition, including domestic resident patents on the right hand side controls

for the patent family eﬀect, namely that a patent application in the U.S. reflects only the fact

that a given technology has been invented and patented at home in the same period.


      Travel The information on international air travel in this paper comes from the Survey

of International Air Travelers (SIAT) which is conducted by the International Trade Adminis-

tration, a branch of the U.S. Department of Commerce. This survey provides information on

travel from the United States to foreign countries for U.S. residents during the years 1993 to

2003. The data has information on the travelers’ U.S. county of residence, the foreign city of

destination, the purpose of the travel, and the traveler’s occupation. Matching this information

on travel with other parts of our data set required aggregation, and the basic unit of observation

is resident travelers from a U.S. state to a given foreign country for each year 1993 to 2003.

      While we do not have specific information on the technological knowledge carried by each

traveler, we account for diﬀerences in this respect by incorporating information on patent stocks

 15
     OECD statistics provide Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D for OECD and also some non-member
countries.
  16
     The assignment of these patents to countries is based only on the first inventor.


                                                 10
(a measure of technological prowess) at the level of the U.S. states and industries. Our business

traveler variable,  , is defined as follows:


                                                     X 
                                       =  ×          × ̃  ∀                                      (1)
                                                      
                                                     



where the variable  is the patent stock of U.S. state  in industry  of year   is

the state’s gross product,  is the patent stock of U.S. industry  in year  and ̃ is the

raw (unweighted) number of business travelers from state  to foreign country  in year . The

                                                                          
weight on the unweighted business travelers in equation (1),                 incorporates two ideas. First,

travelers who originate from a state  that has more patents relative to the size of the state’s

economy receive greater weight than travelers that come from a state 0 with fewer patents.

We choose this formulation because if the patent stock of state  is higher than of state 0  it

is plausible that business travelers from  carry on average more knowledge than those from

                               
0 . Second, the weight           is also increasing in the patent stock of state  in a particular

industry  This picks up any particular strength of state  in a certain industry  compared to

the strength of state  in the average industry.17 The patent figures by state and industry come

from the files of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), and the gross product levels

by state come from the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis. U.S.

state and industry-level patent statistics are summarized in Table A2 of the Appendix.

  17                                                    
     There are alternative approaches to the weights    
                                                              proposed here. To pick up the diﬀerential knowledge
across travelers, for example, one could introduce variables for diﬀerent states, such as California versus Nebraska,
separately. While this approach can be useful (see Keller 2002, Acharya and Keller 2009), it can also be diﬃcult
to estimate multiple additional parameters, which is one reason for why we adopt the weighted sum in equation
(1). Note that equation (1) also scales by the total U.S. patent stock by industry,  , proxying for the U.S.
knowledge in that industry and year (up and beyond general eﬀects picked up by industry and time fixed eﬀects).




                                                           11
   Analogously to the weighted number of business travelers from the United States according

to equation (1), we also compute the numbers of travelers who visit friends & family, are traveling

for religious reasons, are retired, or are homemakers. These variables will be employed below in

form of control functions as discussed below.


   Other variables The size and level of development of a country aﬀects its patenting in

the United States, and for this reason we include information on population size and GDP per

capita (source: Penn World Tables, version 6.2). We want to control for other channels of

international technology transfer, such as international trade and FDI (see the review in Keller

2010). The regressions include U.S. exports to each of the sample countries and U.S. imports

from each of the sample countries. Both outward FDI from the U.S. and inward FDI to the U.S.

are included as controls as well. Outward FDI from the U.S. is captured by the total sales of

U.S. majority-owned multinational aﬃliates in each of the sample countries, while inward FDI

to the U.S. by the total sales of nonbank U.S. aﬃliates of foreign multinational firms. These

data come from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.


   Summary statistics of the data are presented in Table 1. The first two rows show some

descriptive statistics on fractional patent counts by foreign inventors and joint U.S./foreign

patent counts. There is a lot of variation in U.S. patenting by foreign countries and industries

as evidenced by the standard deviation in both foreign U.S. patent counts as well as joint U.S.

patent counts. A list of the 34 countries that are included in this analysis is given in Table

A3 of the Appendix. The following five rows in Table 1 present (in natural logarithms) U.S.

resident travel data for business, visiting friends and family, and religious purposes, along with



                                                12
data on travelers that are retired and homemakers.18 As can be seen from the table, the number

of travelers for the purpose of business and visiting friends and family are close in magnitude,

while the number of observations for religious travel, retired, and homemaker travel is smaller.

         We now turn to the empirical analysis.



4         Empirical Analysis

In this section we present the empirical approach in detail, and we also show the results. The

estimation equation that will be employed is



                       [ | ] = exp [ ln  +  ln  +  +  +  +  ]                  (2)



where  , the expected patent counts of a country  in industry  and year  is a function of  

the number of business travelers at that time between country  and the U.S., other determinants

 of country ’s patenting in the U.S. (such as R&D expenditures), country-, industry- and

year fixed eﬀects (the ’s), and an error term,  . As noted above, we will use quasi- maximum

likelihood estimation (QMLE) in form of both Poisson and Negative Binomial in our empirical

analysis. We begin with simple Poisson QMLE and Negative Binomial regressions before moving

to control function and IV approaches to deal with possible endogeneity.

         The results of estimating equation (2) are shown in Table 2. In columns 1 to 7, the dependent

variable is the foreign country’s patent counts taken out at the U.S. patent oﬃce, while in

columns 8 to 9 the dependent variable is the subset of foreign patents that have U.S. coinventors.

    18
    In this analysis we focus on positive numbers of business travelers; our analysis does not necessary apply to
patenting in the case when there is no business travel.


                                                       13
Columns 1-6 and 8 report estimates from the Poisson model, while columns 7 and 9 from

the Negative Binomial model. Bootstrapped standard errors which allow for clustering at the

country-year level are reported in parentheses, and for the business travel variable we also show

the (bias-corrected) bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.19 Column 1 shows that there is a

strong correlation between patenting and travel from the United States, which is not reduced

with the inclusion of controls for size and level of development (column 2). Next we include

controls for domestic technology investments as well as international technology transfer. U.S.

FDI and U.S. exports have a positive coeﬃcient, although only FDI is significant. Importantly,

the inclusion of these variables does not change the business travel coeﬃcient by much. In

column 4, we include R&D expenditures, which has the expected positive sign.


       Recall that the left-hand side variable is a country’s industry-level patenting in the United

States. In column 5 the domestic patenting of the country’s residents is added. This controls

for technology and other shocks that lead to changes in a country’s overall patenting. We see

that resident patenting is strongly correlated with the country’s patenting in the United States,

a plausible result that holds throughout our analysis. In column 6, U.S. imports and inward

FDI are added, which does not change the estimated eﬀect of business travel on U.S. patenting.

With the inclusion of all control variables, the business travel coeﬃcient is estimated at around

2%. Domestic R&D expenditures and resident patent applications are associated with higher

patenting in the United States. In column 7 the estimates from the Negative Binomial model are

employed. The coeﬃcient of business travel is estimated slightly higher now, at around 3%.20

  19
     We cluster by country-year because some of the variables do not vary by industry; for example, GDP per
capita for a given year is employed for all industries. In contrast, patents on the left and the business variable on
the right-hand side vary by industry.
  20
     From the confidence intervals given in Table 2 we know that the business variable is significanct at a 5% level


                                                         14
    We now turn to a preliminary analysis of the economic magnitude implied by these estimates.

The size of the business travel coeﬃcient suggests that a 10% increase in business travelers from

the U.S. is associated with an about 0.2% higher number of patent applications in the United

States. If we focus on foreign patents with U.S. coinventors, the coeﬃcient estimate for business

traveler is about 0.03-0.04, see columns 8 and 9, compared to 0.02 for all U.S. patents in column

6. The finding of a larger coeﬃcient for U.S. business travelers when U.S. persons are coinventors

is consistent with stronger international transfer through business travel for these technologies.


    In the previous regressions the relationship between patenting and business travel may be

aﬀected by unobserved shocks which would lead to biased estimates because [   ] 6= 0

In particular, we are concerned that [   ]  0 because this would lead to an upward bias

in the business travel coeﬃcient. We use both control function (CF) and instrumental variable

(IV) approaches to deal with possible endogeneity of business travel.


    Consider the CF approach first. The main idea is to construct a control function such that

when it is included in the regression the correlation of business travel and the new regression error

is zero.21 The control function that we propose is the residual of a regression of business travel

on visiting friends & family travel. Consider the following ordinary least-squares regression:



                           ln  =   +   +   +  1 ln  +  2  +                         (3)



where  is the number of travelers that visit friends & family between the U.S. and country

or less in all specifications of Table 2.
  21
     See Blundell and Powell (2003) for an overview and general results of the CF approach, and Wooldridge (2002,
Ch. 19) for a textbook treatment.




                                                       15
 in year  and industry . Note that the estimated residual ̂  of this regression will tend to

be high whenever business travel is high relative to friends & family travel, conditional on all

covariates.22 This would be the case if the travel destination has received tax breaks or other

positive shocks that make it a more attractive place to do business. Because these are the kinds

of circumstances that are primary concerns to us, this residual ̂  will serve as our control

function.


       Another issue is that the CF needs to be based on something that is related to business

travel.23 For example, a new direct air connection from the United States to a specific foreign

country will typically increase both business travel and family & friends travel. In Figure 1, we

show the 10-year diﬀerences for friends & family versus business travel in our data. There is

clearly a strong correlation, and this also exists for shorter periods of time.


       [FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

       The thus constructed CF ̂ is added to equation (2) to yield our estimating equation for

the CF approach:



               [ |  ̂  ] = exp [ ln  +  ln  +  +  +  + ̂  +  ]     (4)



This allows to consistently estimate the impact of business travel on patenting because the CF

essentially filters out the factors that might cause [   ] 6= 0 in equation (2). Identification

in this approach comes from changes in business travel conditional on changes in profitability,

  22
    The definition of this traveler category in the SIAT survey is: "Visit Friends/Relatives".
  23
    This requirement is analogous to a strong first stage correlation in the typical two-state least squares IV
estimation.




                                                         16
technological capability, and all other factors that are captured by shifts in the business versus

friends & family traveler relationship. In addition, the endogeneity of  can be formally tested

by looking at the parameter estimate of ̂ on the control function (see Wooldridge 2002, Ch.

19). In our case, if the control function enters equation (4) significantly, the test implies that

business travel is endogenous, whereas if the control function does not enter significantly the

exogeneity of business travel cannot be rejected.


   As noted above, the main identification assumption is that visiting friends & family travel

does not transfer technology. Of course, friends & family travel to foreign countries conveys

information about the U.S. and its economy, but this general eﬀect will be covered largely

by the fixed eﬀects. Beyond that there is little reason to believe that friends & family travel

responds to short-term, time-varying shocks in the business climate and the like, as the primary

motive of visiting friends and family is to maintain personal relations.


   Table 3 shows the results from a number of control function regressions (equation 3 above).

Column 1 corresponds to visiting friends & family travel as the only control variable, while

columns 2, 3, 4 and 5 successively include additional control variables. They are the number

of persons traveling who are retired (column 2), the number of persons who travel for religious

reasons (columns 3 and 5), and the number of travelers that are homemakers (4 and 5). These

additional travelers, whether classified by purpose, as in the case of religion, or by occupation,

as in the case of homemakers and retirees, share with visitors of family & friends that it is

reasonable to assume that they are not importantly involved in the transfer of technological

knowledge. As seen from Table 3, the number of each type of traveler is positively correlated

with business travel. The most important predictor is visiting friends & family travel, probably


                                                17
because it is relatively common, see the summary statistics in Table 1. The coeﬃcient on friends

& family travel is highly significant at around 0.8, and the regressions have an R-squared upwards

of 0.92. These results suggest that the control function will not lack power.


      The second approach to deal with the potential endogeneity in the business travel variable

is the Poisson GMM IV approach due to Mullahy (1997). The instrument that we use for the

business travel variable is visiting friends & family travel. The IV approach requires that the

friends & family travel instrument is both (1) powerful and (2) valid. Regarding the former,

it is evident from Figure 1 as well as from Table 3 that the instrument is strongly correlated

with business trave. The validity of a single instrument cannot be directly tested. At the same

time, consistent with the validity of the exclusion assumption, friends & family travel is not

significantly correlated with patenting when it is added to equation (2). However, this cannot

be taken as a formal test.


      Table 4 shows the results of the control function and IV approaches. The control functions

̂ constructed from the residuals of the first and fifth column of Table 3 are included in the

Poisson and Negative Binomial regressions.24 The first column repeats the results from Table 2,

column 6 with a coeﬃcient of 2.2% for the business traveler variable. If endogeneity generates

an upward bias in this coeﬃcient, upon inclusion of the control function one expects that the

coeﬃcient on business travel will decrease, and that the coeﬃcient on ̂ itself is positive. We

find that the coeﬃcient on the business travel variable falls little, from 2.2% in column 1 to

2.1%. The control function point estimates are positive, around 0.55%, but not significant. In

column 4, we report results from the Poisson IV estimation. The coeﬃcient on business travel

 24
      The other control functions based on Table 3 give similar results.


                                                         18
is similar, at 2.4%, although somewhat less precisely estimated.


   We also present results from the QMLE estimator with CF and the negative binomial distri-

butional assumption, see column 5. As in the case of the IV Poisson estimation (column 4), this

yields coeﬃcients on Population and GDP per capita which are larger than with the Poisson

CF approach, see columns 2 and 3. However, all estimation methods agree that the coeﬃcient

on business travel is, with a range of 2.1% to 2.5%, not far from the estimate on business travel

under the assumption of exogeneity, at 2.1% (column 1).


   Taken together, these results imply that the evidence for endogeneity of business travel is

limited. Yes, the control function is positive in columns 2, 3, and 5, but it is never significant at

standard levels, and based on this test we cannot reject exogeneity of business travel. Further,

a Hausman-type test for endogeneity based on column 1 (under the assumption of exogeneity)

and column 5 (IV, under the assumption of endogeneity) does find some evidence for diﬀerences

of estimated coeﬃcients, and hence endogeneity—at the same time, the coeﬃcient of primary

interest—on business travel—is almost the same under either the exogeneity or the endogeneity

assumption. In the end, given that our primary concern is consistency of the estimation we might

prefer the CF/IV estimates which are consistent whether or not business travel is endogenous.

However, based on our formal tests there is no reason to reject the exogeneity assumption.


   Turning to the results for the subset of foreign patent applications in the United States with

U.S. coinventors on the right side of Table 4, we see that the control function correction has

qualitatively the same eﬀect on the business travel coeﬃcient, which comes down from 3.8% to

3.3% and the control function itself is positive but not significant (columns 6 and 7). In column

8, the Poisson IV procedure estimates the impact of business travel on patenting to be higher,

                                                 19
at 8.2%. The relatively large number of zeros in the dependent variable for U.S. joint patents

appears to make it computationally diﬃcult to exploit the moment conditions that this estimator

relies on, and we are inclined to discount this higher coeﬃcient estimate. Overall, the results

of Table 4 show that inward business travel from the U.S. gives a significant boost to foreign

countries’ patenting, and this eﬀect is stronger in the case of patents with U.S. coinventors.


   What are the economic magnitudes that our estimates yield? Take Poland and Romania, two

Eastern European countries of roughly similar size. It turns out that during the sample period

covered by the survey there were on average almost 6 business travelers per industry and year

going to Romania, and about 16 going to Poland. At the same time, the mean patenting rate in

Romania was 1.12 while it was 1.31 in Poland. We can use our estimates from Table 4 to gauge

the importance of international business travel from the U.S. in accounting for this diﬀerence

of 0.19 in mean patenting. The coeﬃcient on business travel is 0.021 (column 2, Table 4). This

brings the predicted patenting premium for Poland over Romania attributable to the higher

number of U.S. business travelers to about 0.02 (equal to exp[0021 × ln(131)] − exp[0021 ×

ln(112)]), or about 11% (0.02/0.19) of the total diﬀerence in patenting between Poland and

Romania. The contribution of travel from all countries, as opposed to just from the U.S., in

explaining variation in the patenting rates across countries is probably a small multiple of that.




   Another way to assess the economic importance of business travel for patenting is to compare

it with the impact of domestic R&D expenditures. Using the marginal eﬀects based on our Table

4 regression estimates, we find that business travel has about one quarter of the size of the impact

of domestic R&D on patenting. Overall, these results indicate that international business travel


                                                20
explains a moderately large portion of diﬀerences in the rate of patenting across countries.


       These results come from a large sample of industries which exhibit a lot of variation in

terms of patenting activity. In the context of international technology diﬀusion, the question

is whether learning eﬀects are predominantly associated with the sectors in which there is a

lot of technology creation, as opposed to with all sectors. To see this we examine whether the

estimated relationship between business travel and innovation holds equally for high versus low

patenting industries.25 The results are shown in Table 5, columns 1 to 6. Column 1 repeats

for convenience the estimates from Table 2, column 6, while in columns 2 and 3 in addition to

business travel an interaction of business travel with a high patenting dummy (based on either

median or mean) is included. It is apparent that the coeﬃcient on business travel is greater in

high patenting industries than in the average industry (coeﬃcient of 0.029 to 0.049, compared to

0.022 in column 1). At the same time, for low-patenting industries the business travel estimate

is close to zero.


       In columns 3 to 6 of Table 5 we show analogous results using the control function approach

with the Poisson assumption, where column 4 repeats the earlier results assuming that the

impact of business travelers on international knowledge diﬀusion is constant across industries

(from Table 4, column 2). Given the interaction of business travelers with the high-patenting

dummy, there are now two control functions, one from the regression on business travel on friends

& family travel, as before, and one from the regression of the business travel-high patenting

interaction on the friends & family travel-high patenting interaction. The interaction CF results

  25
    In order to form high versus low patenting industries, we take into account changes in the composition across
countries when creating median and mean patent counts by industry. The high patenting dummy is equal to 1 if
patent counts for a given country  in year  and industry  is higher than median/mean.


                                                       21
of columns 5 and 6 confirms the results without CF in columns 2 and 3 in that business travel

aﬀects patenting mainly in high-patenting industries. This result is along earlier findings that

foreign direct investment triggers technology spillovers for domestic firms primarily in high-

technology industries (Keller and Yeaple 2009).


   Finally, we show results from another specification check in Table 5 on the far right. So

far our business traveler variable was adjusted for diﬀerences in the knowledge carried by each

traveler by using information on whether their U.S. state of departure is a high- or low-patenting

origin (see equation 1 above). Another approach would simply sum over all business travelers

irrespective of from which U.S. state they come. Results for this unweighted business traveler

variable are shown in columns 7 (without CF) and 8 (with CF) of Table 5. We see that the

point estimates for business traveler are about one half of what they were before (see columns 1

and 4 of Table 5), and moreover the unweighted business traveler coeﬃcients are not significant

at standard levels. We conclude that accounting for technological knowledge heterogeneity is

very important in studying international technology diﬀusion.


   We have also conducted a number of other robustness checks, including lagging the patent

variable so as to further reduce the possibility that patent applications in the U.S. simply mirror

domestic patent applications, as well as lagging the business traveler variable to allow for the

possibility that it might take some time until business travel from the U.S. translates into

domestic innovation. Overall these analyses have shown that the impact from U.S. business

travel on foreign countries’ rates of innovation we estimate is robust.


   We now turn to a concluding discussion.




                                                22
5    Conclusions

The basic premise of the paper is that face-to-face meetings might be particularly important

for the transfer of technology because the latter is tacit, and therefore best explained and

demonstrated in person. Along these lines this paper has examined the impact of inward business

travelers in raising a country’s rate of innovation by looking at business travel from the United

States to thirty-four other countries during the years 1993-2003. The results indicate that

international business travel has a significant eﬀect. Quantitatively, the impact of business travel

on innovation is sizable. It accounts in the typical case for about 10% of the total diﬀerence

in patenting rates, and its contribution is about one quarter of the impact of domestic R&D

spending. Moreover, there is strong evidence that the impact on innovation depends on the

quality of the technological knowledge carried by each business traveler.

    While international migration has long been a hot topic in debates on labor market policies,

some recent work has started to address another set of policy questions by linking long-term

immigration to innovation in an economy (Peri 2007, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010, Stuen,

Mobarak, and Maskus 2012). In contrast, our research informs policymakers by examining how

strongly short-term cross-border movements might aﬀect innovation. In particular, given that

entry requirements often reduce the number of business travelers that come to a country, our

results provide some initial guidance on the cost of visa or other entry requirements in terms

of innovation that can be compared to the benefits entry barriers might have. Our analysis

also provides a new perspective on other key policy questions, for example the liberalization of

international trade in services. Specifically, the finding that business air travel raises innovation

suggests that the liberalization of international passenger air travel, by lowering fares, might

                                                 23
yield substantial gains in terms of economic growth across countries.


   While our results suggest that short-term international labor movements could be an impor-

tant way through which cross-country income diﬀerences can be reduced, more work needs to be

done. A particularly promising direction of future work may be to include more geographic de-

tail, perhaps isolating key states, such as California. It would also be interesting to see whether a

country’s own outward business travel is aﬀecting innovation as strongly, or even more strongly,

as the inward business travel from the United States. Finally, there are important questions

regarding the degree of complementarity or substitutability between cross-border travel, trade,

and FDI that needs to be addressed by future work.




                                                 24
References

[1] Acharya, Ram, and Wolfgang Keller (2009), "Technology Transfer Through Imports",

   Canadian Journal of Economics.


[2] Aghion, P., and Howitt, P. (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge,

   MA.


[3] Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I. and McHale, J. (2006), "Gone but not forgotten: knowledge

   flows, labor mobility, and enduring social relationships", Journal of Economic Geography,

   vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 571-591.


[4] Agrawal, A., Kapur, D. and McHale, J. (2008), "How do spatial and social proximity

   influence knowledge flows? Evidence from patent data", Journal of Urban Economics, vol.

   64, no. 2, pp. 258-269.


[5] Andersen, T.B. and Dalgaard, C.J. (2011), "Flows of people, flows of ideas, and the in-

   equality of nations", Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1-31.


[6] Bernard, A., S. Redding, and P. Schott, (2010), “Multiple-Product Firms and Product

   Switching.” American Economic Review, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 70—97.


[7] Blundell, R. , and Powell, J.L. (2003), "Endogeneity in nonparametric and semiparametric

   regression models", Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications,

   Eighth World Congress, pp. 655—679.




                                            25
 [8] Burstein, A., and Monge-Naranjo, A. (2009), "Foreign Know-How, Firm Control, and the

    Income of Developing Countries", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124, no. 1, pp.

    149-195.


 [9] Cristea, A.D.( 2011), "Buyer-Seller Relationships in International Trade: Evidence from

    US States’ Exports and Business-Class Travel", Journal of International Economics, vol.

    84, no. 2, pp. 207-220


[10] Dowrick, S. and Tani, M. (2011), "International Business Visits and the Technology Fron-

    tier", Economics Letters, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 209-212.


[11] Forbes (2009), "Business Meeting: The Case for Face-to-Face”, Forbes Insights Study, 2009.


[12] Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., and Syverson, C., (2008), “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and

    Eﬃciency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review, vol.

    98, no. 1, pp. 394—425.


[13] Gambardella, A., Mariani, M. and Torrisi, S. (2009), "How provincial is your region? Eﬀects

    on labour productivity and employment in Europe", Regional Studies, vol. 43, no. 7, pp.

    935-947.


[14] Hall, B., Jaﬀe, A., and Trajtenberg, M. (2001), "The NBER Patent Citation Data File:

    Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools." NBER Working Paper 8498.


[15] Howitt, P. (2000), "Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Diﬀerences", American

    Economic Review, vol. 90, no 4, pp. 829-846.




                                              26
[16] Hsieh, C. and Klenow, P. (2009), “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and

    India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124, no. 4, pp. 1403-1448.


[17] Hunt, J., and Gauthier-Loiselle M. (2010), "How much does immigration boost innova-

    tion?", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 31-56.


[18] HBR (2009), "Managing Across Distance in Today’s Economic Climate: The Value of

    Face-to-Face Communication”, Harvard Business Review, 2009.


[19] Jones, C. (2002), "Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas", American Eco-

    nomic Review, vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 220-239.


[20] Keller, W. (2010), "International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and Technology

    Spillovers", Chapter 19 in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol. 2, B. Hall and

    N. Rosenberg (eds.), Elsevier, North-Holland.


[21] Keller, W. (2004), "International Technology Diﬀusion", Journal of Economic Literature,

    vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 752-782


[22] Keller, W. (2002), "Geographic Localization of International Technology Diﬀusion", Amer-

    ican Economic Review, March.


[23] Keller, W., and S. Yeaple (2012), "The Gravity of Knowledge", forthcoming, American

    Economic Review.


[24] Keller, W. and Yeaple, S. (2009), "Multinational enterprises, international trade, and pro-

    ductivity growth: firm-level evidence from the United States", The Review of Economics

    and Statistics, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 821-831.

                                                   27
[25] Kerr, W.R. (2008), "Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diﬀusion",

    The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 518-537.


[26] Kim, J., Lee, S. and Marschke, G. (2006), "International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from

    an Inventor-Firm Matched Data Set", NBER Working Paper 12692.


[27] Koskinen, K., and Vanharanta, H. (2002), "The role of tacit knowledge in innovation

    processes of small technology companies", International Journal of Production Economics,

    vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 57-64


[28] Le, T. (2008), "Brain Drain or Brain Circulation: Evidence from OECD’s International

    Migration and R&D Spillovers", Scottish Journal of Political Economy, vol. 55, no. 5, pp.

    618-636.


[29] Lucas, R. (1993), "Making a Miracle", Econometrica, vol. 61, no. 2 , pp. 251-272.


[30] Mullahy J., (1997), "Instrumental variable estimation of Poisson regression models: appli-

    cation to models of cigarette smoking behavior", Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.

    79, pp. 586-593.


[31] Oettl, A. and Agrawal, A. (2008), "International labor mobility and knowledge flow exter-

    nalities", Journal of International Business Studies, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 1242-1260.


[32] Olley, G.S. and Pakes, A. (1996), "The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications

    equipment industry", Econometrica, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 1263-1297.




                                              28
[33] Peri, G. (2007), "Higher Education, Innovation and Growth". In Giorgio Brunello, Pietro

    Garibaldi and Etienne Wasmer (eds.), Education and Training in Europe, Oxford: Oxford

    University Press.


[34] Polanyi, M. (1958), Personal knowledge; towards a post-critical philosophy, University of

    Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.


[35] Poole, J. (2010), "Business Travel as an Input to International Trade", mimeo, University

    of California-Santa Cruz, January.


[36] Rauch, J.E. (2001), "Business and social networks in international trade", Journal of Eco-

    nomic Literature, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1177-1203.


[37] Santos Silva, J., and Tenreyro S. (2006), "The Log of Gravity", Review of Economics and

    Statistics, vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 641-658.


[38] Singh, J. (2005), "Collaborative Networks as Determinants of Knowledge Diﬀusion Pat-

    terns", Management Science, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 756-770.


[39] Stuen, E., Mobarak, M., and Maskus, K. (2012), "Skilled immigration and innovation:

    evidence from enrollment fluctuations in U.S. doctoral programs", forthcoming, Economic

    Journal


[40] Wooldridge, J. (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press,

    Cambridge, MA.


[41] WTO (2006), "Second Review of the Air Transport Annex", Volumes I and II, Note by the

    Secretariat, document S/C/W/270/Add.1.


                                               29
6    Appendix

This section gives the details on the sources and construction of our the variables.


    Innovation U.S. patent counts: The data on U.S. patents issued from 1993-2003 comes

from the United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), Custom Data Extracts. The

individual inventor database, which has address information (street, city, state, country of res-

idence, etc.) for each of multiple inventors per patent, is combined with the bibliographical

patent database, which has application month and year, as well as original USPTO technolog-

ical category for each patent. If a patent has multiple inventors, we assign a fraction of 1

to each inventors country of residence, where  is the number of inventors. Using the origi-

nal USPTO technological categories, each patent is assigned to one of 37 subcategories based

on NBER patent classification (Hall et al. 2001). Then using application year for each patent,

patents are aggregated by foreign country and technological subcategory for each year 1993-2003

to obtain patent counts by foreign countries and industries for each year 1993-2003.

    Joint U.S. patent counts: To identify patents which have a combination of foreign and U.S.

coinventors we also calculated foreign patent counts of only patents for which there is at least one

U.S. coinventor. Using the same methodology as above, foreign patents with at least one U.S.

coinventor are obtained by aggregating by foreign country and industry for each year 1993-2003.

    U.S. patent stock by states and by industries: For the sample period 1993-2003, each patent

with multiple inventors is assigned a fraction of 1, where  is the number of inventors. Then

keeping only U.S. inventors, patent counts are aggregated to a given state for each year during

1993-2003. Similarly, patent counts are aggregated to a given industry for each year 1993-2003.



                                                30
   Travel The data on international air travel comes from the Survey of International Air

Travelers (SIAT), which is conducted by the United States Oﬃce of Travel and Tourism In-

dustries, a branch of the International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce.

SIAT collects data on non-U.S. residents traveling to the U.S. and U.S. residents traveling from

the U.S (excluding Canada). This survey has been carried out monthly starting from 1983 on

randomly selected flights from the major U.S. international gateway airports for over 70 partic-

ipating domestic and foreign airlines. Questionnaires in 12 languages are distributed onboard

U.S. outbound flight to international destinations.

   In this paper we use data on U.S. residents traveling from the United States to foreign

countries in the period of 1993-2003. Outbound U.S. resident travel data is an individual level

database which has information on travelers’ U.S. county of residence, country of citizenship,

main purpose of the trip, secondary purposes of the trip, main destination foreign cities, sec-

ondary destination foreign cities, occupation, quarter and year of travel. Trips can be made

for the purpose of business, visiting friends and relatives, and religious, among others. Possible

occupations include homemaker and retired, among others. Main destination and secondary

destination cities are both coded. Individual observations are expanded if a particular indi-

vidual traveled to distinct destination countries, treating each destination as a separate trip.

If a particular traveler mentioned multiple purposes of the trip, each purpose is given equal

weight. Further, expanded individual travel observations are aggregated by purpose of the trip

and occupations by U.S. state and foreign country for each year 1993-2003.

   Our main variable of interest is   the number of business travelers from state  to foreign

country  in year . We calculated the number of travelers who are visiting friends and family, are



                                                31
traveling for religious reasons, or are retired or homemakers in the same way. These aggregated

travel variables are weighted by the ratio of U.S. state-industry patent stock to real state GDP

and a given industry’s strength in the U.S. (source: U.S. department of Commerce, Bureau of

Economic Analysis, BEA), see equation (1). The final travel variables are in natural logarithms,

with one added to each value. Furthermore, in this analysis we only consider positive numbers

of business travelers.


   Other variables Population size, real GDP per capita for each year 1993-2003 and country

are obtained from Penn World Tables, version 6.2. U.S. exports and imports by country and

year 1993-2003 are collected from U.S. Census Bureau (www.usatradeonline.gov). U.S. FDI

by destination countries and years 1993-2003 is proxied by the total sales of U.S. majority-

owned multinational aﬃliates and comes from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). FDI

to U.S. by countries and years is captured by the total sales of nonbank U.S. aﬃliates of foreign

multinational firms and comes from BEA. Gross domestic expenditures on R&D expenditures

(GERD) for each country in year 1993-2003 are obtained from OECD Statistics, which has data

on OECD countries as well as some non-OECD member economies. Each country’s domestic

patent applications (by first named inventor) by residents of that country in 1993-2003 are from

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). All control variables employed in the analysis

are in natural logarithms. The final dataset is an unbalanced sample for 34 countries and 37

industries for the years 1993-2003.




                                               32
                            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Variable                                  Mean        Std. Dev.       Min         Max

US Patenting
 US patent counts                        101.319      322.750          0          3748
 Joint US patent counts                   2.070        5.761           0           77

US Resident Travel
 Business travel                           1.506        1.480          0          8.923
 Visit friends & family travel             1.421        1.489          0          8.792
 Religious travel                          0.077        0.335          0          4.217
 Retired travel                            0.980        1.237          0          7.115
 Homemaker travel                          0.571        0.968          0          7.241

Other Variables
 Population                               10.133        1.519       5.619        14.062
 Real GDP per capita                      9.745         0.566       7.599        10.783
 US exports                               22.809        1.297       18.544       25.436
 US FDI                                   24.071        1.561       16.300       26.734
 R&D expenditures                         22.654        1.342       18.821       25.385
 Resident patent applications             8.295         1.932       3.714        12.859
 US imports                               23.031        1.430       18.947       25.710
 FDI to US                                20.890        2.489       11.513       24.594
Note: Number of observations for all variables is 5,202. All variables, except US patent
counts and Joint US patent counts, are in natural logarithms. Real GDP per capita, US
exports, US FDI, R&D expenditures, US imports and FDI to US are in dollars. US FDI is
total sales of majority owned multinational firms. FDI to US is total sales of nonbank US
affilities of foreign multinational firms.
                                                                          Table 2: Business Traveler Exogenous

                                           (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)                    (8)            (9)
                                                                                                                                          Negative                              Negative
                                         Poisson         Poisson         Poisson          Poisson         Poisson          Poisson                                Poisson
                                                                                                                                          Binomial                              Binomial
Dependent variable                                                                      US patents                                                                   Joint US patents

Business travel                          0.022*       0.022*       0.022*       0.021*       0.022*       0.022*        0.028*                                     0.038*       0.034*
                                         (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.012)                                    (0.016)      (0.014)
                                      [0.2%, 4.1%] [0.2%, 4.1%] [0.2%, 4.0%] [0.2%, 3.8%] [0.3%, 3.8%] [0.3%, 3.8%] [0.2%, 5.2%]                               [2.0%, 6.4%] [‐0.9%, 6.4%]
Population                                           5.055**      4.005**        1.166        0.856        0.893      1.984**                                       0.913        1.610
                                                      (0.972)      (0.930)      (1.138)      (1.144)      (1.228)      (0.687)                                    (1.435)      (1.299)
GDP per capita                                        0.750*        0.602        0.226        0.184        0.245      1.139**                                       0.802       1.318+
                                                      (0.357)      (0.552)      (0.582)      (0.582)      (0.673)      (0.375)                                    (0.692)      (0.714)
US exports                                                          0.018       ‐0.119       ‐0.184       ‐0.159        ‐0.078                                      0.035        0.015
                                                                   (0.205)      (0.206)      (0.203)      (0.243)      (0.112)                                    (0.216)      (0.183)
US FDI                                                             0.238+        0.089        0.033        0.055        ‐0.007                                    ‐0.359*      ‐0.332+
                                                                   (0.124)      (0.132)      (0.129)      (0.133)      (0.082)                                    (0.170)      (0.195)
R&D expenditures                                                               1.131**      0.835**      0.831**      0.552**                                       0.242        0.074
                                                                                (0.317)      (0.312)      (0.296)      (0.135)                                    (0.386)      (0.321)
Resident patent applications                                                                0.534**      0.502**      0.484**                                    0.684**       0.723**
                                                                                             (0.121)      (0.132)      (0.076)                                    (0.215)      (0.215)
US imports                                                                                                ‐0.093        ‐0.225                                      0.367        0.384
                                                                                                          (0.206)      (0.150)                                    (0.262)      (0.252)
FDI to US                                                                                                  0.071       ‐0.106*                                     ‐0.009       ‐0.017
                                                                                                          (0.100)      (0.051)                                    (0.125)      (0.178)

Observations                              5,202           5,202           5,202            5,202           5,202            5,202           5,202                  5,202            5,202
Log‐likelihood                           ‐67,416         ‐66,644         ‐66,483          ‐65,954         ‐65,552          ‐65,541         ‐18,767                ‐5,942           ‐5,492

Notes: All specifications include country, year and industry fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors allow for clustering by country‐year and are shown in parenthesis; + p<0.10, * p<0.05,
** p< 0.01. Bootstrapped bias‐corrected 95% confidence intervals for the business travel variable are reported in brackets.
                                Table 3: Control Function Regressions

                                             (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)      (5)
Dependent variable                                             Business travel

Visit friends & family travel             0.871**    0.811**      0.808**    0.772**     0.771**
                                          (0.008)    (0.014)      (0.014)    (0.016)     (0.016)
Retired travel                                       0.082**      0.077**    0.065**     0.062**
                                                     (0.015)      (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.015)
Religious travel                                                  0.070**                0.050**
                                                                  (0.019)                (0.019)
Homemaker travel                                                             0.093**     0.090**
                                                                             (0.015)     (0.015)
Population                                ‐0.661+    ‐0.646+      ‐0.649+    ‐0.680+     ‐0.681+
                                          (0.387)    (0.387)      (0.386)    (0.388)     (0.387)
GDP per capita                             ‐0.176     ‐0.169       ‐0.176     ‐0.172      ‐0.177
                                          (0.190)    (0.189)      (0.189)    (0.188)     (0.188)
US exports                                 0.010      0.017        0.017      0.007       0.008
                                          (0.059)    (0.059)      (0.059)    (0.059)     (0.059)
US FDI                                     0.004      ‐0.001       0.003      ‐0.001      0.002
                                          (0.037)    (0.037)      (0.037)    (0.036)     (0.036)
R&D expenditures                           ‐0.007      0.003        0.009     ‐0.005      ‐0.001
                                          (0.078)    (0.077)      (0.077)    (0.076)     (0.076)
Resident patent applications              0.158**    0.159**      0.157**    0.161**     0.159**
                                          (0.043)    (0.043)      (0.043)    (0.043)     (0.043)
US imports                                  0.092      0.088        0.089     0.092+      0.093+
                                          (0.056)    (0.056)      (0.056)    (0.055)     (0.055)
FDI to US                                  ‐0.032     ‐0.032       ‐0.030     ‐0.031      ‐0.030
                                          (0.027)    (0.027)      (0.027)    (0.027)     (0.027)

Observations                               5,202       5,202       5,202         5,202    5,202
R‐squared                                  0.922       0.923       0.923         0.924    0.924
Notes: All specifications include country, year and industry fixed effects. Robust standard
errors in parenthesis; + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p< 0.01
                                     Table 4: Patent Counts with Control Function and Instrumental Variable Estimation
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)               (6)                         (7)             (8)
                                       Poisson      Poisson CF      Poisson CF        Poisson IV      Neg Bin CF           Poisson       Poisson CF       Poisson IV
Dependent variable                                                    US patents                                                       US joint patents

Business travel                         0.022*      0.021*       0.021*                 0.024+       0.025*                 0.038*       0.033+        0.082+
                                        (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)               (0.015)      (0.012)                (0.016)      (0.018)       (0.043)
                                     [0.3%,3.8%] [0.8%,3.9%] [0.7%,4.2%]            [‐0.6%,5.7%] [0.7%, 4.4%]           [2.0%, 6.4%] [0.9%, 5.9%] [8.1%, 16.2%]
Population                                0.893       0.898        0.898               2.793**     1.989**                   0.913        0.936         0.407
                                        (1.228)     (1.244)      (1.235)               (0.969)      (0.684)                (1.435)      (1.447)       (0.968)
GDP per capita                            0.245       0.251        0.251               1.437**     1.140**                   0.802        0.819         0.668
                                        (0.673)     (0.679)      (0.678)               (0.463)      (0.373)                (0.692)      (0.719)       (1.948)
US exports                               ‐0.159      ‐0.160       ‐0.160                ‐0.117       ‐0.079                  0.035        0.026        ‐0.289
                                        (0.243)     (0.242)      (0.243)               (0.240)      (0.112)                (0.216)      (0.217)       (0.512)
US FDI                                    0.055       0.054        0.054                ‐0.238       ‐0.005                ‐0.359*      ‐0.358*       ‐1.602*
                                        (0.133)     (0.132)      (0.132)               (0.154)      (0.082)                (0.170)      (0.171)       (0.673)
R&D expenditures                       0.831**     0.832**      0.832**                0.657**     0.549**                   0.242        0.235       1.924**
                                        (0.296)     (0.295)      (0.293)               (0.215)      (0.136)                (0.386)      (0.382)       (0.604)
Resident patent applications           0.502**     0.502**      0.502**                0.604**     0.486**                0.684**      0.685**         1.424*
                                        (0.132)     (0.132)      (0.132)               (0.121)      (0.076)                (0.215)      (0.213)       (0.558)
US imports                               ‐0.093      ‐0.095       ‐0.094                ‐0.168       ‐0.225                  0.367        0.367        2.108*
                                        (0.206)     (0.207)      (0.207)               (0.174)      (0.151)                (0.262)      (0.264)       (0.903)
FDI to US                                 0.071       0.070        0.070              ‐0.208**      ‐0.106*                 ‐0.009       ‐0.012      ‐0.709**
                                        (0.100)     (0.099)      (0.099)               (0.070)      (0.051)                (0.125)      (0.124)       (0.234)
Control function                                      0.005        0.006                              0.018                               0.028
                                                    (0.035)      (0.035)                            (0.024)                             (0.053)
Instrument/Control function                             FF   FF, Rl, Rt, Hm               FF            FF                                  FF            FF

Observations                            5,202          5,202           5,202            5,202           5,202                5,202           5,202           5,202
Log‐likelihood                         ‐65,541        ‐65,540         ‐65,540            n/a           ‐18,767              ‐5,942          ‐5,942            n/a
Notes: All specifications include country, year and industry fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors allow for clustering by country‐year and are shown in
parenthesis; + p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p< 0.01. Bootstrapped bias‐corrected 95% confidence intervals for the business travel variable are reported in brackets. Types of
travel variables for instrument/control function: FF‐ visit friends & family , Rl‐ religious, Rt‐retired, Hm‐homemaker.
                                                                                          Table 5: Specification Checks
                                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)                     (5)                (6)                 (7)                 (8)
Dependent variable                                                                                                            US patents

Business travel                                         0.022*                0.001              ‐0.014              0.021*                0.006              ‐0.014
                                                        (0.010)              (0.012)             (0.011)             (0.010)              (0.012)            (0.013)
                                                     [0.3%, 3.8%]        [‐1.6%, 2.8%]       [‐3.1%, 0.6%]        [0.8%, 3.9%]        [‐0.3%, 4.1%]        [‐3.5%, 1%]
Business travel* High patents (median)                                      0.029**                                                      0.024**
                                                                             (0.010)                                                      (0.009)
                                                                          [1.3%, 4.4%]                                                 [0.4%, 4.1%]
Business travel* High patents (mean)                                                           0.049**                                                      0.046**
                                                                                                (0.009)                                                      (0.009)
                                                                                             [3.4%, 6.8%]                                                 [3.4%, 5.9%]
Business travel (unweighted)                                                                                                                                                       0.010                0.011
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.012)              (0.013)
                                                                                                                                                                              [‐1.1%, 3.6%]        [‐0.3%, 3.9%]
Population                                               0.893               0.978                1.251               0.898               0.953                1.255               0.841                0.838
                                                       (1.228)             (1.242)              (1.248)             (1.244)             (1.268)              (1.284)              (1.259)              (1.270)
GDP per capita                                           0.245               0.275                0.241               0.251               0.300                0.272               0.217                0.214
                                                       (0.673)             (0.667)              (0.647)             (0.679)             (0.663)              (0.647)              (0.680)              (0.681)
US exports                                              ‐0.159              ‐0.186               ‐0.194              ‐0.160              ‐0.183               ‐0.195              ‐0.151               ‐0.151
                                                       (0.243)             (0.243)              (0.244)             (0.242)             (0.240)              (0.241)              (0.243)              (0.243)
US FDI                                                   0.055               0.037                0.049               0.054               0.015                0.037               0.057                0.057
                                                       (0.133)             (0.133)              (0.133)             (0.132)             (0.137)              (0.135)              (0.133)              (0.133)
R&D expenditures                                       0.831**             0.882**              0.843**             0.832**             0.890**              0.849**             0.840**              0.840**
                                                       (0.296)             (0.285)              (0.285)             (0.295)             (0.284)              (0.287)              (0.294)              (0.293)
Resident patent applications                           0.502**             0.478**              0.460**             0.502**             0.483**              0.460**             0.504**              0.504**
                                                       (0.132)             (0.129)              (0.128)             (0.132)             (0.130)              (0.130)              (0.131)              (0.132)
US imports                                              ‐0.093              ‐0.064               ‐0.026              ‐0.095              ‐0.056               ‐0.025              ‐0.087               ‐0.087
                                                       (0.206)             (0.197)              (0.192)             (0.207)             (0.202)              (0.197)              (0.202)              (0.203)
FDI to US                                                0.071               0.058                0.059               0.070               0.055                0.055               0.068                0.068
                                                       (0.100)             (0.099)              (0.095)             (0.099)             (0.098)              (0.093)              (0.100)              (0.100)
Control function                                                                                                      0.005              ‐0.026                0.001                                   ‐0.002
                                                                                                                    (0.035)             (0.050)              (0.050)                                   (0.033)
Control function: interaction                                                                                                             0.077                0.041
                                                                                                                                        (0.056)              (0.052)

Observations                                            5,202                5,202               5,202               5,202                  5,202             5,202               5,202                5,202
Log‐likelihood                                         ‐65,541              ‐65,087             ‐64,421             ‐65,540                ‐65,015           ‐64,385             ‐65,770              ‐65,769
Notes: Poisson QMLE Regressions. All specifications include country, year and industry fixed effects. Bootstrapped standard errors allow for clustering by country‐year and are shown in parenthesis; + p<0.10, *
p<0.05, ** p< 0.01. Bootstrapped bias‐corrected 95% confidence intervals for the business travel variable are reported in brackets. Control function in columns (4)‐(6) and column (8) is based on visit friends &
family travel.
                                        Table A1: NBER Technological Subcategories

Subcategory                   Description                         Subcategory                   Description
    11      Chemical: Agriculture, Food &Textiles                     45      Electrical & Electronics: Power Systems
                                                                              Electrical & Electronics: Semiconductor
      12       Chemical: Coating                                      46
                                                                              Devices
      13       Chemical: Gas                                          49      Electrical & Electronics: Miscellaneous
      14       Chemical: Organic Compounds                            51      Mechanical: Mat. Proc & Handling
      15       Chemical: Resins                                       52      Mechanical: Metal Working
      19       Chemical: Miscellaneous                                53      Mechanical: Motors & Engines, Parts
               Computers & Communications:
      21                                                                54       Mechanical: Optics
               Communications
               Computers & Communications : Computer
      22                                                                55       Mechanical: Transportation
               Hardware & Software
               Computers & Communications : Computer
      23                                                                59       Mechanical: Miscellaneous
               Peripherals
               Computers & Communications: Information
      24                                                                61       Others: Agriculture, Husbandry &Food
               Storage
               Computers & Communications : Electronic
      25                                                                62       Others: Amusement Devices
               business methods and software
      31       Drugs & Medicine: Drugs                                  63       Others: Apparel & Textile
      32       Drugs & Medicine: Surgery & Med Inst.                    64       Others: Earth Working & Wells
      33       Drugs & Medicine: Genetics                               65       Others: Furniture & House Fixtures
      39       Drugs & Medicine: Miscellaneous                          66       Others: Heating
      41       Electrical & Electronics: Electrical Devices             67       Others: Pipes & Joints
      42       Electrical & Electronics: Electrical Lighting            68       Others: Receptacles
      43       Electrical & Electronics: Measuring & Testing            69       Others: Miscellaneous
      44        Electrical & Electronics: Nuclear & X‐rays
Notes: This classification is based on NBER patent data project classification (classification 2006 excel file). Source:
https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home/downloads/patn‐data‐description
                 Table A2A: US patenting by states, 1993‐2003

State           Sum of patents by         State                 Sum of patents by
                state, 1993‐2003                                state, 1993‐2003

Alabama               4277                N. Carolina                20142
Alaska                 521                Nebraska                   2290
Arizona              17271                Nevada                     3692
Arkansas               1829               New Hampshire              6846
California           202830               New Jersey                 41686
Colorado             21337                New Mexico                 3833
Connecticut          20141                New York                   68699
Delaware               4668               North Dakota                 801
Florida              28949                Ohio                       35574
Georgia              15294                Oklahoma                   5893
Hawaii                 905                Oregon                     16015
Idaho                14952                Pennsylvania               37766
Illinois             40205                Puerto Rico                  258
Indiana              15905                Rhode Island               3251
Iowa                   7054               S. Carolina                6257
Kansas                 4489               S. Dakota                    801
Kentucky               4794               Tennessee                   8860
Louisiana              5083               Texas                      67284
Maine                  1585               Utah                        7876
Maryland              16128               Vermont                     4209
Massachusetts         40813               Virginia                   12678
Michigan              41655               W. Virginia                 1608
Minnesota             30280               Washington                 24422
Mississippi            1821               Washington, DC               733
Missouri               9600               Wisconsin                  19188
Montana                1474               Wyoming                      614
                             Table A2B: US patenting by industries, 1993‐2003


                                                                                  Sum of patents by
Subcategory                               Description
                                                                                industries, 1993‐2003


    11        Chemical: Agriculture, Food &Textiles                                    2404
    12        Chemical: Coating                                                        11814
    13        Chemical: Gas                                                            3597
    14        Chemical: Organic Compounds                                              15801
    15        Chemical: Resins                                                         22499
    19        Chemical: Miscellaneous                                                  68308
    21        Computers & Communications: Communications                               80433
    22        Computers & Communications : Computer Hardware & Software                74403
    23        Computers & Communications : Computer Peripherals                        22983
    24        Computers & Communications: Information Storage                          34557
    25        Computers & Communications : Electronic business methods and
              software                                                                 16475
    31        Drugs & Medicine: Drugs                                                  67206
    32        Drugs & Medicine: Surgery & Med Inst.                                    48587
    33        Drugs & Medicine: Genetics                                               3927
    39        Drugs & Medicine: Miscellaneous                                          9298
    41        Electrical & Electronics: Electrical Devices                             26673
    42        Electrical & Electronics: Electrical Lighting                            13495
    43        Electrical & Electronics: Measuring & Testing                            25291
    44        Electrical & Electronics: Nuclear & X‐rays                               11057
    45        Electrical & Electronics: Power Systems                                  29589
    46        Electrical & Electronics: Semiconductor Devices                          40253
    49        Electrical & Electronics: Miscellaneous                                  18266
    51        Mechanical: Mat. Proc & Handling                                         30835
    52        Mechanical: Metal Working                                                16823
    53        Mechanical: Motors & Engines, Parts                                      19412
    54        Mechanical: Optics                                                       11005
    55        Mechanical: Transportation                                               24565
    59        Mechanical: Miscellaneous                                                34426
    61        Others: Agriculture, Husbandry &Food                                     16882
    62        Others: Amusement Devices                                                12920
    63        Others: Apparel & Textile                                                10156
    64        Others: Earth Working & Wells                                            11417
    65        Others: Furniture & House Fixtures                                       19629
    66        Others: Heating                                                          6220
    67        Others: Pipes & Joints                                                   5620
    68        Others: Receptacles                                                      15996
    69        Others: Miscellaneous                                                    72355
     Table A3A: Countries in Sample

Argentina         Mexico
Australia         Netherlands
Austria           New Zealand
Belgium           Norway
China             Poland
Denmark           Portugal
Finland           Romania
France            Russia
Germany           Singapore
Greece            Slovakia
Iceland           Slovenia
Ireland           South Africa
Israel            Spain
Italy             Sweden
Japan             Switzerland
Korea, South      Turkey
Luxembourg        United Kingdom




                Table A3B: Countries in Sample

        OECD Countries                  Non‐OECD countries
Australia         Mexico                Argentina
Austria           Netherlands           China
Belgium           New Zealand           Israel
Denmark           Norway                Romania
Finland           Poland                Russia
France            Portugal              Singapore
Germany           Slovakia              Slovenia
Greece            Spain                 South Africa
Iceland           Sweden
Ireland           Switzerland
Italy             Turkey
Japan             United Kingdom
Korea, South
Luxembourg
                                                            Figure 1
                            10-year Differences of Business and Friends & Family travel , 1993-2003
            1



                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                 AUS
                                                                 SVN                    ARG
Change in Business Travel




                                                                   CHN ISL
                     0




                                                                     GBR
                                                                      NZL  JPN
                                                                       GRC
                                                                         RUS                  ROM
                                                                NLDESP
                                                             MEX FRA
                                                            DEU    SGP
                                                    KOR
                                                     CHE ITA
                                                     POL
           -1




                                                 AUT TUR SVK
                                                        FINBEL
                                        PRT            SWE
                                               DNK NORZAF


                                         LUX
 -2




                              ISR
            -3




                              -2                 -1                0                1               2
                                                  Change in Friends & Family Travel
