NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POVERTY IN AMERICA:
IS WELFARE THE ANSWER OR THE PROBLEM?

David T. Eliwood
Lawrence H. Suniners

Working Paper No. 1711

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

This paper is drawn from one prepared for delivery at a conference
on "Poverty and Policy: Retrospect and Prospects,'1 held in
Williamsburg, Virginia, December 6—8, 1984. The research reported
here was supported by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services through a contract to the Institute for Research on
Poverty. We have benefitted from discussions with many conference
participants. The research reported here is part of the NBER1s
research program in Labor Studies and project in Government Budget.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, Harvard University, the
Institute for Research on Poverty, or the Department of Health and
Human Services.

NBER Working Paper #1711
October 1985

Poverty in America:
Is Welfare the Answer or the Problem?

ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the current policies for fighting poverty and

explores the impact they have had. We begin by reviewing trends in poverty,
poverty spending and economic performance.

It is immediately apparent that

economic performance is the dominant determinant of the measured poverty rate

over the past two decades. Government assistance programs expanded greatly
over this period, but the growth in

cash assistance was too modest to have

major effects, and the large growth in

in—kind benefits could not reduce

measured poverty since such benefits are not
on three groups: the disabled,

counted as income. Next we focus

female family heads, and unemployed black youth.

We find little evidence that government
of each group, and suggest that the

deserves the blame for the problems

broad outlines of current policies are

defensible on economic grounds.

Prof essor David T. Ellwood
Kennedy School of Government
79 John F. Kennedy Street

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 495—1121

Professor Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University
cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 495—2447

The poverty issue is gridlocked. No one is satisfied with current
policy, but no alternative to the contours of existing policy can

generate much support. The sources of dissatisfaction are well
illustrated in two recent tracts on the poverty problem: Charles
Murray's Losing Ground (1984) and Michael Harrington's The New American

Poverty (1984). Murray notes that poverty has increased in the last
fifteen years in concert with increases in federal social spending

ballooned. He argues for a poverty Laffer curve: attempts to improve
poverty actually made things worse. Harrington sees the problem of
rising poverty as caused by government inaction rather than action. He
asserts that the War on Poverty was never really declared and argues
that without a far more massive effort, there is no real chance of
combating poverty.
We have reviewed the existing policies and our record in reducing

poverty. Despite the haphazard evolution of these policies and their
seeming lack of coherence, we find that they function reasonably well.
Given the resources devoted to fighting poverty, we have done about as

well as we could have hoped. There is logic to the broad outlines of
the current "safety net." Using categorical programs, we have provided
financial support to the needy and probably have not caused an
appreciable share of the current problems. It is true that current
transfer policies do relatively little to help the poor achieve self—

—2—

sufficiency or to ameliorate some of the serious social problems
attending poverty, but a review of the record does not support the view
they have caused them.

I. The Record

Any discussion of trends in poverty must rely on some measure of

the incidence of poverty. And any single poverty measure is bound to be

misleading. We concentrate here on trends in the officially defined
poverty rate——the fraction of population living in families with incomes

below the poverty line. It is important to understand that the poverty
line is a fixed level of real income (which varies by family size),
thought to be sufficient to provide a minimally adequate standard of

living. It is adjusted each year only for changes in the cost of
living. Changes in the poverty rate thus provide an indicator of
society's success in alleviating hardship among those with relatively
low incomes, and do not necessarily indicate changes in income

inequality. It is also important to recognize that only cash payments
are treated as part of family income in the official poverty measure.
In—kind benefits such as medical care, food stamps or housing assistance
are not counted at all.

Figure 1 depicts the trends since 1959 in the poverty rate, defined
as the percentage of all persons living in families with cash income
below the poverty line.

We have broken out the figures for the elderly

and nonelderly separately. For those over 65, there was dramatic and

—3—

relatively continual progress up to 1974, some modest progress through

1978, and a relatively flat poverty level since that time. For the non—
elderly there was a dramatic decline in the poverty rate between 1959

and 1969. Then progress largely halted. The rate moved up and down
throughout the 1970's, finally turning up rather sharply in the 1980s.
It is the dramatic halt to progress in reducing poverty rate for the

nonelderly which seemed to coincide with the onset of the Great Society
programs that has sparked the current discouragement with our

antipoverty efforts. Throughout this paper we shall focus primarily on
the nonelderly, since there appears to be less concern that our efforts
at helping senior citizens were ineffectual or counter—productive.

Poverty In Relation to Economic Change
How much of the poverty rate can be explained by general economic

developments? Figure 2 plots the nonelderly poverty rate along with the
poverty threshold expressed as a fraction of median income. It is
apparent that the curves dovetail almost perfectly. Almost all of the
variation in the poverty rate is tracked by movements in median family
income.

The poverty rate, and the poverty line as a fraction of total

family income, move almost completely together.
One

does

see a slight divergence of the trends in the eighties. 1

But here it should be noted, the poverty rate is basically tracking the
performance of the economy.

In real terms, median family income in

1980 was no higher than it was in 1969. In the recession of 1982, it
actually fell 5% below the 1969 level. Average families have no more

—4—

income than they did almost 15 years ago. It should not come as a great

surprise, then, that poor families weren't much better off either. And
it seems reasonable to blame the same factors for the stagnation in both
the fortunes of the poor and the nonpoor.
The reasons for the lack of growth in median family income are not

entirely clear. Real per capita disposable income did rise by 27.5%.
Some of the explanations must therefore lie in demographic changes,

which were affecting both the poor and the nonpoor. There was a large
increase in the number of female—headed families, and average family

size declined from 3.6 to 3.3. The share of income going to unrelated
individuals also increased substantially. But demographics alone cannot

be the entire story. Median income of full—year, full—time male workers
also declined between 1970 and 1980.

Much of the blame must be placed

on the productivity slowdown, which reduced the annual rate of growth of
productivity to 0.8% in the 1970s after nearly two and one—half decades
of growth at almost 3% per year.

Whatever the reasons for the decline, it would be absurd to blame
changes in median family income on social welfare program mistakes.
Making the poor better or worse off shouldn't affect median income
because the middle family in the income distribution would not be

directly affected. Nor can attitudinal changes sometimes traced to
welfare be blamed for our economic problems. The market valuation of
corporate physical capital, which is presumably free from attitudinal
problems, has declined by more than 50% since the late l960s.
A brief consideration of the relevant magnitudes makes it clear why

—5—

movements in average family incomes should be a dominant determinant of

the fortunes of the poor. The bottom fifth of all families get about 6%

of total personal income. This figure has been remarkably stable for
most of the past 20 years. In 1982 disposable personal income was
$2,172 billion. A 10% increase in disposable personal income would
raise the amount of income flowing to the poor by $13 billion. A 25%
increase, which was achieved between 1961 and 1966, would increase the
income to the bottom fifth by more than the total cost of all means—
tested cash assistance programs plus food stamps. These calculations
probably understate the power of a strong economy in reducing poverty
because they neglect the cyclicality of the share of income going to the
bottom fifth of the population.

There is an alternative way of seeing that the performance of the
economy will be a dominant determinant of the economic condition of the

poor. A majority of the poor are in male—headed families. For this
group, at least 75% of income results from earnings. Even among

poor

female headed families with children, fully 40% of all income comes from

working. The fraction is much greater for families near the poverty
line——the ones 'who will be drawn

into

or out of poverty as the economy

swings.

The

Role of Antipoverty Programs

Still,

it is troubling to find that poverty rates have tracked

median family income so closely. Expenditures on social welfare
programs increased many times during the late 1960s and early l970s.

—6—

Shouldn't we have expected some improvement in poverty? If for no other
reason, transfers from the government should have pushed more people
across the poverty line. This lack of progress seems to have fueled the
current perception that the antipoverty programs were a failure. Murray
even argues that the growth in government programs induced the poor to
stop relying on private sources of income and start relying on public

sources, reducing their hopes for self—sufficiency. Let us examine
these charges.

It is customary to break social welfare expenditures into three

categories: social insurance, cash assistance and in—kind benefits. The
social insurance system is clearly geared to the middle class, designed
to protect those who retire or who suffer some calamity such as total
disability or unemployment or work injury and therefore are unable to

earn money. Medicare, which covers much of the medical care needs of
the aged and totally disabled who receive Social Security, is usually
classified as a social insurance program even though it provides in—kind

benefits. Most workers are covered by these programs so long as they
have worked a reasonable period. Far from being income tested, these
programs tend to give higher benefits to those who had higher earnings

before retirement, disability, or unemployment. Thus the programs do
protect some families from poverty, but they really are designed to
protect middle class incomes.

Cash assistance is offered to certain low—income groups. In most
areas, only three groups really qualify for significant cash assistance:
the aged, the totally disabled, and persons in single— parent families.

—7—

Supplemental Security Income (551) covers the first two groups while

AFDC covers the third. There is some assistance available for others.
Most states offer a very modest General Assistance (GA) program, often

for people who are partially disabled. Further, some states also offer
an AFDC—Unemployed Parent (AFDC—UP) program for two—parent families with
an unemployed parent. In fact, there are stringent restrictions on
eligibility for AFDC—UP, and the program is extremely small, less than

5% of the total AFDC program. The cash transfer programs are explicitly
income—tested and benefits decline as income rises.

Finally, there are a variety of in—kind benefits available. Food
Stamps provides modest benefits per person in the form of vouchers, but
the benefits are available, on a scale which varies by income, to all

poor persons—— (except students and strikers). Medicaid provides
medical benefits to the poor, but only to those who are aged,

permanently disabled, or are in single—parent families.2 There are
housing assistance programs and a number of other modest in—kind
benefits, like Low Income Home Energy Assistance.
Table 1 shows the magnitude and the growth of these various

programs. Expenditures are divided by major beneficiary group: the
elderly, the totally disabled, and all others. Certainly the most
prominent fact on the table is that the bulk of all expenditures and the

bulk of the dollar growth has been in programs for the elderly. We
would certainly expect to see, as we have seen, a very dramatic
reduction in poverty among this group even in the seventies, when growth
was rather flat.

—8—

By almost any standard, expenditures on cash assistance programs

specifically targeted at the poor are small. Taken together, all the
cash assistance programs for the nonelderly totaled less than $20

billion in 1982. That is a considerable increase over 1960, when
benefits were under $5 billion (in 1980 dollars). But it still
represents much less than 1% of GNP. Federal expenditures for these
programs are less than 2% of the federal budget.
These expenditures are too small to have very much effect on

measured poverty. Cash assistance pushes just 5% of poor persons out of
poverty. Spreading the $20 billion spent on cash assistance across all
30.6 million non—elderly poor persons yields an average cash benefit of

slightly over $50 per poor person per month. Benefits are actually
concentrated on those persons who are single parents or disabled. But
for single parents, benefits average only $100 monthly per person; for

the disabled, they average roughly $220. These amounts just aren't
sufficient to push very many persons Out of poverty.
Perhaps even more important, over the period when poverty rates
were stable, there were only modest changes in expenditures for these

programs. Between 1970 and 1980, cash assistance expenditures rose from
$13.7 billion to $18.9 billion. Over the entire decade, annual
expenditures per nonelderly poor person rose just $93! Such an increase
would hardly be noticed in the poverty statistics. And even that figure
overstates the significance of the increase. Nearly all of the growth
in these programs came in the disability program, which reaches only 2
million persons.

—9--

Programs which provide in—kind benefits, such as Food Stamps,
housing assistance or medical care, did grow considerably over the

1970s. But none of these get counted as income for purposes of defining
poverty. Thus expenditures for these programs wouldn't reduce measured
poverty, though they clearly reduce hardship.
The Food Stamp program comes closest to offering cash assistance,
and benefits from the program should surely be counted as income in

calculating poverty. Unlike almost every other major social program,
food stamps are available to all poor families regardless of their
characteristics. But average benefits are relatively low——less than $40

per month per person. Thus the program would not push very many people
out of poverty even if its benefits were included as measured income.
If food stamps were treated as income in 1982, the number of nonelderly

poor would have fallen fall from 30.6 million to 29.1 million. Housing
Assistance is also available——in 1980, $4 billion was spent on the

nonelderly. There are also a variety of child welfare, child nutrition,
social services, and other programs. We do not have an exact total for
these for the nonelderly, but it is probably between $5 and $10 billion.

Medical care falls into a special category. Persons who are in
single—parent families or who are totally disabled and a few others can
qualify for Medicaid. In 1980 the cost for single parents was $7.5

billion; for the disabled, $7.0 billion. It is less appropriate to
think of medical care in the same way that cash assistance or food

stamps are viewed. The poor never bought much health insurance prior to
the start of the program in 1967 so provision for medical care was not

— 10 —

really counted in determining the poverty level. Care was provided on a
charity basis, in government—financed county hospitals, or it was simply
not provided.

Because none of these in—kind benefits is counted in income, they

cannot reduce statistically measured poverty. But there are indications
that these programs have been at least partially successful in achieving

their specific goals. Life expectancy in the U.S. rose more during the
1970s than during the 1950s and 1960s. Perhaps more significantly, life
expectancy rose more for nonwhites than whites: 4.2 years versus 2.7

years. Similarly, the nonwhite infant mortality rate declined almost
twice

as

much in absolute terms as the white rate. And both caloric

intake and protein consumption of the poor increased relative to the

middle class. "Nutritional inequality" declined noticeably.

Social Insurance Programs

The really large growth in social benefits for the nonelderly came

in

the social insurance programs—the programs for the middle class.

Unemployment

Insurance

(UI), Worker's Compensation (WC), Social Security

Disability (DI), and Medicare for the disabled together cost $52 billion
in 1980, up from $22 billion just a decade before.
These programs are not generally perceived by the public as being

antipoverty programs, and rightly so. Their benefits go largely to the
middle class. Only one—quarter of UI and WC funds go to persons who
would otherwise be poor. Nonetheless, their significance in aiding the
poor should not be understated. For those formerly poor persons lucky

— 11 —

enough to receive UI or WC benefits, three—fourths are pushed out of

poverty by them. Indeed in some respects these programs probably do
more to reduce poverty among the non—elderly than the cash assistance

programs do. If UI and WC did not exist, at least 3 million more non—
elderly people would be poor. (We have no comparable figures for the DI
program.)

So it is not really very surprising that measured poverty hardly

improved during the l970s. The single most important correlate with

poverty—median family income——didn't change. On government's side of
the ledger, expenditures for cash assistance directed to the poor

started small and hardly increased at all. In—kind benefits increased
much more dramatically, but they are not counted in income, so they
couldn't improve measured poverty.
But whether or not government transfers were large enough to have a
really significant effect on poverty, concerns remain that government

may actually be contributing to the poverty problem by discouraging work

and encouraging single—parent family formation. We look at three groups
that enter prominently in any discussion of the disadvantaged in

America. The first two are afforded the bulk of cash assistance——the
disabled and those in single—parent families. For both of these groups,
existing policies have been indicted as having important counter-

productive influences. The third group, black youth, have at times been
cited as associated victims of the current welfare system. In all three
cases, we consider whether or not transfer policies must bear
significant responsibility for the problems faced by the groups.

— 12 —

II. THE DISABLED
The disability insurance (DI) portion of Social Security and
Supplemental Security Income provides benefits for those who are
disabled and poor, grew enormously during the 1970s——both more than

doubled during the decade. The combined cost of social insurance and
cash assistance and in—kind benefits for the disabled totaled nearly $33

billion in 1980. Recently it has been charged that the program has
reduced labor force participation of middle aged men. The charge is
serious, since the program is intended solely for those who cannot work.
The program's growth has indeed coincided with a significant

decrease in labor force participation among men. In 1960, only about 4%
of men aged 45 to 54 were out of the labor force. By 1980, the figure
had reached almost 9%. For black men the increases were even more
dramatic: from 7% up to 16%. Motivated by these statistics, a need to
cut budgets, and a host of anecdotes, the Reagan administration
undertook a major tightening of eligibility rules

under

DI in the early

1980s, cutting several hundred thousand people, and making eligibility
more difficult to obtain. These policy developments coincided with
increasing criticism of the program within some academic circles for

contributing to declining male labor force participation. The argument
was that men who could work have been shifting to Disability Insurance.
Thus Donald Parsons (1980) concluded that the recent increase in
nonparticipation in the labor force of prime—aged men can be largely
explained by the increased generosity of social welfare transfers but
these findings have been disputed by other economists.

— 13 —

One approach to exploring the employability of those who received
disability insurance is to look at the earnings patterns of those who

applied but were denied. Certainly those who were denied assistance are
on average considerably more employable than those granted benefits.
Unfortunately, there are few data from recent years on the subsequent

earnings of those denied disability benefits. However the Social
Security Administration (SSA) has examined the subsequent earnings

experience of those denied benefits in 1967 and 1970. In assessing this
evidence, it is important to recall that the fraction of disability
applicants denied eligibility has risen steadily through time, from 49%

in 1965 to 52% in 1975 to 66% in 1980. Thus rejections are even more
common now than during that study periods.
Yet in the late l960s, virtually all of those who were rejected by

the Disability Insurance program did little work in subsequent years. A
SSA staff paper summarized the 1967 survey results by noting: "A large
proportion of the denied applicants never returned to competitive
employment despite many years of work prior to their disability and an
administrative decision in 1967 that they were still able to do so."
Further, "four—fifths of these claimants who were initially denied in
1967 did not return to sustained competitive employment in the following

five years." (Tretel, 1976, pp.22, 25).

Similar results were obtained

in the 1970 survey.

Preliminary work in Bound (1985) suggests that these basic
conclusions hold even in recent years and even if one looks across the
entire age distribution of persons under 60 applying for disability

— 14 —

benefits. More than half do not return to sustained work. And those
who do return to work suffer earnings loses of nearly 50%.

Since 1970 the DI program has doubled in size. Some of the
increase is undoubtedly due to increased knowlege of the program and
some may

be

due to increased benefit levels and some relaxation in

standards. But even if the program now were taking people equivalent to
the least employable four—fifths of those rejected in 1970, it still
would be taking a group which would have done no sustained work whether

or not they were accepted. And recall that in 1980, prior to the
recently increased restrictions, 66% of applicants were denied entry to
a program that is designed for the totally disabled. Those who apply
are unlikely to be very healthy. The medical costs for the disabled are
very large and they have continued to grow out of proportion to the

number of new beneficiaries or the growth in medical costs. The
disastrous experience with the recent policy experiment of removing
those thought least disabled from the disability rolls would seem to
confirm these inferences.

Diaability progr.s appear to be one eTmple where a carefully
targeted

progra

can give generous benefits without generating large

adverse incentive effects. But the progra succeeds largely because
benefits are based on a relatively objective and difficult to alter set
of physical conditions.

POVERTY AMONG SINGLE MOTHERS

The mounting number of children being raised in single—parent

— 15

—

households is commanding increased national attention. The apparent
"crisis of the family" is noted most acutely with respect to black
households, but the trends seem to extend to all racial and economic

groups. The numbers are stark. By the time today's children turn 18,
some 45% of whites and a remarkable 85% of blacks are expected to have

lived for some part of their life in a single—parent household. At a
minimum those who live in single—parent households face financial

hardship; some worry that there are other consequences as well.
Certainly the most troubling and potentially the most damning
accusation leveled against the current welfare system is the charge that
it encourages the formation and perpetuation of single—parent families.
The specifics of the charges have changed over time, but not the basic

message. Originally, it was suggested that we had developed a welfare
system that rewarded single—parent families by denying benefits to

families with two parents. More recently, in the wake of the negative
income tax experiments, it is alleged that by relieving a family of the
necessity of relying on two parents for income, welfare facilitates
marital disruption.
Figure 3 plots the fraction of all children living in a female—
headed household, the fraction of all children who received AFDC since

1960. The fraction of all children living in a female—headed household
started rising much faster in the late 1960s, at precisely the time when
the number of children on AFDC rose sharply. But then the trends
diverged——dramatically so.

Since 1972, the fraction of all children who were living in a

— 16 —

female—headed household jumped quite dramatically, from 14% to almost

20%. During

that

same period, the fraction of all children who were in

homes collecting A1DC

held

almost constant, at 12%. The figures are

even more dramatic for blacks. Between 1972 and 1980 the number of
black children in female—headed families rose nearly 20%. The number of
black children on A.FDC actually fell by 5%!

If AIDC were pulling families apart and

encouraging

the formation

of single—parent families, it is very hard to understand why

of

children on the program would remain

constant

the

number

throughout the period

in our history when family structures cKnged the most.
These figures are easy to understand in light of the fact that real

AFDC levels fell by almost 30% between 1970 and 1980 in the median
state. Even in some comparatively liberal states, benefits plummeted.
In New York City, benefits dropped 33% in real terms over this period.

Food Stamps mitigated the declines somewhat. But between 1971 and 1983,
combined Food Stamp and AFDC benefits fell by 22% in real terms in the

median state. A smaller and smaller fraction of children in single—
parent families were receiving AFDC for a very simple reason——benefit
levels, and therefore eligibility were being sharply cut back.
Perhaps the impact of AFDC benefits was delayed, or perhaps once a
threshold is reached, people don't react to changes in benefit levels.
These explanations could explain why family structures continued to

change even as benefits fell. But we can think of no story crediting
AFDC with a very large part in inducing changed family structures which
is consistent with a falling absolute number of children on the program.

— 17 —

And what about the sharp rise in the fraction of all black births

to unmarried mothers? The birth rate to unmarried black women YELL 13%

between 1970 and 1980. But the birth rate to married black women fell
even more—by 38%, so the fraction of births to unmarried women rose.
During the same period, the nnaarried birth rate to whites rose by 27%.
It seems difficult to argue that AYDC was a major influence in unmarried

births when there was simultaneously a rise in the birth rate to
unmarried whites and a fall in the rate for blacks.3
Probably the most important lesson of the time—series analysis is
that family structure change just do not seem to mirror benefit level

changes. We have already made rather draconian cuts in benefit levels

and family structure changes haven't slowed appreciably. It seems hard
to believe that further cuts would do much to hold families together.
Yet a second approach fails to find a strong connection between

AFDC and family structure. Benefit levels very widely from state to
state. In Mississippi in 1980, a single—parent family of four could get
a maximum of $120 per month in AFDC benefits, and that amount had been

raised from $60 per month only a few years earlier. In California or
New York, the same family could get $563 in benefits.
The gaps between states are not quite as large as they might seem,
because Food Stamps is a Federal program with uniform benefit levels

nationally. As such it narrows the gaps in benefits between states.
But even including Food Stamps, benefits vary by a factor of two to

three. Food Stamps are available whether or not one is in a single—
parent family, so their impact on family formation choices is unclear.

— 18 —

The obvious test is to compare the fraction of children living in
female—headed households, or the divorce rate or the birth rate to

unmarried women, with benefit levels across states. Figure 4 provides
such a comparison for 1980. There is no obvious relationship between the
fraction of children not living in two parent families and AFDC benefit
levels

across

states. The same holds for almost every other measure of

family structure as well, including divorce rates and, out—of—wedlock

birth rates. More sophisticated regression techniques which control for
differing socio—econowic characteristics across states typically also
show little or no relationship.

Our

conclusion is

that AFDC has far less to do with changes in

than has

family structures

been alleged. We suspect that the changes

are probably better traced to changing attitudes toward welfare and
heightened independence brought about by a host of forces that seemed to

have come to a crescendo in the late sixties. In the black community,
family structure changes may have had more to do with the changing
fortues of black men than the availability of AFIC.

AFDC, Reduced

Unlike the
reductions

Work, and--Dependency

disability program, there are undoubtedly some

in labor supply by female

family heads induced by the current

program. But, studies suggest that AFDC has had a modest effect in
reducing work. Welfare mothers do not seem to be very sensitive to work
incentives. Most recently, changes have been made in the AFDC program
which essentially eliminate all work incentives. After four months,

— 19 —

benefits are reduced at least one dollar for each dollar the woman earns

over $30. Yet there apparently has been little change in the work of
single mothers (see, e.g., Research Triangle Institute, 1983).
But concerns about AFDC run deeper than just a fear that short—term

work incentives are distorted. There is a sense that long—term
dependency has developed, that people have come to rely on it to meet
needs that they could and would meet on their own if they had no

alternative. Except for the case studies of sociologists, we know of no
definitive work on the extent to which pathological dependency exists,
or the role that AFDC has had in creating such dependency.
But there is information on the duration of AFDC receipt which does

shed some light on this issue. The evidence, as analyzed by Bane and
Ellwood (1983) for example, suggests two sides of the AFDC population.

Most people who ever use AFDC stay on the program a relatively short
time.

At least 50% leave within two years, 85% leave within eight.

Most women who ever use AFDC don't seem to get trapped by it. At the
same time, the minority who do stay on a long time accumulate and thus

ultimately receive most of the benefits that are paid out. They also
are a large fraction of people who are on the program at any one point

in time. The 15% of new recipients who stay eight years or more on the
program collect more than 50% of the benefits paid out.

Further,

certain women are at particular risk of long—term dependency. Unmarried
mothers, high school dropouts and nonwhites all tend to have much longer
stays than others.

Thus the program does provide short—term relief to the majority of

— 20 —

the people it touches, but the bulk of its expenditures go to a group

that is in fact dependent on welfare for an extended period. This
dependent group is a legitimate source of concern. There isn't any good
evidence that they are trapped by welfare per se; we only know that they

rely on it for at least part of their support. Such dependence is
easily explained. There are just two routes to self—sufficiency for
single mothers——work and marriage. And both of these can be hampered by
the presence of young children. Still, the fact that many are found in
this state of dependence seems undesirable.

Knowingly or unknowingly we have been engaged in an experiment over
the past 10 years. This experiment has been carried out at the expense

of single mothers and its results can be judged a failure. We have cut
back AFDC benefits considerably. There has been no noticeable effect on
family structure or work. We can be sure the impact on the well—being
of single mothers was noticed by the families. We have also conducted
an experiment in allowing benefits to vary across states for years.

Here, too, there is little evidence that these differences have had any
noticeable effect on work or family structure.

Yet there are sources of concern. There is little evidence that
the current system as configured causes large changes in family

structure. But there is reason to worry that massive widening of
welfare benefits to other groups could have more serious disruptive

effects. The negative income tax experiments suggested that a system
which allowed husband and wife to split up and each collect benefits
independently seemed to increase marital splits among low—income

— 21

—

families by as much as 40% more than was true under the existing system

(Groeneveld et al., 1983). The results of the study, while not
definitive, (splits didn't increase in one site, racial patterns
differed across sites) do serve as a warning that major changes in
incentives could have important consequences, at least for marital
stability.

And dependency is a problem for some AFDC recipients, at least if

dependency is defined as long—term welfare receipt. We find such
dependency troubling, particularly since it seems to be greatest among

groups that have considerable disadvantages to begin with. Our current

welfare policies may have some influence on this dependence. There is a
widespread hope that government could do something to help these women
become self—sufficient.

Yet government has not shown much capacity to improve the situation

very much. We know of no serious policy that encourages family
formation. We have tried various programs that have had some success
(particularly Supported Work) in helping long term recipients and poor

women generally, but gains have been quite modest. While the desire to
pursue ways to improve the ability of single women to support themselves
is widespread; few who have designed these programs have grandiose
expectations.

The peculiar nature of the welfare problem for single mothers is
the fact that society generally recognizes and encourages mothers to
stay home and care for children, but it also sees self—sufficiency as a
virtue and it is increasingly unwilling to accept welfare dependence

— 22 —

among single mothers in the way it accepts it among the disabled. Thus
one cannot have a program of high benefits and no work incentives, as is

offered the disabled. More complex regulations about work and child
care are inevitable given social preferences. Diverse services must be
offered.

Baa Youm UNEMPLOYMENT
By every conceivable measure the labor market situation for young

blacks is bad and getting worse. Figure 5 shows the unemployment rate
among black and white youth aged 16—19 from 1955 to 1980. While the
rate for white youth has been relatively steady throughout the period,
the rate for blacks has risen almost continually, though it was during

the 1970s that the gap really widened. If we look at the sexes
separately, we see similar patterns for young men and women. Things get
somewhat better as the youth age, but the gap between the races has been

widening for those aged 20—24 as well. The magnitude of the problem
cannot be overstated. In 1980, before the recession really hit, among
out—of—school black youth, only one in three had any job.
What's all the more perplexing about this widening gap is the fact
that the changes have come at a time when developments are occurring

that might have been expected to narrow the racial gap. Civil rights
legislation was passed in the l960s which reduced overt discrimination

in the workplace. The educational patterns of the races have been
converging—— similar proportions of blacks and whites now complete high

school. College is almost as common for nonwhites as nonwhites. Blacks
are also narrowing the racial gap in the more highly paid professions.

— 23

—

The fear of many conservatives is that the very social forces which
culminated in the late 1960s, particularly the rise of social welfare
programs, lead to a destruction of traditional values and expectations

that hard work pays off in the long run. We are not competent to judge
the entire sociological impact of public policy generally or to evaluate

changing values in America's ghettos. But we can explore the logic of
an assertion that the expansion of social welfare programs played a

role

major

in the decline of work among black youth.

We will concentrate on employment of black male youth to avoid

problems associated with the childbearing among young women. Is it
plausible that social welfare policies have caused a severe decline in
the work ethic among young black men?
Certainly such policies have not removed incentives to work.
Single men are are eligible for very little in the way of federally—

sponsored welfare benefits. A youth living alone is eligible only for
food stamps. In 1982, his benefits would have been $70 per month,
hardly enough to live on. For the first $85 the youth earns, benefits
are not reduced at all, then for every dollar he earned these benefits

would be reduced by only 25 cents. If he found a full—time minimum wage
job he would have earned $560 per month in gross earnings and at least

$450 net of taxes and expenses. It certainly seems hard to believe that
the Food Stamp program would reduce the financial rewards to work much..
If the youth instead lived at home (as most do), the picture hardly

changes. If he lives in a poor two—parent household, his family is
likely to be collecting food stamps. His presence in the home increases

- 24 -

the monthly stamp allotment by roughly $60 month. This allotment is

diminished by the same formula as above if he works. Contrary to
popular belief, the situation is no different if the youth is in a

single—parent family which collects AFDC. A child 18 years old or over
who is not in school cannot now and never could be counted as a part of

an AFDC unit. That means the family's benefits do not depend on whether
the youth lives with the family or not, and benefits will not be reduced
if he earns more.

Thus it is extremely unlikely that welfare programs have robbed

young black men of an incentive to work with their direct effects. But
there is a broader concern. Perhaps the whole structure of welfare has
created a culture of nonwork and dependence. Such a possibility is very
hard to test, but there are several facts which are hard to explain in

light of such an hypothesis: Employment rates for young men living in
two—parent families are not very different from those of youngsters

living with one parent. In 1975, some 23% of young black men living
with two parents and 21% of those living with one parent had jobs. For
whites, the figures are closer to 50% for both family types.

One would

generally expect to find a difference by family type simply because
youth jobs are typically found through informal networks and one would
anticipate that those in fatherless homes would have less access to such

networks. Moreover, though unemployment does fall among blacks as
family income rises, the differential between whites and blacks is
largely unchanged.

Black youth living in central cities don't seem to fare much vorse

— 25 —

than those living outside the ghettos. According to the 1980 Census,
32% of out—of—school black youth in central cities had jobs whereas 38%

of those living in the suburbs were eployed.4 Siiiilarly only 35% of
out—of—school nonwhites living in nonfarm rural areas were working.
While the figures above differ slightly, they are all vastly lower

than the 62% figure for whites. If black youth unemployment were
concentrated in the ghettos, it would be easier to point to the culture
of poverty hypothesis.

The fact that black/white youth unemployment differentials seem to
persist for all geographic locations, for all family types, and for all
income groups clearly suggests something more fundamental is to blame
than the growth of welfare programs, which amount to less than 1% of
GNP.

Among researchers who have looked at the problem, there is no

consensus about what is happening. Most of the simple theories have
been tried, and they don't account for all of the widening differential

between blacks and whites. There is considerable evidence of a job
shortage for black youth, (see e.g., Clark and Summers, 1981; Freeman,
1980), but such an explanation can be only part of the story.
Macroeconomic conditions did worsen over the 1970s, but not enough to

explain so much of a widening differential. And the racial gap widened
somewhat even during the extraordinarily strong economy of the late

1960s. There are fewer jobs in the ghettos, but nonghetto youth seem to
fare just as badly as ghetto youth (see Ellwood, 1985). Nearly all
researchers agree that the minimum wage lowers black youth employment,

— 26 —

but the differential has continued to widen even during periods when the

minimum wage did not change. Women entered the labor force in large
numbers in the 1970s, but their entrance didn't seem to hurt white

youth. Taken together, the various explanations might explain half or
more of the widening differential, but one gets the sense that something

more fundamental has changed. Moreover, even if one places all the
blame on job shortages, the explanation begs the question of why jobs
are not being offered to young blacks when they are being offered to
young whites.

And just as black youth joblessness defies easy explanation, it

defies easy solution. Most careful experiments have shown disappointing
long—term results. Public service employment increases youth
employment, but when the public jobs end, employment rates seem to fall

back to their previous levels. There just are not any good answers at
the current time.

This is not the appropriate place to discuss what might be done to

help such youth. But one thing is very clear. Expand welfare benefits
to this group, would have large adverse incentive effects. The negative
income tax experiments showed that when income was afforded to youth
aged 16—21, work fell by almost 50% below its already low rate (see

Venti and Wise, 1984). It is hard to imagine a policy with more
deleterious effects on the long—run well—being of black youth.
The employment problems of black youth then cannot be blamed on

current welfare policies. In large part, that is because we have
avoided offering welfare to young people. While there is surely some

— 27 —

financial suffering as a result, the fact that extending benefits to
these persons would so dramatically reduce work is an overriding
consideration.

THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN COMBATING POVERTY

The

analysis

in this paper suggests three main conclusions. First,

growth in the economy is a powerful tool for raising the incomes of the

poor. The problem is that we do not really know how to restore rapid
growth.

Second, government transfer policies do not seem to be responsible
for a large part of the problems of the disadvantaged.
Finally, the fact that the problems of the three groups we
considered are so different and the consequences of aid varied so
greatly argues for a continued reliance on a categorical approach to

offering aid to the disadvantaged. For the disabled, there is little
concern with dependence or work incentives. This allows for liberal
benefits and forces no compromises on work incentive. For single
mothers, the need is quite real, and there is little evidence that we
have been overly generous in our benefits, but there is evidence for

some long—term dependency. Trying to balance the needs of children, the
rights of mothers to care for their children, and the desire of society
(and presumably the mothers themselves) to be self—sufficient suggests

the need for a complex policy aimed at that group. For youth, the
reduced work that would apparently accompany an extension of benefits is

— 28

a crucial factor mitigating against an expansion of welfare in that
direction.

While current welfare programs do not have large incentive
effects, they do funnel a significant amount of money to some poor

people. In this limited sense of redistributing income to those in need
without creating undue economic distortions, current policy is
economically efficient.

More fundamentally, general economic priciples suggest the
desirability of a complex welfare system with different rules for

different groups and partial reliance on in—kind benefits. The basic
problem of welfare policy is to transfer income to those truly in need
without sizeable adverse incentive effects and without diverting

significant resources to those who are not truly in need. Seen in this
light, prominent features of our current welfare system seem easily

explainable. Efficiency in redistribution can be increased if payments
are based on available indicators of true earning power.
Particularly desirable are indicators which are not easily altered,

such as disability, and perhaps family status. Moreover, the use of any
type of assistance which will help the truly poor, but be relatively
unattractive to the nonpoor, will raise the amount that can be

redistributed with a minimum of distortion. This may justify
substantial reliance on some types of in—kind programs. People not in
need are less likely to try to look poor in order to qualify for public

housing than they are to qualify for cash assistance. Some
administrative burdens on welfare recipients might also be defended as

— 29 —

facilitating redistribution by increasing the government's ability to
separate those in serious need.

Current policy may also be defended on philosophical grounds. It
expresses the value society places on self—reliance. We expect those
who can to help themselves. Benefits are provided only to those able to
provide some evidence of their inability to support themselves. Most
Americans regard the reasons for indigency as sharply influencing their

willingness to offer aid. The disabled, single parents, those injured
or laid off from work can offer some evidence that their financial
straits are not caused by an unwillingness to work.
While we see reasons for concern about the effects of reducing
eligibility restrictions, we see little cause for concern about the

effects of raising benefit levels under current programs. Restoring
real AFDC benefits to the levels of a decade ago and reducing or
eliminating regional disparities would do a great deal for people in

need without much disincentive effect on work. Certainly there are
equity considerations which would be served by allowing working poor

families for aid beyond food stamps. But there are strong arguments for
the primary notion of categorical and differential treatment in spite of
the large apparent income inequities it can create.
Regardless of the logic of the present system, the current outlines

seem unlikely to change much in the near future. We do think it's worth
remembering that some of the basis for a categorical approach is that
groups differ both in current need and in prospect of need.
Unfortunately, we have tried massive short—term jobs programs and

—

30 —

discovered once again that the problem is complex. Government does not

appear to have been much of the problem. But it hasn't been much of the
long—term solution either. Yet the occasional successes (such as
Supported Work) offer the hope that programs which are carefully tested

and implemented may offer movement toward self—support. It would be
tragic if narrow budgetary concerns or discouragement about the "poverty

problem" eliminated our experiments with promoting self—support.

— 31 —

Table 1
Costs of Major Public Assistance and Social Insurance Programs
for the Elderly, Totally Disabled, and All Others
(In Billions of Constant 1980 Dollars)

PROGRAMS FOR THE ELDERLY

1960

1970

1980

Social Insurance
Social Security Old Age
and Survivors

$29.2

$60.7

$104.7

Public Employee and
Railroad Retirement

$9.7

$21.9

$44.3

Medicare8

$0.0

$16.8

$29.1

$4.5

$4.0

$2.7

Medicaid8

$0.0

$4.1

$8.7

Food Stamps

$0.0

$0.2

$0.5

Housing1

$0.1

$0.5

$2.5

$1.6

$6.5

$15.4

Cash Aisistance
Supplemental Security Income
(and Old Age Assistance)
In—Kind Benefits

PROGRAMS FOR THE TOTALLY DISABLED

Social

Insurance

Social Security Disabilityc
Medicared

$0.0

$0.0

$4.5

$0.7

$2.1

$5.0

$0.0

$2.2

$7.0

Cash Assistance
Supplemental Security Income
(and Aid to the Disabled)
In—Kind Benefits
Nedicaida

—32—

Table 1 Continued
Costs of Major Public Assistance and Social Insurance Programs
for the Elderly, Totally Disabled, and All Others
(In Billions of Constant 1980 Dollars)

PROGRAMS FOR OTRERS
Social Insurance
Unemployment Insurance

$8.4

$9.3

$18.9

Workmen's Compensation

$3.6

$6.5

$13.6

Aid to Families With
Dependent Children (AFDC)

$2.8

$10.3

$12.5

General Assistance (GA)

$0.9

$1.3

$1.4

Medicajda

$0.0

$3.7

$7.5

Food Stamps

$0.0

$1.1

$8.6

Housingb

$0.4

$1.0

$47

Cash Assistance

In—Kind Benefits

Medicare and Medicaid began in 1966.
Estimated based on fraction of persons receiving housing
assistance who are elderly. (See Bureau of the Census, 1982).
Social
Security Disability Insurance program began in 1956.
d
Medicare was extended to the disabled in 1974.
Sources: Social Security Bulletin. Annual Statistical Supplement
1982. Tables 2, 18, 19, 154, 155, 160, 172, 192, 200.

Statistical Abstract 1984. Tables 640, 643.
Statistical Abstract 1978. Table 549.

—33—

Bibliography

1978. Welfare: The Political Economy of Welfare Reform in the
United States. Stanford, California: Hoover Institution.

Anderscn, ft.

Congressional Budget Office.. 1983. "Major Legislative Changes In Human
Resource Programs since January 1981." Staff memorandum. August.

Danziger, S., R. Haveman and R. Plotrtick. 1981. "How Income Transfer
Programs Affect Work, Savings, and the Income Distribution: A Critical
Review." Journal of Economic Literature. September: 975—1028.

Gottschalk, p. 1984. "Causes o the Recent Increases in Poverty and
Prospects for Future Reductions." Testimony to the U.S. House of
Representatives, Comittee on Ways and Means. 1984.
Gramlich, N. and 0. Laren. "How Widespread are Income Losses in a Recession?"
in U. L. bawden, ed., The Social Contract Revisted. Washington: Urban
Institute Press, 1984: 2U7—252.
Joint Committee on Taxation. U.S. Congress. 1983. Unpublished data.

1974. "What Does It Do For the Poor? A New Test for National
Policy." Public interest, No. 34: 66—22.

Lacnpman, R.

Moon, M. and I. Sawhili. 1984. "Faiily incomes: Gainers and Losers," in
J. Polmer and I. Sawhili, eds.., The Reagan Record. Washington, D.C.:
Urban Institute. Auqust.

Murray, C. l94. Losinq Ground. New York: Basic Books.
Ross, C. 1984. "Trends in Poveety, 1965—1983. Tables from the Current
Population Survey." institute for Research on Poverty. Revised November.
Smee.ing, T. 1933. "ecent licreses in Poverty: What the Official Estimates
Fafl to Show." Testiiony before the U.S. House Ways and Means Committee.
October 18.

l84. "is

the Safety Net Still intact?" in D.C. Bawden, ed., The
________
Ial Contract Revi:ted. Washinnton: Urban Institute Press, 1984:

21.

</ref_section>

