                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TRADE AND THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FROM INTERNATIONAL
                          FREIGHT TRANSPORT

                                          Anca D. Cristea
                                          David Hummels
                                          Laura Puzzello
                                         Misak G. Avetisyan

                                        Working Paper 17117
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17117


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We thank the OECD for funding, Ron Steenblik for suggesting and encouraging the work. We also
thank Bruce Blonigen, Tim Cason, Lata Gangadharan, Tom Hertel, Pete Minor, Paul Raschky, Christis
Tombazos, Terrie Walmsley, and seminar participants at the ASSA meetings 2011, and the International
Workshop on Current Issues in CGE Analysis for suggestions and help. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Anca D. Cristea, David Hummels, Laura Puzzello, and Misak G. Avetisyan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and the Greenhouse Gas Emissions from International Freight Transport
Anca D. Cristea, David Hummels, Laura Puzzello, and Misak G. Avetisyan
NBER Working Paper No. 17117
June 2011
JEL No. F17,F18,Q56

                                               ABSTRACT

We collect extensive data on worldwide trade by transportation mode and use this to provide detailed
comparisons of the greenhouse gas emissions associated with output versus international transportation
of traded goods. International transport is responsible for 33 percent of world-wide trade-related emissions,
and over 75 percent of emissions for major manufacturing categories like machinery, electronics and
transport equipment. US exports intensively make use of air cargo; as a result two-thirds of its export-related
emissions are due to international transport, and US exports by themselves generate a third of transport
emissions worldwide. Inclusion of transport dramatically changes the ranking of countries by emission
intensity. US production emissions per dollar of exports are 16 percent below the world average, but
once we include transport US emissions per dollar exported are 59 percent above the world average.
We use our data to systematically investigate whether trade inclusive of transport can lower emissions.
In one-quarter of cases, the difference in output emissions is more than enough to compensate for
the emissions cost of transport. Finally, we examine how likely patterns of trade growth will affect
modal use and emissions. Full liberalization of tariffs and GDP growth concentrated in China and
India lead to transport emissions growing much faster than the value of trade, due to trade shifting
toward distant trading partners. Emissions growth from growing GDP dwarfs any growth from tariff
liberalization.


Anca D. Cristea                                        Laura Puzzello
University of Oregon                                   Monash University
cristea@uoregon.edu                                    laura.puzzello@monash.edu

David Hummels                                          Misak G. Avetisyan
Krannert School of Management                          3XUGXH8QLYHUVLW\
403 West State Street                                  425 W State Str, KCTR 237
Purdue University                                      West Lafayette, IN 47907-2056
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310                          mavetisy@purdue.edu
and NBER
hummelsd@purdue.edu
                   Trade and the Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
                              International Freight Transport


                               Anca Cristea, University of Oregon
                         David Hummels, Purdue University and NBER
                               Laura Puzzello, Monash University
                        Misak Avetisyan, University of Southern California

                                               May 2011

Abstract: We collect extensive data on worldwide trade by transportation mode and use this to
provide detailed comparisons of the greenhouse gas emissions associated with output versus
international transportation of traded goods. International transport is responsible for 33 percent
of world‐wide trade‐related emissions, and over 75 percent of emissions for major manufacturing
categories like machinery, electronics and transport equipment. US exports intensively make use of
air cargo; as a result two‐thirds of its export‐related emissions are due to international transport,
and US exports by themselves generate a third of transport emissions worldwide. Inclusion of
transport dramatically changes the ranking of countries by emission intensity. US production
emissions per dollar of exports are 16 percent below the world average, but once we include
transport US emissions per dollar exported are 59 percent above the world average. We use our
data to systematically investigate whether trade inclusive of transport can lower emissions. In one‐
quarter of cases, the difference in output emissions is more than enough to compensate for the
emissions cost of transport. Finally, we examine how likely patterns of trade growth will affect
modal use and emissions. Full liberalization of tariffs and GDP growth concentrated in China and
India lead to transport emissions growing much faster than the value of trade, due to trade shifting
toward distant trading partners. Emissions growth from growing GDP dwarfs any growth from
tariff liberalization.


JEL classification: Q56; F18. Keywords: Greenhouse gas emissions; international transport
emissions; world trade growth; international trade by transport mode

Acknowledgements: We thank the OECD for funding, Ron Steenblik for suggesting and encouraging the work.
We also thank Bruce Blonigen, Tim Cason, Lata Gangadharan, Tom Hertel, Pete Minor, Paul Raschky, Christis
Tombazos, Terrie Walmsley, and seminar participants at the ASSA meetings 2011, and the International
Workshop on Current Issues in CGE Analysis for suggestions and help.

E‐mail addresses: cristea@uoregon.edu (A. Cristea); hummelsd@purdue.edu (D. Hummels);
laura.puzzello@monash.edu (L. Puzzello); mavetisy@purdue.edu (M. Avetisyan).

    I.      Introduction

International trade generates greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from two sources: the production of

traded goods, and their transportation between trading partners. A large literature has focused on



                                                                                                            1
the emissions associated with production, examining questions related to how trade may reallocate

production between countries with differing emission intensities, or undermine efforts to control

emissions via “carbon leakage”.1 However, the emissions associated with international

transportation are largely overlooked, both in the text of existing agreements such as the Kyoto

Protocol regulations, and in data collection efforts.2

        Efforts to measure the contribution of international freight transport to GHG emissions have

been limited in scope. The case study based life cycle analyses (LCA) literature typically focuses on

a particular product and geographic market, and assesses the environmental impact of every input

in the production and delivery of that product. For example, Sim et al. (2007) estimate that the

global warming impact of Kenyan and Guatemalan beans shipped to the UK are 20‐26 times larger

than UK production. In contrast, Williams (2007) finds that cut roses air delivered from Kenya to

the UK generate emissions that are significantly lower than roses sourced from the neighboring

Netherlands (Williams, 2007). While LCA studies provide detailed calculations of transport

emissions for a particular product and trade flow, they are not informative for the world trading

system as a whole.3 More generally, we lack data sources that attribute international transport

emissions to origin and destination countries. As a consequence, there is little systematic

information regarding the magnitude of transportation emissions relative to production, and how

they are distributed across trade flows.



1 Examples include Ederington and Minier (2003), Babiker (2005), Levinson (2009), Levinson and Taylor
(2008) among others. See also Copeland and Taylor (2004) for a comprehensive literature survey.
2 van Veen‐Groot and Nijkamp (1999) argue that the key research focus in advancing the investigation on the

environmental effects of international trade should be on “building up a monitoring system and database” to
facilitate “measuring the environmental effects of international transport”. For a discussion of the challenges
in measurement and the omission of international transport from policy protocols see Olivier and Peters
(1999), Miljøstyrelsen Miljøministeriet (2003) – the Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Danish
Ministry for the Environment, as well as the Transportation Research Board, 2009.
3
  A few recent papers employ input‐output tables to measure international trade emissions, and attempt to
incorporate international transport emissions into the calculation (Grether et al., 2010; Peters and Hertwich,
2008; Cadarso et al., 2010). However, data on the modes of transport by which goods travel is not readily
available at a global scale, so these papers either restrict their attention to a single importing country or they
base their calculations on entirely imputed data.


                                                                                                                 2
        How important are international transport emissions relative to emissions from the output

of traded goods? The International Transport Forum (ITF 2010) provides aggregate transport

emissions data for international aviation and maritime transport by combining data on fuel

consumption from the International Energy Agency (IEA 2010), along with information on GHG

emissions by fuel type. Table 1 provides the ITF estimates along with additional calculations by the

authors. From 1990‐2004, international transport emissions rose slightly faster than total

emissions or emissions from all transport. Focusing on 2004, international maritime plus

international aviation transportation was responsible for just 3.5 percent of total emissions. This

seems small, but total emissions include many activities (e.g., residential energy usage, domestic

transportation), which are not directly related to trade or the output of tradable goods. The IEA

estimates that industrial production represents only a fifth of worldwide emissions, and most

industrial output emissions are unrelated to trade – e.g., if a quarter of steel output is traded then

three quarters of the output emissions from steel correspond to domestic consumption. This

suggests that international transport measured as a share of trade‐related emissions (which we

define as emissions generated by the production and transport of exported goods) could be

substantial, but careful measurement is needed.

        By measuring actual fuel use the ITF “top‐down” approach is an accurate way to assess

worldwide aviation and maritime emissions in a particular year. However, the ITF approach has

two key drawbacks. First, road and rail transport represent a significant fraction of international

trade for land‐adjacent partners but their emissions are omitted from the ITF numbers because

international and domestic fuel usage is indistinguishable. This is especially problematic because

road and rail transport is a rising share of world trade as regional trade liberalization, especially in

North America and Europe, concentrated trade growth between partner countries sharing land

borders. Road and rail growth is omitted from ITF emission numbers, which raises the question of

whether the sharp decline in emissions per dollar of trade shown in Table 1 is real or spurious.



                                                                                                           3
The second drawback is that one cannot use the aggregate ITF numbers to assess where or how

maritime or aviation fuel was used. Even if one were to track fuel loaded to individual ports this

would be of limited use as ships and planes refueling in a particular port could be carrying cargo of

any type between any country pair in the world. Without knowing where fuel is used we cannot

evaluate the total emissions associated with a particular trade flow (i.e., a specific product traded

between a country pair). Nor can we estimate whether emissions will rise faster or slower than

overall trade growth, or understand which trade flows would be most affected by efforts to mitigate

emissions.

        Complicating matters further, the contribution of transport to trade‐related emissions can

differ dramatically across trade flows. Standard analyses in the trade literature focus on trade

value, while ignoring the weight of trade and how goods move. But emissions depend on the mode

employed and weight, not value, transported. One million dollars of coal is vastly heavier than a

million dollars of microchips, with correspondingly larger transport emissions. Trucks, rail,

airplanes and ships have significantly different GHG emissions and modal use varies widely across

trade flows. One kilogram of cargo flown one kilometer on a plane generates between 50 and 200

times the emissions of that same kg‐km on a bulk cargo carrier. The product and partner

composition of trade has a first‐order impact on the types of transportation employed, and on the

associated GHG emissions. As a consequence, we learn little from the aggregate incidence of

transport emissions that can be directly applied to particular trade flows.

        The purpose of this paper is to provide two exercises, both of which are novel in the

literature. In the first we build an extensive database on output and transport emissions associated

with every origin‐destination‐product trade flow worldwide in a base year 2004. We employ this

database to quantify the contribution of international transport to total emissions, and to highlight

systematic patterns of transport emission intensities across products and trade pairs. In the second

exercise, we calculate the emissions growth due to a simulated change in global trade arising from



                                                                                                        4
tariff liberalization and unevenly distributed GDP growth. In analyzing the simulated changes in

overall GHG emissions, we distinguish between scale (i.e., changes in the derived demand for

international transport services) and composition effects (i.e., changes in the relative use of

transport modes of varying emission intensities).4

        We begin by combining trade and emissions data by mode in order to provide a full

accounting of the emissions associated with international transportation for each individual trade

flow. This “bottom‐up” accounting of emissions yields aggregate worldwide emissions that are

remarkably close to matching the “top‐down” accounting provided by the ITF 2010. Unlike the ITF

aggregate data, these emissions numbers are specific to each origin‐product‐industrial sector. This

allows us to calculate the emissions associated with a dollar of trade and decompose it into a

production and a transport component.

        We next describe the importance of transport relative to production emissions for specific

trade flows, and show which trade flows are especially emissions intensive once both components

are taken into account. World‐wide, 33 percent of trade‐related emissions come from international

transport, though this number is considerably higher in the manufacturing sectors: 80 percent of

trade‐related emissions in machinery exports come from international transportation. There is

also wide variation across countries in the contribution of transport to trade‐related emissions. At

the low end, only 14 percent of Indian and Chinese export emissions come from transport, while

transport is responsible for 66 percent of US export emissions due to substantial use of air cargo.

The magnitude of transport’s contribution to total emissions suggests that policies designed to

mitigate carbon output must take international transport into account and further, that the design

of such policies could have pronounced distributional effects. For example, the US is responsible

for one third of transport emissions but only 12 percent of output emissions. And while US imports

4 In our simulation exercises, the technique effect (i.e., changes in the emission intensity of transport services)

is held constant at the base year level. Notice that while several studies have decomposed the overall change
in production emissions into scale, composition and technique effects (see for example Levinson, 2009;
Grether et al., 2010), our focus in this paper is on trade‐related emissions.


                                                                                                                 5
and exports are very similar in terms of the emission intensities of production, once we include

transport, its exports have double the emission intensity. Whether transport emissions are

allocated to the exporter or the importer thus becomes a significant issue for welfare analysis.

Rising trade induces emission changes by boosting transport emissions, and by reallocating

production toward countries with different production emission intensities. By characterizing both

production and transport emissions from trade flows we can address systematically the questions

answered previously using case studies, namely, does consuming foreign goods raise or lower GHG

emissions once international transport is accounted for? We examine a set of “partial equilibrium”

reallocations in which a country lowers its own production and instead buys the good from abroad.

Just over a quarter of changes in specialization would lead to a reduction in emissions, with much

higher numbers in resource‐based industries and in the developing world.5

           These partial equilibrium reallocations are meant to be illustrative. They do not

contemplate whether the reallocation is feasible, what kinds of shocks would induce it, or what

possible general equilibrium effects might exacerbate or attenuate the change. To consider these

issues we next simulate the level and composition of trade growth in four scenarios related to trade

liberalization and a fifth scenario examining differential changes in country GDP growth rates

through the year 2020. Trade liberalization and output growth are likely to lead not only to growth

in the quantity of trade but also to changes in its product and country‐pair composition. The

question is then whether growth will occur in high or low emissions categories, and whether

transport emissions are likely to grow more rapidly than output emissions. Combining simulated

output and trade changes with our emissions data we can then calculate the predicted growth in

emissions from trade.

Our findings are as follows. Trade liberalization scenarios currently contemplated under the Doha

WTO round generate very small changes in output, exports, and GHG emissions. Full liberalization


5   These emission‐reducing trade pairs are non‐trivial, corresponding to 31 percent of global trade by value.


                                                                                                                 6
results in a 6 percent increase in trade, concentrated in those products that are subject to the

highest rates of protection. More importantly, liberalization eliminates tariff preferences enjoyed

primarily by nearby trading partners (e.g., NAFTA and the EU). Trade shifts away from proximate

partners and toward distant partners who cannot be reached by land transport. Use of air cargo

rises, and with it, GHG emission rise 23‐42 percent faster than trade.

In contrast to the modest effects from tariff liberalization, projected output growth (a 75 percent

increase in gross world product by 2020) leads to profound changes in trade and emissions.

Exports rise at 3.8 percent per year, 80 percent cumulatively, while transport services (kg‐km) rise

173 percent cumulatively as trade shifts to distant but rapidly growing China and India. Transport

emissions grow faster than trade by value and faster than output emissions, with especially rapid

growth in maritime emissions.

         The paper proceeds as follows. Section Two describes the methodology and Section Three

describes the construction of the main data components for our exercises. Section Four provides

evidence on current contribution of international transportation to GHG emissions from

international trade. Section Five provides simulations of trade growth, and calculates how this

growth would affect modal use and emissions. Section Six concludes.



   II.       Methodology: Base Year Emissions

The International Transport Forum (ITF 2010) uses data on fuel consumption to calculate

emissions associated with international transport. As discussed in the introduction, this “top‐

down” approach provides accurate measures of worldwide emissions, but has a number of

significant drawbacks because it cannot assign emissions to particular trade flows. We use a

“bottom‐up” approach in which we construct the emissions associated with a trade flow by

calculating the quantity of transportation services for that flow provided by each transportation

mode, and multiplying by emissions per unit of transportation services.



                                                                                                      7
         Denote Eodg
                 T
                     as the GHG emissions6 associated with transporting good g from origin o to

destination d. VAL is the value of that flow, and WV is the weight to value ratio so that VALodg * WVog

is the quantity of the flow in kilograms. A country pair may ship product g using multiple

transportation modes. The quantity share of mode m in that flow is QSodg
                                                                     m
                                                                         , so VALodg *WVog * QS odg
                                                                                                m




gives the quantity of the flow for each mode, in kg. Multiplying by DISTodm the distance traveled

from o to d for mode m gives us a measure of transportation services, for each mode, measured in a

common unit (one kg of cargo moved one kilometer). Finally, multiplying by e m , the GHG

emissions produced by mode m when providing one kg‐km of transportation services, and

summing over all modes yields the total emissions associated with that trade flow.

(1)        T
          Eodg   m VALodg * WVog * QS odg
                                        m
                                            * DISTodm * e m

This bottom up approach has a few limitations owing to data availability. This formulation imposes

a constraint that emissions for a given mode are common to all products and country pairs and are

linear in weight and distance. As such it masks two potentially important sources of heterogeneity.

One, some trade flows may employ older, smaller ships and planes with higher emissions per kg‐km

of transportation services. We partially adjust for this problem in the data by allowing for multiple

types of ocean vessels that are specific to certain cargos, and by experimenting with aviation

emissions data that reflect the most efficient planes versus those in use in existing fleets. Two,

there are emissions associated with “fixed costs” of transport, incurred independent of distance

traveled, including port time for ships and higher landing/take off emissions for planes. We

provide calculations to suggest that these problems, while significant at very short distances,

become insignificant at the international distances seen in the data.

         An additional limitation relates to emissions from domestic transport linked to trade. All

production requires domestic transport, and we capture this input and its associated emissions as


6“GHG   emissions” refer to both CO2 and non‐CO2 emissions, represented as CO2 equivalents.


                                                                                                      8
part of output emissions. If production for external trade uses domestic transport to the same

extent as production for domestic use, then we capture domestic transport emissions accurately.

However, in some instances external trade may require movement of goods over great internal

distances, while in others (production near borders, or near air or seaports) external trade may

employ very little domestic transport. This may result in under‐ or over‐counting trade‐related

emissions, but we have no clear indication if there is a bias or which way it runs. Note that this is

fundamentally similar to any case in which a heterogeneous production technology is characterized

by an aggregate technology.

          Starting from equation (1), we can provide a number of comparisons and calculations.

Trade flows are most commonly reported in value terms. Pulling the value of the trade flow out of

this summation we can decompose the quantity of transportation emissions from the flow into a

scale measure and an intensity measure

(2)
           T
          Eodg  VALodg * eodg
                           T            T
                                 where eodg   mWVog * QSodg
                                                          m
                                                              * DISTodm * em

Using this basic decomposition we can compare the transport emissions from exports across

countries. Summing over importers and products, an exporter o’s emissions are

(3)       EoT  VALo * eoT  VALo *  dg sodg * eodg
                                                 T




where sodg is the share of destination d, good g in total trade for origin o. Transport emissions

depend on the scale of trade and the transport emission intensity of a dollar of trade. The latter is a

trade‐weighted average of emissions from individual flows. If an exporter engages in trade with

more distant partners, trades heavier goods, or uses aviation more than maritime transport it will

have a higher aggregate transport emission intensity. We can provide similar aggregations by

importers (aggregating over exporters and products) or by products (aggregating over country

pairs).




                                                                                                        9
        We can also use this decomposition to compare the emission intensity of trade arising from

two distinct sources: production of traded goods and transport of traded goods. Begin by writing

the emissions from output of good (or service) g in country o as the product of output (in dollars)

and emissions per dollar of output,

(4)          Y
            Eog  Yog * eog
                         Y




so that aggregate emissions in a country are an output weighted average of emissions for each

activity.

EoY  Yo *  sg * eog
                   Y
                 g


Aggregating again over all countries yields worldwide emissions, similar to that found in Table 1.

If we instead measure both output and transport emissions as an intensity (i.e., CO2 equivalents per

dollar), we can calculate the contribution of each emission component to the total emission

associated with a particular trade flow. For any particular o‐d‐g flow we have:

(5)         Eodg   eodg
                      T
                           eog
                             Y
                                 *VALodg
This representation is also convenient as it allows for an immediate calculation of the tariff

equivalent of policies designed to reduce total trade‐related emissions. Suppose a trade flow

produces 200 grams of CO2 equivalent emissions per dollar of trade, and faces a carbon tax of $50

per ton. The carbon tax raises the cost of that trade flow by one percent, and so is equivalent to a

1% tariff.

       Much of our analysis will consist of a few basic but informative calculations. We will

compare the magnitudes of eodg
                           T      Y
                               , eog for particular trade flows, and in the aggregate for different

regions. We will also analyze whether moving output from a high emission to a low emission

producer induces emission changes that are large or small relative to reallocating trade across

partners from high transport emission trade flow to a low transport emission trade flow.




                                                                                                       10
   III.      Data

In this section we describe the main data components necessary to describe GHG emissions from

output and international transportation in the base year. These data components are: the weight,

value, and modal shares of trade for each bilateral pair and product; the GHG emission intensity for

each transportation mode; and GHG emissions associated with output for each producer x sector.

Given the improvement in quality and coverage that these new sources of data provide, and their

likely use in future research on transport and trade‐related emissions, we devote much attention to

document the construction of the dataset.

   A.        Aggregation

These disparate data components must fit together precisely, using the same level of regional and

product aggregation. In this we are most constrained by the data available for output emissions,

which we take from the database underlying version 7 of the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP)

model. The GTAP database is ideal for our purposes because it contains detailed information on

energy usage and GHG emissions by origin country and sector, and because we can use the GTAP

computable general equilibrium model in the final section of the paper for performing trade

liberalization and output growth simulations.

          At its maximum disaggregation, GTAP 7 allows one to model production and trade for 57

traded and non‐traded sectors between 113 countries. While it is not computationally feasible to

run trade experiments with the full 113 country x 57 sector version of the model, GTAP allows for

flexible aggregation across regions and sectors in order to examine certain especially interesting

subsets of the whole dataset. For current purposes, we employ an aggregation of the model with 40

regions (i.e. ,1600 bilateral pairs), and 23 traded goods and 6 non‐traded goods sectors, the detailed

listing of which is reported in Appendix 1.

          This particular aggregation scheme was chosen to serve two purposes. One, countries and

sectors with “similar” transportation characteristics are aggregated together. For example, all sub‐



                                                                                                     11
categories of bulk agriculture, which primarily uses maritime transport, are aggregated into one

category while sub‐categories of processed agriculture, which is more likely to employ air

transport, are aggregated into a second category. Two, we employ country level aggregation in

cases where we have detailed weight/value and transportation mode data, and broader geographic

aggregation for regions where these data are lacking. For example, we represent the Middle East

and Africa in only 3 aggregated regions, while Europe is represented with 15 individual countries

and 3 aggregated regions. This allows us to minimize the amount of imputation that must be

employed to complete the database.

    B. Trade and Output in the Base Year: Weight/Value, and Modal Shares

Recalling equation (1), we need data on the value of trade, the weight/value ratio, and the quantity

shares of each mode.

        Our base dataset for the value of output and trade comes from the GTAP 7 database,

aggregated to 40 regions and 29 sectors (23 traded) in 2004. By multiplying values in dollars by a

weight/value ratio (kg/dollar) that is specific to each origin x sector, we convert these value of

trade numbers into kilograms. This physical unit of measurement is consistent across countries

and products, is meaningful from a transportation perspective, and can be used directly to calculate

GHG emissions from transport.

        To construct WVog we draw on three primary data sources that report trade by value and

weight at the 6 digit level of the Harmonized system (roughly 5000 products). These are: US

Imports and Exports of Merchandise; Eurostats Trade (covering the imports and exports of 27 EU

countries)7, and the ALADI trade database, covering the imports of 11 Latin American countries

(Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and




7Data on trade outside the EU by transport mode are available at the HS6 level. Data on exports from EU15
to EU25 countries (excluding Bulgaria and Romania) by transport mode are reported at the 3 digit level of the
NSTR and were compiled on special request by statisticians at Eurostats.


                                                                                                          12
Venezuela) from all exporters worldwide. The bilateral pair coverage represented by these three

datasets is displayed in Appendix 2.

        It is necessary to concord the HS6 data to the 23 merchandise trade sectors used in our

aggregation of the GTAP model. This means that for each importer and exporter there may be

several hundred HS codes corresponding to a single GTAP sector such as "electronic equipment".

To arrive at a weight/value ratio for each exporter and product, we separately sum the weight of

trade and the value of trade and express them as a ratio. This is equivalent to a share‐weighted

average of the weight/value ratio for each HS6 product traded by that exporter.8

For reference we report data by commodity in Appendix Table A1. This includes initial tariff rates

and weight/value ratios (each expressed as a trade‐weighted average over all country pairs), along

with the share of each commodity in world output, world trade by value, and world trade by

transportation services units (kg‐km). Of interest, some of the goods that represent a larger value

share in trade (electronic equipment and machinery) represent a significantly smaller share in

transportation services. This reflects large differences in weight/value between these

manufactured goods and heavy products such as bulk agriculture, minerals, and oil.

        The data for modal shares, QSodg
                                     m
                                         , come from the same three sources as the weight/value

data described above. Each of those datasets contains information on the weight and value of trade

by origin‐destination‐product and transport mode. The US data split trade into air and ocean

modes, but has no modal information on overland transport from Mexico and Canada. To

disaggregate these flows into truck and rail we use supplementary data from the Transborder




8 We do not employ weight/value ratios that vary across importers because we do not have weight data for

every o‐d‐g triplet in the data. Apart from the o‐d pairs with no data, the weight field is missing from roughly
20 percent of EU observations, though these tends to be relatively small value flows and unrelated to modal
use. In general, because aggregating over importers for a given exporter and product reduces measurement
error in the more noisy weight data.


                                                                                                              13
Surface Freight Data.9 The EU and ALADI datasets report trade by air, ocean, rail, and truck modes.

Modal use for the US, ALADI, and EU trade with non‐EU partners are measured at the HS6 level.

Intra‐EU trade is measured at the NSTR 3 digit level. To construct modal quantity shares, we first

concord the HS6 (or NSTR3) product codes to GTAP sector groupings, and aggregate so that we

have the weight of trade for each mode within each o‐d‐g triplet.

        For 35 percent of world trade by value we have no direct data on modal use. In these cases

we estimate modal shares as a function of geography, country, and product characteristics basing

our estimation sample on those country pairs that do report modal data. These regressions have

good explanatory power, especially in the vast majority (all but 2 percent) of the remaining cases

where land transport is not an option. Details are provided in Appendix 2.

The results of our data collection generate a full matrix of modal shares for each origin‐destination‐

GTAP sector by value, weight, and transportation service units (kg‐km). Table 2 provides modal

shares for the imports and exports of each continent, by trade value and KG‐KM. Appendix Table

A2 reports the numbers by traded sectors.

        A few things are notable. There are large differences across regions in the value shares of

the transportation modes that largely reflect geography. For example, North America and Europe,

with important land‐adjacent trade partners, rely much more heavily on road transport.10

Substitution between air and ocean cargo is especially important as it reflects the largest gap in

emission intensities. Worldwide 18 percent of trade by value is air‐borne, with much higher ratios

in North American and East Asian exports. Excluding land‐based modes, air transport represents



9 The TBSF data have rail v. road splits at the HS2 level. We take each land‐based trade flow from the more

disaggregated HS 6 data and divide it using the splits found in the corresponding HS 2 data. We then
aggregate to the broader 23 sectors found in the GTAP data.
10 Most of Asia has very small shares of land transport because the largest trading partners are separated by

(short) stretches of ocean. South America, for which land transport is actually an option has rather low land
transport shares, probably because economic activity is concentrated on coasts rather than in the interiors
close to land borders. When we disaggregate to the country level there are more dramatic differences.
Europe as a whole has very high shares of rail and road transport, except for countries like the UK, Ireland,
and Finland.


                                                                                                            14
48 percent of international (air + ocean) cargo for North American exports and 27 percent for

European and Asian exports.

        It is also instructive to contrast the value of trade with the transportation services (KG‐KM)

employed by trade. Here, sea transport dominates with 95 percent of transportation services

provided. Products that are heavy, and that are transported long distances, are much more likely to

be sea‐borne. The largest difference relative to value shares comes in the use of road‐based

transport: while it represents nearly half of European imports by value it is only 5 percent of

European imports by KG‐KM. Road transport constitutes a large share of value and weight moved

in European trade; however it is concentrated in the trade of proximate partners. As a result, road

transport represents a very small share of kilogram‐kilometers shipped.

     C. Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Transport Mode

We draw on data from several studies to calculate emissions per kg‐km of cargo moved by each of

the four transport modes: ocean, air, rail, and road. These sources, and data on emissions, are

reported in Table 3. We briefly remark on the data for maritime and aviation emissions here.

The most recent and comprehensive study for maritime transport comes from "Ship Emissions

Study", National Technical University of Athens Laboratory for Maritime Transport (2008). It

reports emissions in grams of CO2 per tonne‐km shipped for many distinct ship types, as well as

variability across vessels of different sizes within each type. 11 In Table 3, we reproduce the fleet

averages for six ship types, and note the ship types employed for each traded goods sector in our

model. While other studies lack the detailed data by ship type reported in that study, those studies

(Kristensen 2006, Giannouli and Mellios, 2005) that provide data for containerized cargo arrive at

similar emission numbers.

11In general, CO2 emissions per tonne‐km shipped are much lower for larger vessels within each type. For
example, post‐Panamax (> 4400 TEU) containerships produce 1/3 the emissions of a less than 500 TEU
feeder ship. Because we have no data on the ship size composition of flows, we employ fleet averages for
each fleet type. The study also provides data for highly specialized ship types such as Reefers and Ro‐Ros.
We do not employ this data as our broader trade aggregates contain a mix of goods that would employ these
specialized types as a small subset of goods that generally employ container vessels.


                                                                                                         15
In searching the literature we found few estimates of emissions associated with air cargo. These

arrive at widely varying estimates of emissions per tonne‐km, and provide little detail on

methodology. For example, a Maersk 2007 pamphlet cited in the University of Athens (2008) study

reports that a Boeing 747‐400 emits 552 grams of CO2 per tonne‐km shipped. A California Climate

Change pamphlet for 2006 reports emissions per tonne‐km shipped ranging from 476‐1020 grams

of CO2.

          Given this wide range, we attempted our own calculations based on fuel usage and fleet

characteristics. The Air Transport Association of America reports fleet wide fuel usage and ton‐

miles of cargo shipped for US cargo airlines. Using these totals we calculate that US cargo airlines

used 163.6 gallons of jet fuel per thousand ton‐miles shipped. Converting gallons of jet fuel into

grams of CO2 and cargos into tonne‐km, we calculate CO2 emissions of 963.5 grams of CO2 per

tonne‐km.

          We also attempted to construct an independent estimate of CO2 emissions associated with

air cargo using data taken from Aircraft Economics, 1999, “Freighter Cost Comparisons”. This

source provides data for 14 major cargo plane types including total fuel use, revenue ton‐miles

flown, and share in the fleet. Combining fuel use, emissions per gallon of jet fuel, and ton‐km flown

it is possible to construct a measure of average CO2 emissions per tonne‐km flown. The numbers

range from 493 to 1834, depending on the plane type and how it was used (i.e. for short v. long haul

cargo carriage). For comparison, applying this method to the Boeing 747 yields emissions of 700

grams of CO2 per tonne‐km, which is close to the Maersk study. Taking a weighted average of

these emission numbers over the fleet shares reported, we arrive at average emission rate of 972

grams. Finally, if we update the fleet composition using 2008 shares (from ATA) we arrive at

average emissions of 912.1 grams.

          In the calculations that follow we employ 552 g/t‐km as a “LOW” emissions value for

aviation. This corresponds to use of the most efficient aircraft on the longest flights. We use 950



                                                                                                       16
g/t‐km as a “HIGH” emissions scenario, and it corresponds to a use of a mixed fleet of smaller

planes on shorter flights.

     To amplify this last point, landing/take off (LTO) requires high fuel use relative to cruising, but

this effect is most pronounced at short distances. We collected detailed data from EEA Emission

Inventory Guidebook 2007 on fuel usage on LTO and cruise for a variety of planes and calculated

emissions per ton‐km for various trip lengths to see how this would affect our calculations. For

example, a 747‐400 with a 60% load factor on a 1852 km flight emits 556 g/t‐km (close to our LOW

scenario), while that same plane and load factor emits 912 g/t‐km on a 463 km flight. This

represents an important diseconomy of scale for much shorter flights of the kind one would see

with domestic US cargo usage. However, once one gets to flights of international distances, the

effects become muted. At 463 km, LTO fuel represents nearly 55% of total fuel use, dropping below

5% for distances above 6000 km. The median travel distance in our data is 8000 km.

        The final component we need to calculate transport emissions is distance traveled. For rail,

road, and air transport we rely on the simple distances reported by the CEPII.12 Bilateral distances

between country pairs are calculated following the great circle formula, which uses latitudes and

longitudes of the most important city in each country.13 For ocean transport direct line distances

significantly understate actual distances traveled. Containerships rarely travel point to point

between importer and exporter and frequently stop at multiple ports of call en route. We draw on a

dataset of actual ship itineraries from Hummels and Schaur (2011) that allow us to calculate actual

distances traveled due to these indirect routings.

     D. Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Output

The GTAP 7 database provides data on GHG emissions produced by each sector g in each country o,

 Y
Eog in equation (4). We briefly summarize how these data were constructed, and direct readers to


12The CEPII dataset is available for download at http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm.
13For aggregation at the regional level we weighted each constituent country’s distance by its GDP share in
the region’s GDP.


                                                                                                              17
more detailed discussions available from Lee (2008) and Rose et al (2010). For each o‐g pair, the

database contains information on use of six energy inputs (coal, oil, gas, petroleum products,

electricity, and gas distribution). Energy use differs across countries and sectors as a function of

the energy intensity of production, the efficiency with which energy is used, and the availability of

energy inputs in the respective country. Using a standard formulation provided by IPCC (1997)

guidelines, the quantity of energy inputs is then converted into CO2 emissions. Finally, these data

are supplemented by calculating non‐CO2 greenhouse gases emitted as a by‐product of production

(primarily in agriculture). These are converted into CO2 equivalents based on their global warming

potentials, following the methodology in USEPA (2006).

         Combining these data we have total GHG emissions for each country o and sector g. To

provide comparisons to our transportation emissions, we describe these as emission intensities per

dollar of output eog
                  Y
                     by dividing total emissions for o‐g by the market value of output.




   IV.       Transport and Output Emissions in the Base Year

In this section we provide three main exercises. First, we compare our “bottom‐up” approach to

calculating international transport emissions to the ITF “top‐down” approach as a methodological

check. Second, we compare transport to output emissions for a given trade flow to gauge the

importance of transport emissions in trade. Third, we use the transport and output data in

combination to consider whether some partial equilibrium changes in the pattern of specialization

and trade will yield rising or falling GHG emissions.

   A. Aggregate Emissions from International Transport: Comparing Methodologies

Our “bottom‐up” approach to emissions calculates the quantity of transportation services (KG‐KM)

performed by each mode in each origin‐destination‐product trade flow, and then multiplies by

emissions per KG‐KM for each mode. This yields transportation emissions that are specific to

nearly 36,000 individual trade flows. Summing over all trade flows we have an alternative estimate



                                                                                                       18
of total CO2 emissions from international transport. How does this bottom up approach compare to

the top down ITF (2010) approach based on worldwide fuel usage? The answer is: surprisingly

well. In 2004, the ITF calculates that international aviation and maritime transport was responsible

for 910 million tons of CO2 production, 520 from maritime and 390 from aviation. We calculate

522 million tons of maritime emissions. When we employ the LOW emissions intensity we

calculate aviation emissions of 419 (and a total of 941 million tons) in 2004.14 Accordingly, we will

focus most of our subsequent calculations on the LOW aviation emissions scenario. While there are

large methodological differences between our approach and the ITF, we match emission aggregates

quite closely. This gives us confidence that our estimates for disaggregated flows will also be

informative.

          Using our more comprehensive emissions data we calculate that total international

transport emissions are 1205 million tons in 2004. Measured relative to the value of world trade,

international transport emits 146 grams per dollar of trade, while output of traded goods generates

300 grams per dollar of trade. That is, total trade‐related emissions are 446 grams per dollar, of

which 33 percent come from international transport. For perspective, a $50 per ton carbon tax

applied to the average international transport emissions would be equivalent to a 0.73 percent

tariff.

          Our calculation of 1200 million tons of CO2 equivalent contrasts with the 910 million tons

calculated by the ITF. By omitting road and rail, the ITF calculation misses 28 percent of

international transport emissions. This may help to explain a curious pattern in Table 1. Using the

ITF emission numbers we see that international (maritime plus aviation) transport emissions per

dollar of world trade dropped sharply from 159 g/$ in 1990 to 93 g/$ in 2004. Why did trade

14 Note that the HIGH aviation intensity, based on the current composition of the US air cargo fleet, yields

aviation emissions of 721 million tons, much higher than the ITF values. There are two possible explanations
here. One, the ITF separates fuel use into domestic and international usage. If some international fuel use
were inaccurately recorded as domestic usage, they would under‐estimate emissions. Two, it may be that the
composition of the US air cargo fleet, including smaller planes and shorter routes than are typically found in
international aviation, may overstate emissions.


                                                                                                           19
appear to become less emission intensive from 1990‐2004? The key is that land‐based trade,

omitted from the ITF emission values, interacts in an interesting way with the structure of

protection. In this period trade grew especially fast with land‐adjacent partners,15 promoted by

policy measures that offer preferential tariff rates, investment rules, regulatory harmonization and

currency union with those close partners. Table 2 shows that international road and rail are

responsible for nearly a third of world‐trade by value – half of intra‐European trade by value is land

based.

         Note, however, that this pattern need not persist. Were trade liberalization at the

multilateral level to erode preferential tariff rates, or were output to grow more rapidly outside of

North America and Europe, trade would likely shift towards distant partners. We revisit this point

in Section Five.

    B. Emissions from Trade: Comparing Output and International Transportation

We begin by comparing trade‐related emissions from output of traded goods and international

transport at the level of 35,880 individual trade flows (that is, 40 exporters x 39 importers x 23

traded goods sectors). We plot the distribution of emission intensities as CO2 grams per dollar of

trade in Figure 1. Output and transport emissions are similarly distributed because they have

similar medians (transport ‐ 120 g/$, output ‐ 137 g/$) and are highly correlated at the level of

individual trade flows.16

         There is a wide variance in both transport and output emissions, ranging from close to zero

grams of carbon per dollar to well over 2 kg of CO2. This variance is notable because the average


15 This pattern, in sharp contrast to the conventional wisdom pointing to the “death of distance” has been

pointed out by several authors looking at the effect of distance variables in gravity regressions (Disidier and
Head, 2008; Berthelon and Freund 2008), and others who have noted the remarkably large effect of NAFTA
and EU liberalization policies on trade within those regions.
16 Trade flows with high output emissions also have high transport emissions, and this is true whether we

look at total emissions or emissions intensities. A regression of transport emission intensities on output
emission intensities for the exporter yields an elasticity of 0.26 and an R2=0.10. A regression of total
emissions from transport on total output emissions yields an elasticity of 0.76 and an R2=0.73.



                                                                                                              20
value of 145 grams/$ for transport as a whole is driven by a concentration of trade in o‐d‐g flows

with very low emission intensities. There are many flows with much higher emissions, and carbon

taxation would have a pronounced effect on these goods. For comparison, the world‐wide average

tariff rate in our data is 3.2 percent, which is equivalent to a carbon tax of $50 applied to a trade

flow with transport emissions of 650 grams/$.

        Next we examine the contribution of transport emissions to trade‐related emissions when

calculated on a common per dollar basis. We aggregate transport emissions for each industry by

summing over all country pairs. Taking the transport emissions for each industry and dividing by

the value of trade yields a (weighted average) transport emission intensity for that industry. A

similar procedure yields the average output emissions intensity. Adding these together as in

equation (5) enables us to calculate the share of transport emissions in total trade‐related

emissions for each industry. Figure 2 provides this comparison with industries sorted from

smallest to largest transport emissions share (data in grey, scale displayed on the right vertical

axis). For perspective we also display transport emissions for that industry as a share of total

transport emissions (data in blue, scale displayed on the left vertical axis).

Recall that worldwide transport is responsible for 33 percent of trade related emissions. At the

industry level we see wide dispersion in these numbers. At the low end are bulk products

(agriculture, mining) with significant output emissions, and which tend to be shipped using the

most efficient maritime bulk carriers. At the high end are manufactured goods. Over 75 percent of

the trade‐related emissions of transport equipment, electronic equipment, machinery, and

manufactures not elsewhere classified come from transportation.

        In Table 4 we provide similar calculations for international transport and output emissions

by regional groupings and for selected countries (for the full sample of countries see Appendix

Table A3). The first three columns show the contribution of each region to trade‐related emissions

worldwide, including emissions from industrial output and from international transport. There are



                                                                                                        21
several notable patterns here. First, there is a significant difference between the output share of

emissions and the trade share of emissions. North America and Europe are together responsible

for just over a third of output emissions but over 60 percent of transport emissions. The US alone is

responsible for almost a third of world emissions from transportation of exports. The opposite

pattern holds for China, which is responsible for 20.8 percent of output emissions, and only 3.5

percent of transport emissions from exports. Second, for many regions there is a large imbalance

between international transport emissions in imports and exports. The US export emissions share

is much larger than its import emissions share while this imbalance is reversed from the European

and East Asian perspective.

        To some extent these shares are driven by the size of each region, reliance on trade, and

trade imbalances. To eliminate these effects, in the remaining columns we calculate emission

intensities for exports and imports, measured in grams of CO2 equivalent per dollar of trade. To

make the numbers comparable, both output and transport emissions are reported as weighted

averages of country x sector emissions, where the weights in each case reflect trade shares.17

Here we see large differences between regions in the emission intensities of output and transport.

There is significant variation in output intensities, driven largely by the commodity composition of

trade. South America, Oceania and the Middle East/Africa have very high output emissions per

dollar of trade, driven by their reliance on emission intensive commodity production.

Manufacturing oriented exporters see much smaller output intensities. Perhaps more surprising

there are also very large differences in the transport intensities. The transportation of US exports is

nearly eight times more emission intensive than the transportation of Chinese exports, and six

times more emission intensive than Europe. This is a consequence of an unusually large reliance on

air cargo in US exports.


17By using trade shares, the importance of a particular sector is the same for both output and transport
emissions. Were we to use output shares for output, goods with a large share of output but a small share of
trade would skew the averages.


                                                                                                          22
         These numbers make clear that including transport significantly changes our perspective on

which regions have emission intensive trade. India’s production of traded goods has 143 percent

more emissions than the US per dollar of trade, but after incorporating transportation, its exports

are less emission intensive in total. We also see a strong imbalance in emission intensities. East

Asian imports are much more emission intensive than the exports, while the reverse is true for the

US.

         A significant advantage of our approach to assessing transport emissions is that it gives us

the ability to sort out which regions are engaged in especially emission intensive trade. A clear

implication of these numbers is that both production and transportation emissions should be

considered when evaluating policy changes designed to curtail emissions. In some countries the

impact will be felt most acutely on the production side, whereas in countries like the US, the main

effect will primarily be on transport. Similarly, in some climate change mitigation proposals,

international transport emissions are to be included as part of a country’s carbon allocation. The

large differences between import and export emissions shown in Table 4 suggest the precise

manner in which this is done could be very important. That is, North America would much prefer

an import based allocation rather than an export based allocation, while East Asian countries would

prefer the opposite.

      C. Reallocating Production: Does More Trade Mean More Emissions?

A central question of the previous literature on trade and carbon emissions is this: will rising trade

lead to higher or lower emissions? If two countries engaged in trade have similar output emission

intensities, then more trade means more international transport and higher emissions. However, if

the difference in output emissions is large enough to offset the transport emissions, trade could

lower emissions.

         This question has been previously addressed with case studies (Jones, 2006; Sims et al.,

2007; Williams, 2007) or with largely imputed data (Peters and Hertwich, 2008). We can use our



                                                                                                      23
data to address it comprehensively. To begin we provide a straightforward partial equilibrium

calculation. We look at all possible reallocations of production in which a country reduces domestic

production of a sector and imports the same value of the good from abroad. Denoting the exporter

or origin as “o”, the destination country as “d”, and the good “g”, we can calculate the change in

emissions associated with consuming the good as

(6)        eodg
             c
                  (edg
                     Y
                         eog
                           Y      T
                              ) eodg

We will consider all possible reallocations over all country pairs, which means that the first term in

brackets will be symmetrically distributed around zero. (For example, there are two observations

for the US and China trading electronics, one in which the US is the origin, and another in which

China is the origin.) The question can then be framed as: is the variation in output emissions large

or small relative to transport emissions, and what fraction of reallocations could reduce emissions

despite incorporating transport?

           In Figure 3a we provide a histogram of 29,300 production reallocations, with units in grams

of CO2 per dollar traded.18 The median reallocation from trade increases emissions by 123 grams

per dollar traded, while the mean reallocation increases emissions by 554 grams. Negative

observations represent a reduction in emissions from trade; 26.5% of all possible reallocations

reduce emissions, and these trade pairs account for about 31 percent of world trade by value in

2004.

           To understand the mechanics of this reallocation better, we provide a similar distribution

for two illustrative sectors: wearing apparel and bulk agriculture. For wearing apparel, there are

quite small differences across countries in output emissions. This means that rising trade acts

primarily to increase emissions from transport. Only 15.8% of production reallocations reduce

emissions, and the aggregate changes in emissions from trade are quite small (mean 136). In

contrast, there are large differences across countries in output emissions from bulk agriculture, and

18   We drop the top and bottom 5% of values to eliminate outliers that distort the histogram.


                                                                                                        24
as we noted in Figure 2, transport is a small share of trade‐related emissions. In this case, 41.6

percent of production reallocations reduce emissions, and the aggregate change in emissions from

trade is very large (mean 764 grams).

        Table 5 provides data for each country and producing sector including the fraction of trade

reallocations that are GHG emission reducing, and the average change in emissions from trade.

High income countries tend to have low output emissions and intensively use airplanes in trade,

and here, few trade exchanges are CO2 reducing. Low income countries have high output emissions

and intensively use maritime transport. Here, more than half of trade reallocations are emission

reducing.

        These calculations are mechanically focused only on GHG emissions, and do not address

whether any particular trade flow is likely to take place. As such they are meant to be illustrative of

the capacity of the trading system to increase or decrease emissions, but not the feasibility of the

change. In the next section we consider general equilibrium shocks to the trading system in order

to analyze how likely future patterns of trade growth will affect emissions.



   V.       Trade Growth and Changes in International Transport Emissions

The emission intensity of individual trade flows varies dramatically depending on what product is

being traded, which countries are trading, and how they are transporting it. As a consequence,

trade growth that also changes the composition of trade can result in pronounced differences in

trade‐related emissions.

        In this section we will use a CGE simulation to generate changes in the value and

composition of trade resulting from tariff liberalization and GDP growth. Combining this with our

scale vs. intensity decomposition we can calculate the effect of growing trade on emissions growth.

Fixing the emission intensity of a particular output sector o‐g, the growth in output related

emissions is:



                                                                                                       25
(7)       Eog
            Y
                Yog * eog
                         Y




Fixing the emission intensity of a particular o‐d‐g trade flow, the growth of trade‐related emissions

is then

(8)       Eodg
            T
                 VALodg * eodg
                             T




This exercise holds fixed the modal shares for each o‐d‐g flow, and the emission intensity of each

mode. Put another way, this exercise takes the transportation system as given and examines how

changes in trade affect the greenhouse gas emissions from international output and transport. We

do not model how changes in fuel prices, spurred either by rising demand for fuel or changes in

carbon/fuel taxes, affect mode‐specific prices. Nor do we explicitly examine endogenous

technological change in transportation, although we do explore sensitivity of our results to

assumptions on the fuel and emission intensity of air transport. One can imagine an additional

exercise, motivated by and made possible by the data constructed in this paper, focused on the

effect of carbon taxation on fuel prices and therefore modal choice, and how that would feedback

into changes in trade patterns. We leave this considerably more involved exercise for future work.

Our approach of fixing modal shares for each o‐d‐g flow yields a reasonable approximation of

aggregate changes in modal use and emissions in two cases. One, if tariff liberalization or GDP

growth does not generate large changes in relative transportation prices (e.g. the price of air

relative to ocean shipping), then we would not expect modal shares within an o‐d‐g flow to change

much. This would be the case if there are few aggregate changes in modal use, or if trade growth

does not affect input costs differentially across modes. Two, suppose that modal use varies

primarily across (rather than within) o‐d‐g flows due to immutable geography, infrastructure, and

product characteristics. For example, land‐adjacent countries will continue to move goods via road

and rail independent of ocean shipping prices while countries separated by an ocean will be unable

to use road and rail. Similarly, product weight will force grain onto bulk cargo carriers regardless




                                                                                                     26
of the price of air cargo. In these cases, small changes over time in modal use within each o‐d‐g flow

will be swamped by changes in the trade shares of flows that use one mode more than another. 19

     A. Simulated Trade Growth

We wish to simulate the changes in worldwide output and trade (  Yog and  VALodg in equations (7)

and (8) respectively) associated with various tariff liberalization and output growth scenarios,

which requires the use of a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model of trade. We employ

version 7 of the GTAP model, aggregating the model to 40 regions and 23 traded and 6 non‐traded

goods. A highly detailed description of this widely used model can be found in Hertel and Tsigas

(1997). We briefly summarize key characteristics here.

        Within each sector firms are constant returns to scale with a production structure that is

Leontief in factor inputs (labor, capital, and land) and intermediate inputs including energy

commodities. Substitution between factor inputs is governed by a CES structure, as is substitution

between intermediate inputs that are Armington differentiated by origin. On the consumption side,

households have Cobb‐Douglas preferences over consumption, government spending and saving.

Demands over consumption goods employ a CDE (constant difference of elasticities) form, and

households regard the output of each source country as Armington differentiated.

        To capture possible effects of trade liberalization we explore four scenarios. There have

been a wide variety of liberalization proposals as part of the Doha round of the WTO talks. We

choose a representative three, referred to in Minor (2006) as Doha Scenarios 4, 5, and 9, because

their design is closest to the proposals currently under consideration. Appendix 3 contains detailed

notes on these scenarios. In summary, scenarios 4 and 5 focus on agricultural market access only

with tariff cuts for developed countries ranging from 40 to 60 percent, and those for developing

countries being one third smaller. Scenario 9 accounts for both agricultural and non‐agricultural

market access (NAMA), and here non‐agricultural tariffs are cut progressively, i.e. peak tariffs are

19We also hold fixed the wv ratio of trade for a given flow, assuming that small changes over time in wv
within an o‐d‐g flow will be swamped by changes in the trade shares of light versus heavy flows.


                                                                                                           27
cut more than lower tariffs. In a final “full liberalization” scenario, all import and export tariffs and

subsidies are set to zero.

        Tariff liberalization may lead to modest increases in trade, but rising output is likely to lead

to much more rapid trade growth. Moreover, output growth is likely to be asymmetric with some

developing countries such as China and India growing much faster than developed countries. To

experiment with output growth we use a specialized version of the GTAP model called GDyn (or

Dynamic GTAP). This version of the model contains detailed projections of GDP and factor

endowment growth rates from 2004‐2020 for each country in the database (Walmsley 2006).20

This model takes both real GDP growth and factor input growth as exogenous (values shown in

Appendix Table A4), and allows a Hicks neutral technological change variable to reconcile these

changes with other model values.

        This simulation allows us to examine two key points. First, predicted GDP growth rates

vary widely across countries, with especially rapid growth in China and India, and slower growth in

developed European economies. Second, this growth occurs through uneven rates of factor

accumulation, with some countries rapidly accumulating capital and skilled labor while others see

relatively rapid growth in unskilled labor. This allows us to model changes in both the scale of each

economy and in comparative advantage arising from changing factor supplies.

    B. Results

Table 6 summarizes the changes in output, exports, modal use (by value and by KG‐KM), and CO2

emissions under each of the five scenarios. Changes in output value, output emissions, and export

values come directly from the GTAP model. Combining these with our data on trade weight/value



20 Walmsley 2006 in turn builds GDP and input growth estimates based on Global Economic Prospects 2005,

Ahuja and Filmer 1995, and CPB 1999. GDyn explicitly models the dynamics of capital accumulation, which
makes it easier for the modeler to hit a given GDP growth target. It allows for international capital mobility so
that closing the model requires us to allow investment to vary endogenously in one country (we chose South
Africa, given its relative unimportance for the major issues at hand). The result was an unrealistically high
rate of capital accumulation in South Africa. However all results are robust to including/excluding South
Africa, except for those in Table 7.


                                                                                                              28
and distance we calculate changes in exports by weight and by transportation services. Combining

changes in transportation services with data on modal use and emissions we calculate changes in

modal use and emissions. For robustness we calculate changes in transport intensity assuming

both a HIGH emissions scenario (aviation emissions matching the US cargo fleet), and a LOW

emissions scenario (aviation emissions corresponding to the most efficient long range planes, and

matching 2004 total emission values from the ITF).

           The three Doha scenarios are largely uninteresting from a transport and emissions

perspective. Simply, these liberalization efforts are so modest that they yield little growth in trade,

in transport, or in emissions. The most far‐reaching scenario yields a 1.1 percent increase in trade

(by value or KG‐KM), and a slightly higher (1.7‐2.1 percent) rise in transport emissions.

The full liberalization scenario eliminates all import and export tariffs. While this is not currently

on the negotiating agenda, it is an interesting exercise because it reveals an important intersection

between the structure of protection and emissions. Tariff rates are not set uniformly across trading

partners and significant preferences are given to partners within trading blocs such as the EU and

NAFTA. Because trading blocs tend to be geographically concentrated, tariffs are lower for more

proximate partners and especially for land‐adjacent partners. In our base year, the trade‐weighted

average tariff rate for land‐adjacent partners is 1 percent, while the average tariff for non‐adjacent

partners is 5.5 percent. This is an important phenomenon from a transportation perspective

because rail and road transport dominate international trade between land‐adjacent countries.

Tariff liberalization that removes tariff preferences for land‐adjacent countries will then shift trade

toward distant partners and away from road and rail transport.

           These effects show up clearly in our results. In Table 6 we see that full liberalization

increases trade by 6 percent, concentrated in those products (agriculture, textiles and wearing

apparel) that are subject to the highest rates of protection.21 International transport emissions rise


21   The small negative effect on output value is due to terms of trade effects. Real quantities of trade rise.


                                                                                                                  29
faster than trade, due in part to a rise in trade at a distance and in part to an expansion of emission

intensive air cargo. As we see in Table 6, rail and road usage shrinks substantially while

international aviation and maritime transport grow quickly.

In contrast to the tariff liberalization simulations, the GDP growth scenario yields profound changes

in output, trade, and greenhouse‐gas emissions. Output and trade value rises at similar rates,

accumulating to 75‐80 percent growth over this period. Trade measured by transport services (KG‐

KM) rises much faster, 6.5 percent per annum, accumulating to 173 percent growth. Not

surprisingly then, transport emissions rise faster than output and trade by value, and faster than

output emissions.

        To understand this, note that tariff liberalization created trade growth biased toward long

distance trade because of the erosion of proximity‐based tariff preferences. The GDP growth

experiment creates trade growth biased toward long distance trade because the fastest growing

countries (China, India) are far away from other large markets. As with tariff liberalization there is

faster growth in air and sea transport relative to rail and road transport.

These aggregated numbers hide a wealth of interesting variation we wish to explore. Recalling

equation (8), we ask: what is the relationship between transport emission intensity in the base

year, and the subsequent growth in trade? In the top left panel of Table 7 we group 30,906 o‐d‐g

trade flows into quartiles using transport emission intensity, and assign each o‐d‐g observation a

quartile dummy variable.22 We then regress trade growth (by o‐d‐g) on emissions quartiles with

the constant representing growth in the lowest emission quartile. In both the full liberalization and

GDP growth scenarios, the higher the transport emission intensity of the trade flow the faster trade

grew. This effect was considerably stronger in the GDP growth scenario, both in the size of the

coefficients and in the regression R‐squared. In the bottom left panel we examine correlates of

22 We also omit the GAS sector and incorporate fixed effects for South Africa. GAS is an outlier that skews

results badly because its weight/value ratio and transport modal use are poorly measured. For technical
reasons noted above South Africa is treated differently in the model closure, which results in unrealistic
measures of capital growth.


                                                                                                              30
transport emission intensities. Trade growth in both scenarios is fastest for trade flows that occur

over longer distances, and use a higher share of air cargo, and in products with higher weight/value

ratios.

          The top right panel of Table 7 performs a similar exercise on output emissions. For each of

879 origin‐products we group production into quartiles based on output emission intensities, and

regress output growth on these quartiles. Full liberalization has very little effect in reorienting

output growth toward more or less emission intensive production. However, GDP growth orients

output growth toward those countries and products with high output emissions. This is primarily

the effect of rapid GDP growth in China and India. Because their output is more emission intensive

(in the fourth quartile of intensities), more rapid GDP growth in those countries will push overall

emissions higher.



    VI.      Conclusions and Implications

Most of the work on trade and climate change has ignored international transportation, or

considered it in the context of case studies. This neglect is due in part to a lack of data, and in part

to the belief that international transportation represents a small portion of overall emissions.

In this paper we combined data on trade, transportation modes, transport emissions, and output

emissions to calculate the contribution of transportation to trade‐related greenhouse gas emissions

in the aggregate and for all trade flows world‐wide. While international transportation is a small

fraction of overall emissions it is a surprisingly large fraction of trade‐related emissions. Two‐

thirds of trade‐related emissions in US exports are due to international transportation, and world‐

wide over 75 percent of the trade‐related emissions of transport equipment, electronic equipment,

machinery, and manufactures nec come from transportation.

          We used our data to systematically evaluate whether increasing trade could be emission

reducing. If a country has very high output emissions, and transports goods efficiently, importing



                                                                                                       31
the good from a low emission producer can reduce emissions. We find that in one quarter of

possible production reallocations, trade can reduce emissions. Emission reducing trades are more

likely to occur in agriculture and mining sectors while reducing emissions through trading

manufactures is relatively difficult.

        These reallocations are simple partial equilibrium changes and do not address whether

such a reallocation would be feasible or likely. To examine likely changes we combined our data

with a series of trade growth simulations designed to illuminate the role of tariff liberalization and

GDP growth. Tariff liberalization undoes tariff preferences that favor proximate and land‐adjacent

partners who use rail and road transport and move goods short distances. This results in a shift in

trade toward distant partners, a more intensive use of air cargo, and transport emissions growth

that is more rapid than trade growth. The share of transport in trade‐related emissions rises,

reversing a downward trend created by preferential trade agreements. However, these changes are

small relative to those caused by GDP growth in China and India. We project transport emissions

rising at 5 percent a year as economic growth in these countries significantly increases the distance

of trade.

        A clear implication of our calculations is that production and transportation emissions

should be considered when evaluating policy changes designed to curtail emissions. Many

exporters and products that look relatively “clean” when we focus only on output emissions are in

fact heavy emitters once incorporating transportation. In some countries the impact of mitigation

will be felt most acutely on the production side, whereas in countries like the US, the main effect

will primarily be on transport.

        There are also significant implications for mechanism design, specifically, how to treat the

international transport sector within the global framework for emissions. Does international

transport “belong” to the exporter, to the importer, or should it be treated as a separately capped

sector, in essence a country unto itself? Given the imbalance in transport emissions the US would



                                                                                                      32
much prefer an import based allocation rather than an export based allocation, while East Asian

countries would prefer the opposite. Were transport treated as a separately capped “country” the

higher rate of transport services growth (and the differences in growth rates across modes) would

yield potentially large distortionary effects on trade as caps bind faster on transport than on output.

Finally, our trade and emissions growth calculations take the transport sector as given and as such

abstract from important substitution margins. We assume away changes in modal usage within a

particular trade flow over time, and do not allow for technological change in emission intensities

due either to innovation or to updating the vintage of the transportation fleet capital stock.

Including these additional margins of response is beyond the scope of the current study, but in

future work this could be useful for understanding interactions between trade, transportation and

emissions. In particular, the much higher fuel intensity of air cargo, and its associated CO2

emissions, suggests that climate mitigation policies could have pronounced effects on how goods

move and the kinds of goods that nations trade. This is especially important for countries like the

US, whose reliance on air cargo results in unusually high transportation emissions.



References

Aircraft Economics, 1999. Freighter Cost Comparisons. Aircraft Economics, 45, 50‐56.

Ahuja, V. and Filmer, D., 1995. “Educational Attainment in Developing Countries; New Estimates
and projections Disaggregated by Gender,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1489.

Babiker, M., 2005. Climate Change Policy, Market Structure and Carbon Leakage. Journal of
International Economics, 65(2), 421‐445.

Berthelon, M., and Freund, C., 2008. “On the Conservation of Distance in International Trade”.

Journal of International Economics, 75, 310‐20.

Cadarso, M.‐A., Lopez, L.‐A., Gomez, N., Tobarra, M.‐A., 2010. CO2 Emissions of International Freight
Transport and Offshoring: Measurement and Allocation. Ecological Economics 69, 1682‐1694.

California Climate Change 2006. Comparing Energy Options.

Canals, L. M., Cowell, S.J., Sims, S. and Besson, L., 2007. Comparing Domestic versus Imported




                                                                                                     33
Apples: A focus on Energy Use. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 14 (5),

338‐344.

Carlsson‐Kanyama, A., Pipping Ekstrom, M. and Shanahan, H., 2003. Food and life cycle energy

inputs: consequences of diet and ways to increase efficiency. Ecological Economics, 44,

293‐307.

Copeland, B. R. and Taylor, M.S., 2004. Trade, Growth, and the Environment. Journal of Economic
Literature 42 (1), 7‐71.

CPB, 1999. “WorldScan: the Core Version,” CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis.

De, Prabir, 2007. Facilitating Overland Trade in South Asia. mimeo.

Disdier, A.C. and Head, K., 2008. “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral

Trade”. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1), 37‐41.

Ederington, J. and Minier, J., 2003. Is environmental policy a secondary trade barrier? An empirical
analysis. Canadian Journal of Economics, 36 (1), 137‐155.

EEA. 2007. “EMEP/CORINAIR Emission Inventory Guidebook”, Group 8.

Giannouli, M., and Mellios, G., 2005. Overall Energy Efficiency and specific CO2 emissions for
passenger and freight transport. European Environmental Agency, TERM 2005 27 EEA 32.

Grether, J.‐M., Mathys, N. A., de Melo, J., 2010. Global Manufacturing SO2 Emissions: Does Trade
Matter?. Review of World Economics 145(4), 713‐729.

Hertel, T. and Tsigas, M., 1997. The Structure of GTAP. GTAP Working Paper 413.

Hummels, D. L., 2009. “Globalization and Transport Costs”. Study Prepared for OECD International
Transportation Forum Meetings.

Hummels, D.L. and Schaur G., 2011. “ Time as a Trade Barrier”. Mimeo.

International Transport Forum, 2010. Transport Greenhouse Gas Emissions 2010. ITF/OECD.

International Energy Agency, 2010. Co2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2010. IEA/OECD.

IPCC/OECD/IEA. 1997. Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.
Paris: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Organization for Economic Co‐operation
and Development (OECD), International Energy Agency (IEA).

Jones, A. , 2006. A life cycle analysis of UK supermarket imported green beans from Kenya. Fresh
Insights No. 4. International Institute for Environment and Development, London, United Kingdom.

Kristensen, H.O., 2006. Cargo Transport by Sea and Road – Technical and Environmental Factors.
Naval Engineers Journal, 118, 115‐129.




                                                                                                   34
Lee, H.‐L., 2008. The Combustion‐based CO2 Emissions Data for GTAP version 7 Data Base. GTAP
Working Paper 4470.

Levinson, A., 2009. Technology, International Trade and Pollution from US Manufacturing. American
Economic Review, 99(5), 2177‐2192.

Levinson, A. and Taylor, M., 2008. Unmasking the Pollution Haven Effect. International Economic
Review, 49(1), 223‐253.

Maersk Line, 2007. Constant Care for the Environment.

Miljøstyrelsen Miljøministeriet (Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Danish Ministry for the
Environment), 2003. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions from International Aviation and Allocation
Options”. URL: http://www2.mst.dk/common/Udgivramme/Frame.asp?http://www2.mst.dk
/udgiv/publications/2003/87‐7972‐489‐2/html/helepubl_eng.htm.

Minor, P., 2006. Projected Impacts of the Doha Development Round on Egypt’s Trade and
Production. GTAP Working Paper 3363.

National Technical University of Athens Laboratory for Maritime Transport, 2008. Ship Emissions
Study.

Olivier, J., Peters, J., 1999. International marine and aviation bunker fuel: trends, ranking of
countries and comparison with national CO2 emissions. RIVM report 773301 002. National
Institute of Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), The Netherlands.

URL: http://www.rivm.nl/bibliotheek/rapporten/773301002.pdf

Peters, G. P., Hertwich, E. G., 2008. CO2 Embodied in International Trade with Implications for
Global Climate Policy. Environmental Science and Technology 42(5), 1401‐1407.

Rose, S., Avetisyan, M. and Hertel, T., 2010. Development of the Preliminary Version 7 Non‐CO2 GHG
Emissions Dataset. GTAP Working Paper 4618.

Sim, S., Barry, M., Clift, R. and Cowell, S., 2007. The relative importance of transport in determining
an appropriate sustainability strategy for food sourcing. A case study of fresh produce supply
chains. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 12, 422‐431.

Transportation Research Board, 2009. “Guidebook on Preparing Airport Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Inventories”. Research sponsored by the Federal Aviation Administration.

USEPA, 2006. Global Emissions of Non‐CO2 Greenhouse Gases: 1990‐2020. United States
Environmental Protection Agency (US‐EPA), Washington, D.C., EPA Report 430‐R‐06‐003.

Van Veen‐Groot, D., Nijkamp, P., 1999. Globalization, transport and the environment: new
perspectives for ecological economics. Ecological Economics 31, 331–346.

Walmsley, T., 2006. A Baseline Scenario for the Dynamic GTAP Model. GTAP Working Paper 2854.

Williams, A., 2007. Comparative study of cut roses for the British market produced in Kenya and the
Netherlands. Précis Report for World Flowers, February.

World Bank, 2005. Global Economic Prospects 2005.


                                                                                                      35
Appendix 1: Model Aggregation
Region Aggregation: We begin with 113 constituent countries/regions available in the GTAP
database, then aggregate into the 40 “regions” listed in bold. Some regions are single countries and
others are aggregations of the 87 constituent countries available in the GTAP database.
North America: (2 regions) Canada, United States
Central America: (2 regions) Mexico, Other Central America and Caribbean (Central America,
Rest of FTAA, Rest of Caribbean)
South America: (4 regions) Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Rest of South America (Colombia, Peru,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Rest of Andean Pact, Rest of South America)
Europe: (18 regions) Austria, Belgium‐Luxemburg, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Russia, Rest of
European Union (Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Romania), Other Europe – EFTA (Switzerland, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Norway), Other CEE and Other CIS (Albania, Croatia, Turkey, Rest of Former Soviet Union)
South Asia: (2 regions) India, Other South Asia (Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Rest of
South Asia)
East Asia (8 regions) Japan, Korea, Singapore, Malaysia‐Indonesia, China‐Hong Hong,
Taiwan, Other East Asia (North Korea, Macau, Mongolia), Other South East Asia (Philippines,
Thailand, Vietnam, Rest of Southeast Asia)
Middle East/Africa: (3 regions) South Africa, Middle East and North Africa (Middle East,
Morocco, Tunisia, Rest of North Africa), Sub‐Saharan Africa (Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique,
Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Madagascar, Uganda, Rest of South African Customs Union, Rest of
Southern African Development Community, Rest of Sub‐Saharan Africa)
Oceania Countries (1 region): (Australia, New Zealand, Rest of Oceania)
Sectoral Aggregation. GTAP provides data on 57 sectors. We aggregate these to 27 sectors, and
focus on 23 tradable sectors described in Table A1 below. Manufacturing and mining sectors are
analyzed using the same level of detail as in the GTAP data. Agricultural sectors are aggregated as
follows.
Bulk Agriculture (Paddy rice; Wheat; Cereal grains nec; Oil seeds; Sugar cane, sugar beet; Plant‐
based fibers; Crops nec);
Processed Agriculture (Vegetables, fruit, nuts; Bovine cattle, sheep and goats, horses; Animal
products nec; Raw milk; Wool, silk‐worm cocoons; Bovine meat products; Meat products nec;




                                                                                                    36
Vegetable oils and fats; Dairy products; Processed rice; Sugar; Food products nec; Beverages and
tobacco products);


Appendix 2. Sources of Modal Data and Calculation of Modal Shares
The table below summarizes the source of modal data for worldwide trade flows. X indicates that
modal shares are directly observed from various data sources, as follows. These data represent
65% of the value of world trade.
Xa Modal shares calculated using Eurostats data on European exports. For flows from EU15 to
EU25 (excluding Bulgaria and Romania), modal shares are originally reported at the 3 digit level of
the NSTR. These data were compiled on special request by statisticians at Eurostats. We apply the
most recently available year, 1999.
Xb. Modal shares calculated from Eurostats data on European imports.
Xc. Modal shares calculated using US “Imports of Merchandise”, US Bureau of the Census.
Xd. Modals shares calculated from ALADI trade data.
Xe. Modal shares calculated using US “Exports of Merchandise”, US Bureau of the Census.
Xf. Modal shares calculated using US “Exports and Imports of Merchandise” (US Bureau of the
Census) and freight flows data from the North American Transborder Freight Data.


               Importer     EU     US    LAC      Rest of    Canada,      Asia      Africa     Other
                                                  Europe     Mexico
        Exporter
        EU                  Xa     Xa     Xd        Xa          Xa         Xa         Xa         Xa
        US                  Xb     ‐‐     Xd        Xe          Xf         Xe         Xe         Xe
        LAC                 Xb     Xc     Xd       A/O         A/O        A/O        A/O        A/O
        Rest of Europe      Xb     Xc     Xd      L/A/O        A/O        A/O        A/O        A/O
        Canada, Mexico      Xb     Xf     Xd       A/O        L/A/O       A/O        A/O        A/O
        Asia                Xb     Xc     Xd       A/O         A/O       L/A/O       A/O        A/O
        Africa              Xb     Xc     Xd       A/O         A/O        A/O       L/A/O       A/O
        Other               Xb     Xc     Xd       A/O         A/O        A/O        A/O        A/O

The remaining values are estimated. A/O indicates that land transport is not available between
regions, and so trade flows are split between air and ocean. L/A/O indicates that land (rail, truck),
air, and ocean shares are imputed.
Modal Share Data Imputation: For trade flows representing 35 percent of world trade, no direct
information on modal use is available. In these cases we estimate modal use by relying on the
matrix of modal trade flows we do have and the following four‐step algorithm.
   1. Identify trade where land transport is infeasible.


                                                                                                   37
If an o‐d country pair is not on the same continent, or a destination could not reasonably be reached
by land transport, rail and road shares are set to zero. (That is, Japan is part of Asia, but lacks a land
bridge so its rail and road shares are zero.). Of the 35 percent of world trade not covered by our
explicit modal share data, 33 percent have no land‐based trade. For these cases, skip to step three.
    2. Estimate the share of trade that moves by land.
For the 2 percent of world trade without modal data, and where land transport is an option, we
proceed on a case by case basis. For European country pairs not covered explicitly by the EU data,
we estimate a modal share model with first the rail share of trade and then the road share as a
dependent variable. Regressors include fixed effects for origin, destination, and GTAP sector, the
distance between countries, a dummy for land‐adjacency, and the weight/value ratio of the
exporter‐sector. The sample employed is the EU data for which we do have modal information –
recall that all the EU 27 countries report their imports from all European countries and their
exports to all European countries. We then use out of sample prediction to generate modal splits
for the remaining countries. This allows us to estimate, for example, the share of rail in Russian
exports of coal by calculating Russia’s conditional average share of rail to the EU27 countries (the
origin fixed effect), the weight/value of Russian coal, and the distance to each market.
This leaves intra‐continental trade within Africa and land‐adjacent Asian countries, roughly 1.8
percent of world trade by value. For Asia we use calculations by Prabir De (2007) that report the
modal shares of Indian trade with its land‐adjacent neighbors, summed over all products and
partners. These shares do not vary over sectors. For intra‐African trade (a vanishingly small share
of world trade) we could find no data on modal shares and so imposed road shares of 75 percent
and rail shares of 0.
    3. Split the (air+ocean) share
Recall that in almost all cases (33 percent of the 35 percent of trade with no data), the ocean + air
share is 100%. In the remaining 2 percent of cases we split air v. ocean for the trade that is leftover
after subtracting off the shares of trade going to rail and road transport.
We estimate a model where the dependent variable is the ratio of air/ocean and the regressors
include the weight/value ratio of the exporter‐product, distance between markets, whether they
are land‐adjacent and vectors of fixed effects by origin, destination, and GTAP sector. These origin
and destination fixed effects capture all market characteristics such as level of development, and
quality and composition of infrastructure that strongly affect this modal split. The product fixed
effects absorb factors that explain modal use such as bulk, spoilage, the need for special packing,
and timely delivery. Again, the estimation sample includes the EU, US, and ALADI data for which we



                                                                                                        38
have explicit modal share data and we use out of sample prediction to generate modal splits for the
remaining countries. The high R2 in these regressions (0.75) suggests that the model does a good
job of identifying share variation.


Appendix 3: Simulating Trade Growth: Tariff Liberalization Scenarios
To capture possible effects of trade liberalization we explore four scenarios. Three of these are
“likely” tariff cuts under current Doha round negotiations. The fourth is a full liberalization
scenario in which all import and export tariffs and subsidies are set to zero.
There have been a wide variety of liberalization proposals as part of the Doha round. Ten of these
proposals have been modeled by CEPII and incorporated into the GTAP model. There are subtle
differences across these proposals, so we choose a representative three, referred to in Minor (2006)
as Doha Scenarios 4,5, and 9. Scenarios 4 and 5 focus on agricultural market access only, while
scenario 9 accounts for both agricultural and non‐agricultural market access (NAMA). These
scenarios are chosen because their design is closest to the proposals currently under consideration.
Scenario 4 and 5 are both based on the Harbinson proposal, which consists of applying
proportional tariff cuts on four tiers of tariff ranges. Tariff ranges and cuts in each tier vary between
developing and developed countries. The table below is taken from Minor (2006) and shows the
Harbinson tiered tariff cutting formula for agriculture in scenario 4. The tariff cuts are highest for
developed countries ranging from 40 to 60 percent. Developing countries tariff cuts in each tier are
about two thirds those in the corresponding tiers of developed countries.

                   Tier        Developed Countries            Developing Countries
                              Tariff Rate       Cut (%)        Tariff Rate      Cut (%)
                              Range (%)                        Range (%)
                   1             < 15             40              < 20            25
                   2            15‐90             50             20‐60            30
                   3             > 90             60            60‐120            35
                   4               ‐‐              ‐‐            > 120            40


Scenario 5 is the same as scenario 4 but allows countries to avoid the application of the tariff cuts
on 2% of sensitive products. In practice, the chosen exceptions are concentrated in ‘processed
agriculture’. Scenario 9 adds non‐agricultural market access.23 The non‐agricultural tariff cuts are

23The agricultural market access underlying this scenario assumes instead of the Harbinson formula a
harmonizing formula.


                                                                                                        39
non‐proportional, so that peak tariffs are reduced more than lower tariffs. Non‐linear tariff cuts
formulas are usually referred as Swiss‐type. While the adoption of Swiss‐type formula on non‐
agricultural products is agreed among negotiators the exact type is not. Our scenario assumes the
Girard (WTO 03‐4322) formula:
       B  Ta  T0
T1 
       B  Ta  T0

Where T1 is the new bound tariff rate, B is the coefficient to be determined for reductions, T0 is the
base bound rate, and Ta is the average of base bound rates for NAMA products. B is equal to 1 for
developed countries and 2 for developing countries.




                                                                                                     40
Note. Emissions intensities are expressed in grams of CO2 per dollar.



                       Figure 1. Distribution of Emission Intensities




                                                                        41
Note. Emissions intensities are expressed in grams of CO2 per dollar.


  Figure 2: The Contribution of Transport to Total Trade‐Related Emissions




                                                                             42
Note: 26.5% of all origin‐destination‐sector trade flows lead to a reduction in total CO2 emission
(output and transport emissions combined). Emission intensities are expressed in grams of CO2 per
dollar


                  Figure 3a: Net Change in CO2 Emissions due to Trade




                Note. Emission intensities are expressed in grams of CO2 per dollar.


              Figure 3b: Net Change in CO2 Emissions for Selected Sectors


                                                                                                     43
Table 1. World Output and Transport Emissions, 1990‐2004 (selected years)

                                                              1990       1995       2000       2004

CO2 Emissions (mil tons Co2)

Fuel combustion, all sources1                                21024      21808      23487      26320

Total Transport1                                              4614       5047       5678       6202

International Transport (aviation, maritime)2                  649         710        829       910

International Transport Emissions

Share of Total Emissions                                      3.1%       3.3%       3.5%       3.5%

Share of Transport Emissions                                 14.1%      14.1%      14.6%      14.7%

CO2 equivalent grams per Dollar of Exports                    158.8      129.6      104.0       93.3

Note.1Source: International Energy Agency. 2International transport includes international maritime
and aviation transport modes. Data source: International Transport Forum




                                                                                                44
Table 2. Regional Modal Shares, by trade value and KG‐KM
Panel (A) Modal shares by importer
                          By Value                         By KG‐KM
                             Sea      Air   Rail   Road       Sea     Air   Rail   Road
North America                46.6    21.0   6.7    25.7       91.8    1.4   1.4     5.5
Central America              78.8    16.3   0.3     4.6       97.9    0.6   0.1     1.4
South America                66.4    22.7   0.3    10.6       96.0    1.3   0.2     2.6
Europe                       35.5    13.0   4.5    46.9       91.7    1.1   2.0     5.2
South Asia                   74.8    21.7   0.6     2.9       99.2    0.5   0.1     0.3
East Asia                    72.8    25.8   0.2     1.2       98.8    1.1   0.0     0.1
Middle East/Africa           68.2    19.1   0.0    12.7       88.5    0.9   0.0    10.6
Oceania                      78.0    22.0   0.0     0.0       98.1    1.9   0.0     0.0
WORLD                        50.2    18.4   3.5    27.8       95.0    1.1   0.8     3.1
Panel (B) Modal shares by exporter
North America                28.3    25.9   9.4    36.4       88.2    4.6   1.4    5.8
Central America              74.0    20.6   0.4     5.0       97.0    0.9   0.2    2.0
South America                85.7     7.3   0.2     6.8       99.1    0.2   0.0    0.6
Europe                       35.1    13.0   4.5    47.3       89.3    0.9   2.8    7.1
South Asia                   73.9    21.6   0.8     3.7       97.8    1.0   0.2    1.0
East Asia                    72.0    26.8   0.2     1.0       98.8    0.9   0.0    0.2
Middle East/Africa           80.6    9.3    0.0    10.1       97.3    0.1   0.0    2.6
Oceania                      89.8    10.2   0.0     0.0       99.9    0.1   0.0    0.0
WORLD                        50.2    18.4   3.5    27.8       95.0    1.1   0.8    3.1




                                                                                     45
Table 3: Emissions per Tonnes‐Km of Transport Services, by Mode
Panel (A) Maritime Mode
Ship Type CO2 per       GTAP Sectors                                Source
            tonnes‐
            km
Bulk            4.5     Bulk agriculture, forestry, minerals,       University of Athens, 2008
                        coal products
Container       12.1    Processed agriculture, fishing, textiles,   University of Athens, 2008
                        wearing apparel, leather products,
                        wood products, paper products and
                        publishing, ferrous metals, metals nec,
                        metal products, motor vehicles and
                        parts, transport equipment nec,
                        electronic equipment, machinery and
                        equipment, manufactures nec
Oil Tanker       5         Oil                                      University of Athens, 2008
LNG             16.3       Gas                                      University of Athens, 2008
LPG             12.7       Petroleum                                University of Athens, 2008
Chemical        10.1       Chemical products                        University of Athens, 2008
Panel (B) Land Mode
Mode        CO2 per                                                 Source
Type        tonnes‐
            km
Road           119.7                                                Giannouli and Mellios, EEA,
                                                                    2005
Rail            22.7
Panel (C) Air Mode
Plane        CO2 per                                                Source
Type         tonnes‐
             km
Boeing          552                                                 Maersk Line, 2007
747
Various       476‐1020                                              California Climate Change
                                                                    2006
US Cargo       963.45                                               Authors’ calculations based on
Fleet                                                               ATA fuel usage data
US Cargo         912                                                Authors’ calculations based on
Fleet                                                               Aircraft Economics 1999 data




                                                                                                  46
Table 4. Output and Transport Emission Shares and Intensities, by Region
                     Emission Shares (% of World)                                       Emission Intensities (CO2 g/$)
                                                                            Exports                                          Imports
                          Transport          Output    Total      Output*              Transport          Total     Output*              Transport
                     Importer    Exporter                                       Grams       Share %                               Grams       Share %
North America          20.1        35.2       15.9      606         270          336          55%         395          259         136          34%
Central America        0.9         0.7        0.8       557        404           153          27%         510          376         135          26%
South America          3.8         6.9        9.4      1476        1138          337          23%         760          474         286          38%
Europe                 31.1        25.4       19.4      262         179           83          32%         355          253         101          29%
South Asia             2.0         0.9        7.0      674         581           93           14%         731          562         169          23%
East Asia              31.4        15.0       31.1      306         224           81          26%         562          352         210          37%
Middle
East/Africa            8.6         13.1       14.5     1176         908          268          23%         697          476         221          32%
Oceania                2.0         2.8        1.9      1008         701          307          30%         440          245         194          44%
WORLD                  100         100        100       445         300          146          33%         445          300         145          33%

Selected Countries
United States          10.7         32.5       12.0      739         251          488          66%          366        271            94        26%
China                   6.7          3.5       20.8      426         363           63          15%          430        293           138        32%
India                  1.5          0.6         4.9      707         612           95          13%          698        516           182        26%
Note. Total emissions per dollar are calculated as the sum of transport and output emission intensities. *For comparability with transport emissions,
 output emissions are constructed as a weighted average of sector level output emissions, using trade rather than output weights.




                                                                                                                                                     47
Table 5: Likelihood of CO2 Reductions through International Trade
                              Fraction                                        Fraction
By Importer                              By Sector
                                (%)                                           (%)
Singapore                        6.2     Leather products                        12.7
Japan                            7.0     Wood products                           12.8
Sweden                           9.0     Wearing apparel                         15.8
Denmark                         10.1     Motor vehicles and parts                16.6
France                          10.8     Forestry                                17.8
Germany                         11.0     Textiles                                20.3
Portugal                        12.5     Petroleum, coal products                21.1
Austria                         12.6     Metal products                          22.4
Italy                           13.9     Paper products, publishing              24.1
Rest of European Countries      14.6     Machinery and equipment nec             24.9
United Kingdom                  15.3     Transport equipment nec                 26.8
Finland                         17.0     Minerals                                27.0
Oceania countries               17.0     Manufactures nec                        29.8
Belgium                         18.3     Fishing                                 30.3
Korea                           18.8     Oil                                     33.6
Netherlands                     19.1     Ferrous metals                          36.3
Mexico                          19.6     Mineral products nec                    37.2
Spain                           21.2     Gas                                     37.4
Ireland                         21.7     Electronic equipment                    39.2
Taiwan                          22.5     Metals nec                              40.1
Greece                          24.1     Chemical, rubber, plastic products      40.7
Brazil                          24.7     Bulk Agriculture                        41.6
United States                   25.1     Processed Agriculture                   42.7
Central and Caribbean
Americas                        26.1
European Union                  29.3
Canada                          30.0
South Africa                    31.0
India                           35.9
Rest of South East Asia         37.6
Sub Saharan Africa              40.5
Malaysia and Indonesia          43.7
South and Other Americas        43.9
Argentina                       45.2
Chile                           46.6
Russia                          49.6
Rest of South Asia              51.3
China and Hong Kong             52.8
Middle Eastern and North
Africa                          64.6
Other East Europe               64.7
Rest of East Asia               67.3
Average                         26.5     Average                                26.5



                                                                                         48
Table 6. Worldwide Changes in Output, Trade and Associated Emissions by Scenario
                                                                                   Full      GDP growth 2004‐2020
                            Doha S04       Doha S05      Doha S09        Liberalization    Per Annum       Cummulative
% Change
Output                          ‐0.09          ‐0.04          ‐0.22                ‐1.22         3.57             75.2
Exports:
          Value                  0.07          ‐0.13          1.12                  6.09         3.76             80.4
         Weight                  0.24          ‐0.08          0.57                  5.72         5.83            147.8
         Kg‐Km                   0.46          ‐0.06          1.10                  6.05         6.48            173.3
Modal Use (value)
            Sea                  0.54           0.03           2.70                12.25         4.52            102.8
            Air                 ‐0.31          ‐0.34           1.78                 7.41         3.82             82.1
           Rail                 ‐0.23          ‐0.23          ‐1.20                ‐3.72         2.88             57.6
           Road                 ‐0.50          ‐0.27          ‐1.85                ‐4.66         2.21             41.8
Modal Use (KG‐KM)
            Sea                  0.51          ‐0.04           1.16                 6.32         6.59            177.5
            Air                 ‐0.48          ‐0.44           3.60                13.14         4.93            116.1
           Rail                 ‐0.33          ‐0.60          ‐0.63                 5.21         4.82            112.5
           Road                 ‐0.52          ‐0.27          ‐1.33                ‐4.73         3.69             78.7
CO2 Emissions
(% change)
Output                           0.84           0.42          0.92                  0.41         4.50            102.2
Transport:
     HIGH Scenario              ‐0.06          ‐0.22          2.10                  8.63         5.10            121.7
     LOW Scenario                0.04          ‐0.16          1.72                  7.51         5.14            123.1




                                                                                                                         49
Table 7. Trade value and output growth by emission intensity: WLS estimates
Dependent
Variable:                     Trade Growth                            Output Growth
                           Full       GDP growth                   Full          GDP growth
                      Liberalization                         Liberalization
Panel (A) On quartiles of transport emission intensity    On quartiles of output emission intensity
II quartile               0.036***          0.093***             ‐0.016                   0.085
                           [0.013]           [0.025]            [0.015]                  [0.062]
III quartile              0.040***          0.229***              0.006                 0.094**
                           [0.012]           [0.029]            [0.009]                  [0.043]
IV quartile               0.049***          0.417***              0.010                 0.314***
                           [0.012]           [0.032]            [0.012]                  [0.049]
Constant                    ‐0.001          0.361***           ‐0.015***                0.403***
                           [0.006]           [0.015]            [0.006]                  [0.028]
N                          34,162            34,162                879                     879
R2                           0.007            0.570               0.012                   0.195
Panel (B) On transport emission intensity determinants
Distance                0.035***            0.055***
                         [0.005]             [0.009]
Weight/Value            0.019***            0.090***
                         [0.004]             [0.008]
air use                 0.010***            0.008**
                         [0.002]             [0.004]
Constant                ‐0.182***            0.149*
                         [0.046]             [0.086]
N                        30,906              30,906
R2                        0.051               0.602
Note. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** P<0.01, ** P<0.05, * P<0.1. In panel (A) quartiles
are based on the distribution of (log) emission intensity. A trade flow's emission intensity is
calculated using the LOW scenario emissions content. All coefficients are estimates by WLS using
2004 export values as weights. All regressions include unreported indicator variables for imports
and exports involving South Africa. This is done in order to account for the fact that in the GTAP
GDP growth simulation South Africa is used in closing the model. The Gas sector is a huge outlier
and so it is removed from the sample.




                                                                                                      50
Appendix Table A1. Baseline Descriptives by Commodity
Commodity                            Tariff   Weight/Value   Share of:
                                                             World       Trade
                                                                                 Kg‐Km
                                                             Output      Value
Bulk Agriculture                     8.98        3.56          2.51       1.40   4.69
Processed Agriculture                9.68        1.24         16.39       6.69   5.54
Forestry                             1.13         8.87         0.55       0.16    0.74
Fishing                              3.37         0.35         0.51       0.17   0.03
Minerals                             1.56        16.56         1.63       1.61   26.53
Oil                                  1.22         5.01         2.86       5.86   23.69
Gas                                  0.09         6.33         0.61       0.87    3.52
Textiles                             6.91         0.38         2.88       3.20    0.72
Wearing apparel                      7.69        0.07          2.14       2.36   0.12
Leather products                     7.37        0.21          0.82       1.24   0.19
Wood products                        1.66        1.21          2.35       2.04   1.21
Paper products, publishing           1.64        1.41          5.05       2.34    1.97
Petroleum, coal products             3.25        5.13          4.72       2.43   8.27
Chemical, rubber, plastic products   2.57        0.90         12.22      14.22   8.15
Mineral products nec                 3.71        2.48          2.66       1.28   1.95
Ferrous metals                       2.46        2.43          3.69       3.01    4.74
Metals nec                           2.11        0.63          2.14       3.00   1.31
Metal products                       3.03        0.90          4.20       2.33   1.21
Motor vehicles and parts             3.45        0.19          7.82      10.48    0.98
Transport equipment nec              2.01         0.11         2.18       3.10   0.26
Electronic equipment                 1.14        0.08          7.78      13.36   1.01
Machinery and equipment nec          2.58        0.23         11.66      16.66   2.88
Manufactures nec                     2.57        0.19          2.64       2.20   0.31
TOTAL                                3.21         1.31         100       100      100




                                                                                         51
Appendix Table A2. Sectoral Modal Shares, by trade value and KG‐KM
Commodity                            By Value                           By KG‐KM
                                       Sea       Air    Rail    Road       Sea      Air    Rail   Road

Bulk Agriculture                      76.95      3.18    2.87   16.95    97.02      0.35   1.28   1.36
Processed Agriculture                 56.42      2.77    1.98   38.68    91.77      0.54   0.84    6.86
Forestry                              67.76      2.41    7.88   21.83    92.21      0.52   3.60    3.67
Fishing                               41.73     25.78    0.40   32.05    71.02     19.51   0.11    9.36
Minerals                              71.70     20.38    2.82    5.07    98.48      0.08   0.65    0.79
Oil                                   96.45      0.00    1.16    2.39    98.41      0.00   0.31    1.28
Gas                                   62.12      0.00   13.37   24.50    96.00      0.00   1.10    2.90
Textiles                              58.19      9.08    0.61   32.07    80.96      4.82   0.13   14.08
Wearing apparel                       52.56     17.93    0.58   28.88    76.03     16.23   0.11   7.63
Leather products                      56.85     14.43    0.31   28.37    81.85      8.68   0.12    9.35
Wood products                         50.86      2.05    8.75   38.25    87.74      0.47   2.71    9.08
Paper products, publishing            47.01      5.00    5.80   42.11    89.92      0.95   1.57    7.56
Petroleum, coal products              89.07      0.24    2.97    7.37    97.43     0.12    0.68   1.77
Chemical, rubber, plastic products    45.96     16.44   2.42    35.08    91.35      1.11   1.11    6.44
Mineral products nec                  49.27      7.94    2.25   40.41    90.66      0.65   1.26    7.43
Ferrous metals                        65.15      1.36    7.08   26.14    94.36      0.17   1.66    3.81
Metals nec                            57.56     13.23    3.09   26.03    93.93      0.89   0.73   4.45
Metal products                        43.65     10.16    2.08   44.03    77.43      7.32   0.41   14.85
Motor vehicles and parts              44.81      3.42   12.95   38.66    81.58      4.34   2.53   11.54
Transport equipment nec               34.04     43.52    3.35   19.03    86.02      9.86   0.92   3.20
Electronic equipment                  32.78     50.21    0.58   16.38    68.19     28.61   0.07   3.13
Machinery and equipment nec           41.79     25.34    2.31   30.52    81.66     11.42   0.35    6.57
Manufactures nec                      36.45     42.82    0.61   20.07    86.76      8.95   0.16    4.13
TOTAL                                 50.25     18.36    3.50   27.81    95.05      1.10   0.78    3.06




                                                                                                          52
Appendix Table A3. Output and Transport Emission Shares and Intensities, by Country
                                                           Emission Intensities (CO2 g/$)          Emission Intensities (CO2 g/$)
                                  Emission Shares
                                   (% of World)
                                                           By Exporter                             By Importer

                                 Transport      Output     Total   Output*       Transport           Total       Output*      Transport
                            Importer Exporter                                 Grams    Share                               Grams    Share
Argentina                     0.56      1.20     1.47      2351     1924       427      18.2          621         282       339      54.6
Austria                       0.71      0.62    0.18        160       82        79      49.1          227         142        85      37.6
Belgium                       1.41      1.45     0.31       176      103        73      41.4          292         230        63      21.4
Brazil                        1.40      3.17    4.53       1477     1103       374      25.3          766         487       279      36.4
Canada                        3.52      1.54     2.08       429      363        66      15.4          368         205       163      44.4
China and Hong Kong           6.73      3.45    20.85       426      363        63      14.8          430         293       138      32.0
Chile                         0.79      0.64    0.29        639      391       247      38.7          945         503       442      46.8
Central and Caribbean
                              0.92      0.70        0.85   557       404       153          27.5      510         376       135     26.4
Americas
Denmark                       0.59      1.02        0.16   309      123        186          60.1      313         193       119     38.2
European Union                2.30      2.10        1.91   264      169        95           36.0      333         242        91     27.4
Rest of East Asia             0.08      0.26        0.76   2183     1679       505          23.1      700         546       154     22.0
Finland                        0.45     0.24        0.17    152     103         49          32.2      352         248       104     29.5
France                         2.82     2.39        1.56    185     112         73          39.4      291         209        82     28.3
Germany                       5.82      3.61        1.62   115       61         54          46.9      327         217       109     33.5
Greece                        0.48      0.36        0.23   497      253        244          49.1      370         260       110     29.8
India                         1.54      0.64        4.90   707      612        95           13.4      698         516       182     26.1
Ireland                       0.54      0.17        0.20   104       86         18          17.5      252         153        99     39.3
Italy                          2.85     1.89        1.13    155      84         71          46.0      391         285       105     27.0
Japan                         10.40     1.97        2.35   105       63         42          40.3      761         457       305     40.0
Korea                         4.11      2.94        0.90   244      108        136          55.6      650         410       240     37.0
Middle Eastern and North
                              4.27      9.24        7.37   1068      808       259          24.3      606         449       156     25.8
Africa




                                                                                                                                            53
Appendix Table A3. (cont’d) Output and Transport Emission Shares and Intensities, by Country
                                                                 Emission Intensities (CO2 g/$)           Emission Intensities (CO2 g/$)
                                       Emission Shares
                                        (% of World)
                                                                 By Exporter                              By Importer

                                     Transport          Output   Total    Output*        Transport           Total      Output*      Transport
                                 Importer Exporter                                    Grams    Share                              Grams    Share

Mexico                             5.92       1.13       1.78     288       211         76      26.6         674         245       429        63.6
Malaysia and Indonesia             2.48       3.90       2.52    545       333         212      38.9         522         319       203        38.8
Netherlands                        1.41       1.70       0.69     348       226        122      35.0          456        348       108        23.6
Oceania countries                  2.02       2.77       1.87    1008      701         307      30.4         440         245       194        44.2
Other East Europe                  2.15       2.73       4.34    1156       949        207      17.9          626        497       130        20.7
Rest of European Countries         1.34       0.93        0.49    213       158         55       25.8         281        181        99        35.4
Portugal                           0.40       0.26        0.15    172        88         83      48.6          354        266        87        24.7
Rest of South East Asia            2.16       1.33       3.12     525       442         84      15.9          503        348       155        30.8
Rest of South Asia                 0.50       0.22       2.10     583       496         88      15.0         808         670       138        17.1
Russia                             0.90       1.91       3.93    1177      1014        163      13.8          570        451       119        20.9
Singapore                          2.40       0.49       0.03      78        28         50      63.9          492        259       233        47.3
South Africa                       2.42       1.62       1.03     985       618        367      37.2         1019        403       616        60.4
Spain                              2.02       1.41        0.97    231       133         98      42.3          391        290       102        26.0
Sweden                             1.17       1.17       0.17     173        51        122      70.6         315         160       155        49.2
Sub Saharan Africa                 1.92       2.27       6.14    1699      1447        252      14.8         856         608       248        29.0
South and Other Americas           1.00       1.93       3.08    1430      1142        288      20.2         732         518       215        29.3
Taiwan                             3.09       0.70        0.57    158       117         41      26.0          564        324       240        42.6
United Kingdom                     3.78       1.38       1.16     169      112          57      33.6         341         234       106        31.2
United States                     10.65      32.53       12.03    739       251        488      66.0          366        271        94        25.8
TOTAL                             100.00     100.00     100.00    445       300        146      32.70         445        300       146        32.70
Note. Total emissions per dollar are calculated as the sum of transport and output emission intensities. *For comparability with transport
emissions, output emissions are constructed as a weighted average of sector level output emissions, using trade rather than output weights.




                                                                                                                                                      54
Appendix Table A4. Projected GDP Growth
                                  GDP in 2004              Projected Growth, 2004‐2020, %
                                    (billion
Country/Region                                   GDP     Capital   Unskilled Labor    Skilled Labor
                                     USD)
Argentina                                  150    73.3     48.3                24.5           146.2
Austria                                   292     47.6     51.0                15.1             3.2
Belgium                                   384     41.8     58.0                 2.6             ‐8.0
Brazil                                    617     76.4     68.0                13.1            61.9
Canada                                    979     51.1     68.1                28.4            15.5
Central America and Caribbean             287     69.9     85.8                33.5            76.4
Chile                                      90     96.5    128.2                51.6           132.9
China and Hong Kong                      1,837   174.2    266.0                14.1            87.1
Denmark                                   244     41.0     58.1                 7.8             ‐3.3
East Asia                                  26     63.6     68.3                25.4            35.9
Rest of European Union                    680     73.6     73.2               ‐14.9             ‐7.8
Finland                                   186     60.2     50.5                 8.7             ‐2.6
France                                   2,046    44.1     52.5                16.9             4.8
Germany                                  2,741    33.3     36.1                 8.0             ‐3.2
Greece                                    205     47.3     72.8                15.1             3.2
India                                     641    139.1    161.5                28.3            88.8
Ireland                                   182    102.3    135.6                46.6            31.4
Italy                                    1,678    41.6     42.6                ‐0.7           ‐10.9
Japan                                    4,659    30.6     49.3                 2.9           ‐10.5
Korea                                     676    109.0    118.6                35.8           147.7
Malaysia and Indonesia                    370    130.5    127.5                47.2           174.4
Mexico                                    683     81.5     69.5                51.5           106.7
Middle Eastern and North Africa          1,116    89.0     92.4                34.4            62.5
Netherlands                               579     51.5     52.8                16.6             4.6
Oceania countries                         756     72.5     83.8                31.5            13.2
Other East Europe                         553     89.2     82.3                12.9            41.7
Portugal                                  168     47.2     77.8                 9.4             ‐1.9
Rest of European Countries                623     39.9     35.9                21.7             9.1
Rest of South Asia                        185    120.1    122.8                40.4            79.8
Rest of South East Asia                   310     92.7     88.2                21.0            76.1
Russia                                    570     67.6     73.2                ‐1.6             6.6
Singapore                                 107    116.5    131.4                10.5            19.8
South Africa                              214     69.0    675.8                26.2            36.7
South and Other Americas                  339     62.9     59.9                21.8            81.0
Spain                                    1,040    56.6     84.0                17.4             5.3
Sub Saharan Africa                        310     77.1     85.9                51.6            72.5
Sweden                                    346     49.0     48.5                14.3             2.4
Taiwan                                    305     89.1    118.5                 1.2             9.7
United Kingdom                           2,124    41.9     48.9                17.5             5.3
United States                          11,673     66.8     86.8                26.9            14.1
WORLD                                  40,970     64.6     83.3                18.7            21.8




                                                                                                       55
