NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERSECUTION PERPETUATED:
THE MEDIEVAL ORIGINS OF ANTI-SEMITIC VIOLENCE IN NAZI GERMANY
Nico Voigtlaender
Hans-Joachim Voth
Working Paper 17113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17113

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

We thank Sascha Becker, Efraim Benmelech, Davide Cantoni, Dora Costa, Raquel Fernandez, Jordi
Galí, Claudia Goldin, Avner Greif, Elhanan Helpman, Rick Hornbeck, Saumitra Jha, Matthew Kahn,
Lawrence Katz, Deirdre McCloskey, Joel Mokyr, Petra Moser, Nathan Nunn, Steve Pischke, Leah
Platt Boustan, Shanker Satyanath, Kurt Schmidheiny, Andrei Shleifer, Yannay Spitzer, Peter Temin,
Matthias Thoenig, and Jaume Ventura for helpful comments. Seminar audiences at CREI, Harvard,
NYU, Northwestern, Stanford, UCLA, UPF, Warwick, and at the 2011 Royal Economic Society Conference
offered useful criticisms. We are grateful to Hans-Christian Boy for outstanding research assistance,
and Jonathan Hersh, Maximilian von Laer, and Diego Puga for help with the geographic data. Davide
Cantoni and Noam Yuchtman kindly shared their data on year of incorporation and first market for
German cities. Voigtländer acknowledges financial support from the UCLA Center for International
Business Education and Research (CIBER). Voth thanks the European Research Council for generous
funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Nico Voigtlaender and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany
Nico Voigtlaender and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 17113
June 2011
JEL No. N33,N34,N53,N54,Z1,Z10
ABSTRACT
How persistent are cultural traits? This paper uses data on anti-Semitism in Germany and finds continuity
at the local level over more than half a millennium. When the Black Death hit Europe in 1348-50,
killing between one third and one half of the population, its cause was unknown. Many contemporaries
blamed the Jews. Cities all over Germany witnessed mass killings of their Jewish population. At the
same time, numerous Jewish communities were spared. We use plague pogroms as an indicator for
medieval anti-Semitism. Pogroms during the Black Death are a strong and robust predictor of violence
against Jews in the 1920s, and of votes for the Nazi Party. In addition, cities that saw medieval anti-Semitic
violence also had higher deportation rates for Jews after 1933, were more likely to see synagogues
damaged or destroyed in the 'Night of Broken' Glass in 1938, and their inhabitants wrote more anti-Jewish
letters to the editor of the Nazi newspaper Der Stürmer.
Nico Voigtlaender
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu
Hans-Joachim Voth
Economics Department
UPF & CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
E-08005 Barcelona
and CREI
jvoth@crei.cat

I. Introduction
From fertility to trust and corruption, there is a growing theoretical literature arguing that cultural
norms are powerful determinants of individual behavior (Bisin and Verdier 2001, Tabellini
2008), and that they can persist over long periods (Acemoglu and Jackson 2011). There is also
strong empirical support for parental investment creating long-term persistence of attitudes
(Fernandez and Fogli 2009, Algan and Cahuc 2010), and for past events and institutional
arrangements influencing norms and preferences today (Nunn and Wantchekon 2011, Guiso,
Sapienza, Zingales 2008). What is less clear is how long cultural persistence can last, and if it
matters for extreme forms of behavior, such as inter-ethnic violence.
In this paper, we examine the historical roots of anti-Semitism in interwar Germany. When the
Black Death arrived in Europe in 1348-50, it was often blamed on Jews poisoning wells. Many
towns and cities (but not all) murdered their Jewish populations. Almost six hundred years later,
after defeat in World War I, Germany saw a country-wide rise in anti-Semitism. This led to a
wave of persecution, even before the Nazi Party seized power in 1933. We demonstrate that
localities with a medieval history of pogroms showed markedly higher levels of anti-Semitism in
the interwar period. Attacks on Jews were six times more likely in the 1920s in towns and cities
where Jews had been burned in 1348-50; the Nazi Party’s share of the vote in 1928 – when it had
a strong anti-Semitic focus – was 1.5 times higher than elsewhere.1
Germany’s persecution of Jews during the early 20th century has been a topic of intense research
interest. While some have argued that it can never be rationally explained (Levi 1979), others
have pointed to underlying economic and political causes (Glaeser 2005, Arendt 1994, Cohn
2007). That a deep-rooted history of anti-Semitism was ultimately responsible for a wave of
hatred has been argued by Goldhagen (1996). He observed that “... the most telling evidence
supporting the argument that antisemitism has fundamentally nothing to do with the actions of
Jews, and … nothing to do with an antisemite’s knowledge of the real nature of Jews, is the
widespread historical and contemporary appearance of antisemitism, even in its most virulent
forms, where there are no Jews, and among people who have never met Jews.” Several
mechanisms for the perpetuation of hatred have been emphasized, including the role of religion.
Passion plays, for example, often portrayed Jews as engaged in deicide (Glassman 1975). Anti-

1

The NSDAP received 2.6 percent of the popular vote in 1928. It only developed into a mass movement after the
onset of the Great Depression.

2
Semitic sculptures decorated churches and private houses, and book printing distributed these
images widely.2 Several tracts of Martin Luther are strongly anti-Semitic (Oberman 1984).
We explore the long-term persistence of inter-ethnic hatred by analyzing a new dataset
consisting of a cross-section of more than 1,400 towns and cities in interwar Germany.3 The
majority of them was small, with a median population of no more than 18,000 inhabitants in
1925, and a few thousand at most in the Middle Ages. Marriage across towns and migrations
were rare, which should have facilitated the persistence of cultural characteristics at the local
level. For all these towns, we record if pogroms took place at the time of the Black Death.
Several indicators shed light on interwar anti-Semitism. We compile data on anti-Jewish
pogroms during the 1920s, votes for the Nazi Party (especially during its early years, when it was
not yet a mass movement), readers’ letters to a virulently anti-Semitic Nazi newspaper (Der
Stürmer), attacks on synagogues during the ‘Night of Broken Glass’ (Reichskristallnacht) in
1938, as well as on deportations of Jews.
All these indicators suggest that localities with a history of pogroms in the Middle Ages also
showed higher levels of anti-Semitism in the years after 1920. We demonstrate the strength of
the link using both standard regression analysis, and by comparing matched pairs of cities based
on geographical distance. We also examine the circumstances under which persistence weakens
or disappears altogether. Some aspects of culture can change quickly, such as in the case of gays,
or of premarital sex (Fernandez-Villaverde, Greenwood, and Guner 2010). We demonstrate that
in our sample, persistence disappears for a subset of locations where the costs of discriminating
against outsiders was particularly high: Members of the Hanseatic League, which specialized in
long-distance trade, show no persistence of anti-Semitism. The same is true for towns and cities
that experienced high rates of population growth between the Middle Ages and the early 20th
century. This suggests that economic incentives as well as migration can overwhelm the
influence of local customs and beliefs.
This paper contributes to the literature on the long-run effects of local culture. Alesina and La
Ferrara (2005) have argued that cultural and religious fragmentation is robustly associated with
important outcome variables, such as civil wars, corruption, and public good provision. Bisin and
Verdier (2000) build a model of the dynamics of cultural transmission, and show under what

2

Churches from Cologne to Brandenburg contained (and many still contain) a sculpture of a so-called ‘Judensau,’
the image of a female pig in intimate contact with several Jews shown in demeaning poses (Shachar 1974). The
same type of sculpture can also be found in Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, France, and the Low Countries.
3
We will not be able to distinguish between anti-Semitism and a hatred of minorities in general – Jews were the
single largest minority in Germany at the time.

3
conditions heterogeneity of ethnic and cultural traits can survive over the long run.4 Tabellini
(2008) examines interactions of individuals with different degrees of ‘morality,’ and shows how
their proportion varies as a result of parental investment.
Recently, the historical roots of present-day conditions have attracted attention. Fernandez and
Fogli (2009) show that the fertility of immigrants’ children continues to be influenced by the
fertility in their parents’ country of origin. Algan and Cahuc (2010) demonstrate that inherited
trust is a powerful predictor of economic performance. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008)
argue that free medieval cities in Italy still have higher levels of interpersonal trust today. There
is also evidence that nationalities allowed to lend under Ottoman rule have higher bank
penetration in the present (Grosjean 2011), that having been a member of the Habsburg Empire
is associated with lower corruption in today’s successor states (Becker et al. 2011), that the
historic use of the plough in agriculture affects contemporaneous gender roles (Alesina,
Giuliano, and Nunn 2011), that the effect of changing religious norms on literacy can be
permanent (Botticini and Eckstein 2007), and that the slave trade in Africa led to permanently
lower levels of trust (Nunn and Wantchekon 2011).5 In a similar spirit to our paper, Jha (2008)
argues that Indian trading ports with a history of peaceful cooperation between Hindus and
Muslims saw less violent conflict during the period 1850-1950 and in 2002. We also connect
with recent work looking at the long-run effects of ‘deep’ parameters such as technological
starting conditions, genetic origin, and population composition (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2009;
Comin, Easterly, and Gong 2010; Putterman and Weil 2010).
Relative to this literature, our main contribution is to show the persistence of a ‘pure’ cultural
trait (i.e., without economic benefits) over the very long run.6 Other studies conclude that
economically beneficial features of culture – for example trust in the case of cities, or corruption
for individuals – can persist once they become established. Economic gain and its cultural
determinants, such as trust, are probably mutually reinforcing.7 This is true, for example, of the
Italian city states analyzed by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008), as well as the work of Jha

4

A more general model is Bisin and Verdier (2001). Cf. also the overview in Bisin (2010).
Other important work includes Grosjean (2010), who analyzes attitudes towards violence in the US and their
relation to a ‘culture of honor’ among Scottish and Irish settlers, the comparative work by Hackett Fischer (1989),
and research by Durante (2010) who concludes that higher climatic variability since 1500 is associated with higher
trust.
6
The origins of anti-Semitic sentiment may or may not have had an economic dimension. We simply argue that it is
unlikely that economic motives were crucial for transmission, given that Jews largely vanished from Germany for
centuries after the Middle Ages.
7
Aghion, Algan, Cahuc, and Shleifer (2010) build a model in which the level of trust and the regulatory
environment mutually reinforce each other, giving rise to multiple equilibria.
5

4
(2008). In contrast, the perpetuation of racial hatred in Germany over centuries shows that
cultural traits that are prima facie not economically beneficial can show similar persistence. Our
finding is particularly striking given that Jews largely disappeared from Germany after the
Middle Ages.8
We also contribute to the literature on modern anti-Semitism. In addition to the school of thought
that argues for the transmission of a cultural trait over centuries, even in the absence of Jews
themselves (Goldhagen 1996, Perednik 2003), there are ‘functionalist’ interpretations. These
emphasize economic and social factors, such as the particular benefits from murdering money
lenders (Cohn 2007). For recent episodes of anti-Semitism, some authors have emphasized the
role of modernization. Increasing social mobility and civic rights are said to have heightened the
fears of non-Jews about their social status (Arendt 1994; Almog 1990; Lindemann 2000). Where
strong states imposed equality, anti-Semitism flourished; weak states saw no such reaction
(Birnbaum and Kochan 1992). Political economy models of hatred focus on the incentives of
‘entrepreneurs’ in fostering misperceptions as a rallying cry for groups (Glaeser 2005). One
alternative is the so-called scapegoat theory, which argues that Jews are typically blamed for
misfortune in times of crisis (Ettinger 1980; Katz 1980; Fein 1987). All of these approaches have
difficulties explaining the waxing and waning of anti-Semitism over time, as well as the
differences in levels across countries (Brustein and King 2004). Our procedure is different. We
use two events that lowered the country-wide threshold for violence against Jews – the Black
Death and the rise of anti-Semitism after 1918 – and examine in which locations the hatred of
Jews leads to extreme acts.
The plan of the paper is as follows. We first describe our data and the historical context and
background of anti-Semitism in the Middle Ages. Section III presents our main empirical results.
The robustness and implications of our findings are discussed in section IV. Section V
concludes.

II. Data and Historical Context
We use data on anti-Semitism at two points in time – the medieval period, and the years 19201945. Our principal indicator for medieval violence against Jews is pogroms during the Black
Death. A wave of Jew-burning swept through much of Western Europe when the Black Death
arrived in 1348-50 (Cohn 2007). Germany is a particularly useful setting for our purposes due to
8

From the 19th century onwards, Jews resettled in Germany in large numbers.

5
its political fragmentation. Elsewhere, Jews had often been expelled by central authorities before
the Black Death.9 There is rich variation in pogroms at the local and regional level in Germany.
We can therefore compare medieval outbreaks of anti-Semitic violence with similar acts
committed in the same location more than half a millennium later, between 1920 and 1945.
Pogroms and Jewish Settlements in the Middle Ages
Jews probably first settled in Germany during the Roman period.10 The documentary record
begins around the year 1000, when there are confirmed settlements in major cities like Worms,
Speyer, Cologne, and Mainz (Haverkamp 2002). By the 14th century, there were nearly 300
confirmed localities with Jewish communities.11
Pogroms against Jews began not long after the earliest confirmed settlements were established.
The crusades in 1096, 1146, and 1309 witnessed mass killings of Jews in towns along the Rhine.
In addition, there is a long history of sporadic, localized, and deadly attacks. The so-called
Rintfleisch pogroms in Bavaria and Franconia in the late 13th century saw the destruction of
many communities (Toch 2003). In the same category are the Guter Werner attacks (1287) in the
mid-Rhine area, and the Armleder pogroms (1336) in Franconia and Saxony (Toch 2010). Many
of the pogroms unconnected with the plague or the crusades began with accusations against Jews
for ritual murder, poisoning of wells, or host desecration.
By far the most wide-spread and violent pogroms occurred at the time of the Black Death. One
of the deadliest epidemics in history, it spread from the Crimea to Southern Italy, France,
Switzerland, and into Central Europe. The plague killed between a third and half of Europe’s
population between 1348 and 1350 (McNeil 1975). Faced with a mass epidemic of
unprecedented proportion in living memory, Christians were quick to blame Jews for poisoning
wells and foodstuffs. After the first confessions were extracted under torture, the allegations
spread from town to town.
The Jews of Zurich were relatively fortunate – they were merely expelled. Despite an
intervention by the pope and declarations by the medical faculties in Montpellier and Paris that
the allegations of well-poisoning were false, many towns murdered their Jewish populations. In

9

Jews had been expelled from England in 1290 and from France in 1306/22. They were then partly recalled to
France, and finally expelled in 1359. Outbreaks of anti-Semitic violence also occurred during the Spanish expulsion
of 1492.
10
Throughout, we refer to Germany as the area under German control in 1938.
11
There are good reasons to believe that better documentation, and not only a spreading of Jewish settlements, was
responsible for this rise in numbers (Toch 2010).

6
Basle, approximately 600 Jews were gathered in a wooden house, constructed for the purpose, on
an island in the river Rhine. There they were burned (Gottfried 1985). Elsewhere, some city
authorities and local princes tried to shield ‘their’ Jews; few were successful. The city council of
Strasbourg intended to save its Jewish inhabitants. As a result, it was deposed. The next council
then arrested the Jews, who were burned on St. Valentine’s Day (Foa 2000).12 In some areas,
peasants and unruly mobs set upon the Jews who had been expelled or tried to flee (Gottfried
1985).
The chronicles of towns that burned their Jews rarely provide an explanation. The same dearth of
sources restricts the analysis of locations where no assaults are recorded. In some cases, it is not
certain that Jews dwelled in the town at the time of the Black Death. But in many cases, we can
be certain that Jews lived in towns which did not carry out attacks. In Halberstadt in central
Germany, for example, transactions with Jewish money lenders are recorded right before and
during the Black Death; there is no record of any violence. The most likely interpretation, and
the one we subscribe to, is that in locations where Jews lived, but where no pogrom occurred,
anti-Semitic sentiment was weaker. This resulted in less pressure by artisans and peasants on the
authorities to burn or expel the local Jewish community.
We use the Germania Judaica [GJ] as the main source for the medieval period.13 Initiated as a
research project by the German Society for the Advancement of Jewish Studies in 1903, GJ was
conceived as a comprehensive description of Jewish settlement history in the German Empire
from the origins to the Congress of Vienna in 1814. Its three completed volumes begin with the
earliest known Jewish settlements in Germany, and end in 1519. We principally use data from
vol. 2, covering the period 1238 to 1350. We supplement this list with information from the
recent work by Alicke (2008). Doubtful cases are not included in our list of Jewish settlements.
The scholars producing GJ drew on a number of original documents and secondary works. An
important source are the so-called Memorbücher. These collections, compiled in the Middle
Ages, contain remembrances of dead community members and prayers. From the 13th century
onwards, they developed into a particular literary form. Some of them contain more detailed
information, such as lists of victims during particular outbursts of violence (e.g., during the
1348-50 pogroms, or during the first crusade). Many of the plague pogroms are recorded in the
12

The case is disputed (Cohn 2007). Another famous example of elites shielding Jews involves the Duke Albrecht
of Austria. He initially intervened to stop the killing of Jews. Eventually, faced with direct challenges by local rulers
to his authority, and under orders of his own judges, he had all the Jews living in his territories burned (Cohn 2007).
There is substantial uncertainty about the extent of elite involvement in the mass killings of Jews in general
(Haverkamp 2002).
13
Avneri (1968).

7
Martyrologium of the Nürnberg Memorbuch (Salfeld 1898). Several other communities, such as
Deutz, also compiled their own versions. As our indicator for violence against Jews in the
Middle Ages, we code whether there was a pogrom in 1348-50. A typical entry in GJ reads as
follows:
Heiligenstadt – […] fortified by 1278, later capital of the principality of Eichsfeld, today
Kreisstadt in Thuringia.
At the time of the Black Death, the Jews of Heiligenstadt were systematically killed.
Survivors were recorded in Erfurt in 1365, and in Frankfurt in 1389. Heiligenstadt only
admitted Jews again in 1469.
The overwhelming majority of towns with Jewish populations witnessed mass killings in 134850. Of 299 observations, 218 (73%) recorded pogroms. The map in Figure 1 shows the frequency
of pogroms in 1348-50 in Germany in its 1938 borders. Areas where every single town saw
violent attacks on Jews are shown as black; the others are in varying shades of blue, depending
on the frequency of pogroms. Areas without data reflect those parts of Germany where there are
no records of medieval Jewish settlements. While there are white spots on the map, the
information derived from GJ covers all the major parts of Germany. The Rhineland, Franconia,
and Hesse stand out as areas with a high frequency of attacks.
[insert Figure 1 here]
At the same time, even at the local level, the frequency of attacks varied substantially. The
detailed map is taken from Haverkamp (2002) and shows parts of South-West Germany. Cities
and towns with a confirmed Jewish settlement are marked with a dark grey circle; those that
suffer a pogrom during the Black Death are indicated by a red square. Towns in immediate
proximity to each other – all with Jewish settlements – experienced a very different history of
medieval anti-Semitic violence. While the Jews of Göppingen, for example, were attacked, those
in Kirchheim escaped unharmed. The same contrast is visible for Reutlingen and Tübingen, or
between Rottenburg and Horb. These towns are no more than 25 km apart. This is the level of
variation at the local level which we will exploit in the quantitative analysis section of this paper.
Describing the history of Jews in Germany between the Middle Ages and the 19th century goes
beyond the scope of this paper. After the repeated pogroms of the medieval period, Jewish
communities had largely disappeared from Germany after the 15th century. They did not return
until the 17th century. Mercantilist rulers often welcomed Jewish commercial and financial
expertise (Burnett 1996). From the 18th century, Jews once more settled in Germany in larger
numbers. Their rights were severely limited until the large-scale emancipation of the Jews in the

8
19th century. By the late 19th century, Germany was home to numerous Jewish communities.
While the early years after the founding of the Empire saw a rise in anti-Semitism, anti-Jewish
parties had dwindled to near-insignificance by 1914 (Wawrzinek 1927, Levy 1974).
Anti-Semitism in Germany after World War I
Anti-Semitism in Germany grew during and after World War I. During the war, right-wing
organizations spread rumors that Jews were not serving at the front, and were engaged in warprofiteering. The German Army High Command ordered a count of all Jews in uniform,
allegedly to counter such claims, but never published the results. After the collapse of 1918, Jews
were wrongly blamed for defeat in World War I. This led to another increase in the level of antiSemitic agitation. Jews had served in high office, including Walther Rathenau, who coordinated
the supply of raw materials for the war. Matthias Erzberger, another prominent politician and a
Jew, opposed the war openly from 1917 onwards. He signed the humiliating armistice with the
Entente in 1918. As chairman of the armistice commission and later, as Finance Minister, he
implemented many of the provisions of the Versailles treaty, including a large hike in taxes to
pay for reparations.
In addition, Jews provided some of the leadership for the German revolution of 1918 and
attempts to establish socialist regimes thereafter. In Munich, Kurt Eisner proclaimed a Soviet
Republic; Gustav Landauer and Eugen Levine held positions of great influence. Rosa
Luxemburg attempted to organize a revolution along Bolshevist lines.14 The ultra-left bid for
power was eventually thwarted by demobilized army units. Radical right-wing groups quickly
seized on the involvement of leading Jewish politicians in the revolution, the armistice, and the
peace treaty of Versailles. The (incorrect) claim that Germany’s army had been ‘stabbed in the
back’ and not been defeated in battle pointed the finger at the revolution of 1918 as the key
factor that lost the war.
Anti-Semitism was already widespread before the Nazi party’s rise to power in 1933. Student
associations would often exclude Jews. The desecration of Jewish cemeteries occurred with
some frequency. Synagogues were besmirched with graffiti; politicians made anti-Semitic
speeches (Walter 1999). In many hotels and restaurants, Jews were not welcome; elsewhere,
entire towns declared themselves to be open for Christian guests only (Borut 2000).

14

Luxemburg and Liebknecht led the USPD, the ultra-left wing of the socialist party (SPD). Liebknecht was widely
(and incorrectly) believed to be Jewish.

9
According to the census of 1925, there were over 560,000 Jews living in Germany. The vast
majority (66%) resided in the six biggest cities; the rest was evenly divided between smaller
cities and over 1,000 towns and villages with a population size of less than 10,000. For the
regional patterns of 20th century violence, our main source is Alicke (2008). From the wealth of
information in his Encyclopaedia of Jewish Communities in German-speaking Areas, we focus
on evidence about anti-Semitic violence in the 1920s and 1930s. Pogroms before 1933 were rare,
but not unknown. We find 37 communities that engaged in major attacks on Jews before the
Nazi rise to power. To qualify as such, there has to be physical violence.15
During Weimar Germany’s period of economic decline and social unrest after 1918, numerous
right-wing parties with anti-Semitic programs sprang up. Hitler’s National Socialist German
Workers Party (NSDAP, aka the Nazi Party) was only one of many, but amongst the most
radical. The German National People’s Party (DNVP) continued the anti-Semitic rhetoric of the
Imperial era (Hertzman 1963). Closest to the NSDAP was the German People’s Freedom Party
(DVFP), which split from the DNVP in 1922 because of the latter’s lack of radical antiSemitism. We use King et al.’s (2008) election data as well as commonly used control variables.
During its early years, the Nazi Party emphasized its extremist world view and anti-Semitic
plans, and tried to seize power in the so-called Beerhall putsch. Afterwards, the Nazi Party was
banned. The DVFP absorbed much of the Nazi vote in the May 1924 election (Striesow 1981).16
We find a correlation of .67 between the voting results of the DFVP in 1924 and the Nazi Party
in 1928, significant at the 1% level. Readmitted to the polls in 1928, the Nazi Party won 3.2
percent of eligible votes in our sample.17 And yet, in some localities, as many as 34 percent of
voters supported the party’s program, while in others, not a single vote was cast in favor of the
NSDAP.18
The Nazi party’s focus changed later, when it tried to garner middle class support. To this end, it
tried to appear ‘respectable;’ leaders underlined their determination to win power by legal
means.19 The change in tactics is generally dated after 1928. During the Great Depression, the
party increasingly sought to exploit economic and social issues. Anti-Semitism never
15

Based on Alicke (2008). Political agitation and the desecration of Jewish property alone is not counted under this
heading.
16
Members of the banned NSDAP reconstituted themselves as a party under the label NSFP, which put forward
joint lists with the DVFP. The NSFP later merged with the NSDAP when the ban on the latter expired (Levy 2005).
17
Nationwide, the NSDAP received 2.6% of the vote. The difference between our sample mean and the nationwide
average is explained by the fact that our sample includes only cities.
18
The latter occurred in 7 cities in our sample – all with less than 2,000 eligible voters.
19
Stachura (1978) emphasizes decisions after the election of 1928 as a turning point; Broszat (1960), Bullock
(1991), and Bracher (1970) suggest that the decisive changes occurred in 1929.

10
disappeared from the party’s manifestos and propaganda, but it was toned down. Oded
Heilbronner (2004), summarizing the main research trend over the last few decades, concluded:
Until the 1960s most studies of the Nazi Party and National Socialism argued that antiSemitism was an essential factor in explaining Nazi success before 1933. But in recent
decades, numerous studies have shown that anti-Semitism was probably somewhat
underrepresented in Nazi Party activity and propaganda in the period before 1933,
particularly in the last years before Hitler became Chancellor.
After the ‘turning point’ in 1928 (Stachura 1978), the NSDAP became largely a party for
disaffected protest voters, who may or may not have shared its more radical ideas. As the party
gained electoral appeal, the distribution of votes by district increasingly approximates a normal
distribution – locations with radical views are less easily identified as the party’s mass support
swamped the factors that drove its early results. Figure 2 gives an overview of how voting
outcomes changed over time. We plot vote shares for the DVFP in 1924, and for the NSDAP in
1928, 1930, and 1933. After 1928, a continuous shift of the distribution to the right is apparent.
At the same time, relative differences between the average and the most fervently pro-Nazi
district become harder to identify. For these reasons, we regard results until 1928 as particularly
useful indicators for a local population’s ideological orientation. We will also analyze the post1928 election results.
[insert Figure 2 here]
In Figure 3, we show the geographical distribution of votes for the Nazi Party in 1928. Bavaria,
the upper Rhine region, as well as Schleswig-Holstein are areas of high support. As in Figure 1,
we see ample variation at the regional level, with areas of very low vote shares immediately
adjacent to those with high proportions of votes for the Nazi Party.
[insert Figure 3 here]
In addition, we collect data on the ‘Night of Broken Glass’ (Reichskristallnacht). While much of
the violence was centrally directed, it required local co-operation. In a number of towns and
cities, there were no attacks. We collect information from Alicke (2008) on whether synagogues
were damaged or destroyed in 1938. The local record is not always clear on why this happened.
In a handful of cases, local mayors refused to participate, or stopped SA troopers from burning
down the synagogue, etc. Historical narratives (Alicke 2008) often emphasize ‘technical’
constraints, such as fire hazard, or ownership issues. We do not take a view if these were a
pretext. However, we see no good reason why there should have been fewer practical difficulties
in those German municipalities that participated in medieval pogroms.

11
Next, we use data on deportations of German Jews to assess the strength of anti-Semitic
sentiment in each town. The German Federal Archive (Bundesarchiv) has compiled detailed data
from available records, at the level of each municipality, for deportations, including the name,
date of birth, date of deportation, destination, and (where known) ultimate fate of each
individual.20 Mass deportations to the East began only in 1941. As early as 1938, Polish Jews
living in Germany were rounded up and transported to the German-Polish border, and then
forced to cross. Before that date, and during the pogroms of the ‘Night of Broken Glass,’ Jews
from some towns were deported to camps in the Reich.
In our empirical analysis, we examine how many deportations took place, conditioning on the
number of Jews living in a town. Remaining differences reflect, in our view, local sentiment.
This is because many rules for the treatment of Jews were anything but clear-cut. Deportations
could occur at the instigation of local town and party officials; exemptions (for ‘quarter Jews,’
i.e., those with only one Jewish grandparent; for veterans of World War I; or for those married to
gentiles) could be applied for and needed to be approved. Under these conditions, local
administrators could find themselves in a position of great power. Lobbying could postpone the
day of reckoning for some Jews; for others, denunciations spelled an early transfer to the camps.
Finally, while the numbers rescued were not large, help from local neighbors and friends was
decisive for Jews trying to hide or flee abroad.
We derive our final indicator of anti-Semitic sentiment from the Nazi newspaper Der Stürmer.
Published under the motto ‘the Jews are our misfortune,’ it was by far the most anti-Jewish of all
the Nazi newspapers. Der Stürmer typically mixed tales of Jewish ritual murders with dark
conspiracy theories. It also contained a section with letters to the editor (chosen by the editorial
staff for the interest and attitude of the letter received). A typical case involves a mixture of
denunciation and pedagogical questions about how bad it is to mingle with Jews. For example, a
Hamburg schoolgirl wrote to the newspaper in 1935 (Hahn 1978):
Dear Stürmer!
I attend a well-known higher secondary school in Hamburg. Regrettably, we still have
many Jewish fellow students. Equally regrettably, many German girls are still close
friends with these Jewish girls. On special occasions, when we wear [BDM]21 uniforms
in school, these girls walk arm-in-arm with their Jewish friends. You can imagine what

20

Bundesarchiv (2007). The register of names and places is available online at
http://www.bundesarchiv.de/gedenkbuch/
21
BDM-Bund Deutscher Mädchen [Association of German Girls]. This was the equivalent of the Hitler Youth for
girls.

12
an impression this gives! When confronting the girls in question, they say “stop
instigating hatred all the time! Jews are human beings, too, and ‘Eva’ is a ‘modest’,
‘decent’, ‘nice’ girl!” […] I consider these friendships very dangerous, since the Jews and
their corrupting ideas destroy the souls of the girls slowly but surely. Girls at 14 are too
innocent to realize the true intentions of their Jewish “girlfriends”. I am myself barely 15
years old…
We use three years of letters to the editor of Stürmer, from 1935 to 1938, and code the location
of the letter-writer. We then calculate the sum of letters in three categories – those published as
article-equivalents (an obvious sign of approbation by the editors), those denouncing named
individuals still talking to or having business dealings with Jews, and those asking questions
about Jews (e.g., the number of Jews remaining in a city, etc.). Of the 1,401 towns in our dataset,
888 (63%) recorded not a single letter sent to the Stürmer. At the other end of the distribution,
we find cities like Nürnberg (where the Stürmer was edited, and NSDAP party congresses were
held) with 73 letters, Munich (77, where the party was founded and the Beerhall putsch took
place), Cologne (110), and Berlin (354).22
Data overview
Throughout the empirical analysis, we use two datasets. The full sample contains all the
municipalities with 20th century data on Jewish population and anti-Semitic outcome variables,
based on the work by Alicke (2008). The other is a subset of the full sample, where we exclude
all towns and cities for which there is no direct evidence of Jewish settlement in the 14th century
(restricted sample). The full sample contains more than 1,400 cities within the 1938 borders of
Germany; for 299 of these, Jewish settlements before the Black Death are documented,
constituting the restricted sample. The appendix provides a more detailed description of our data.
Table 1 gives an overview of the main variables in the full sample. The average town has a little
over 20,000 inhabitants, but the largest city in the dataset (Berlin) has over 4.4 million. Jews are
typically a small part of the population (2.3%).23 In the average city, about half of the population
was Protestant, and most of the remainder Catholic. In almost 80% of locations, there was a
synagogue or a dedicated place for religious worship by Jews in 1933. About 2.5 percent of cities

The veracity of letters such as the one cited in the text may well be called into question. However, the Stürmer
Archive (preserved in the City Archive of Nuremberg) contains many letters of this type, as well as of other
denunciations.
23
In Germany as a whole, Jews accounted for less than one percent of the total population. Since many Jews lived in
urban centers, it is not surprising that our urban sample shows a higher proportion than the nation as a whole.
22

13
witnessed pogroms during the 1920s. The average city gave 3.2% of votes to the NSDAP in
1928, and 6.9% to the Völkisch-Nationalist DVFP in 1924. For both elections, there is
substantial variation from municipality to municipality. The average town reported 113
deportees, ranging from 0 to 55,807. The number of anti-Semitic letters to the Stürmer between
1935-38 shows a range from 0 to 354 (which we scale by town/city population in our empirical
analysis). In more than 80% of cities that had synagogues or prayer rooms, these were damaged
or destroyed during the ‘Night of Broken Glass.’ Of the overall sample, 26.2% (367 cities) have
confirmed records of Jewish settlement in the Middle Ages; 17.2% of the sample witnessed
pogroms during the Black Death.24
[insert Table 1 here]
In Table 2, we explore some basic correlation patterns in our data. We find that all our indicators
of 20th century anti-Semitism are significantly and positively correlated with medieval pogroms.
In addition, the six variables for modern anti-Semitism are mostly positively correlated with each
other.
[insert Table 2 here]
Next, we examine the comparability of localities with and without Black Death pogroms. We
first use data on the economic development of German cities in the Middle Ages. The date of
incorporation, and of the first market charter capture this dimension.25 Differences are small.
Places with pogroms were first incorporated in 1272; those without them, in 1284. The same is
true for first market charter – 1315 vs. 1395. Second, we compare long-run economic
development for locations with and without pogroms. Table 3 reports city growth over two
periods – 1300-1933 and 1750-1933.26 Neither the full sample (columns 1-2), nor the restricted
sample (columns 4-5) show statistically significant differences in growth rates between towns
and cities with and without pogroms. Finally, the share of Jews in the population in 1933 is not
significantly different, either (columns 3 and 6). This suggests that Jews did not systematically
avoid settling in locations where medieval pogroms had occurred. Overall, there is little reason to
question the comparability of the towns with and without pogroms in 1349.

24

For 132 cities, the historical record on Black Death pogroms is ambiguous or explicitly listed as “unknown” in GJ.
We code these observations as missing, which explains the smaller number of observations for POG1349. This leaves
299 cities with confirmed medieval Jewish communities and information on Black Death pogroms. These constitute
our restricted sample.
25
We thank Davide Cantoni and Noam Yuchtman for sharing their data with us.
26

We use two periods for growth since there are only a few observations on population size in 1300. We investigate
outcome variables for which city-level (as opposed to precinct-level) data are available.

14
[insert Table 3 here]

III. Empirical Results
In this section we present our main results. We argue that pogroms during the Black Death in
1348-50 reflect medieval anti-Semitism. As described in Section II, the Black Death was a
common shock that lowered the overall threshold for violence against Jews. In some cities,
citizens responded with pogroms, while in others, Jews were unharmed. Similarly, the general
upsurge in anti-Semitic sentiment in Germany after World War I made the expression of antiSemitic attitudes and violent acts against Jews more likely. We demonstrate that across a range
of indicators, towns and cities with a medieval history of violence against Jews also engaged in
more persecution in the 1920s and 1930s.
Specification of Regressions and Estimation Techniques
We use two empirical strategies. First, standard regression analysis with a variety of estimators,
from OLS to Poisson. Second, we employ geographical matching to compare nearby towns with
and without Black Death pogroms. In this way, we control for unobserved local characteristics.
Regressions take the following general form:
ASi = α + β·POGi1349 + γXi + εi ,
where ASi represents the various proxies for anti-Semitism in the Weimar Republic and Nazi
Germany at the city level i, POGi1349 is an indicator variable for Black Death pogroms, and Xi is
a vector of control variables. Depending on the indicator, we allow for different distributions of
the error term εi, instead of limiting ourselves to normal ones only (OLS). Where the outcome
variable is a dummy, we employ Probit estimation, and where its distribution is skewed, we use
Poisson ML estimation. We also use propensity score estimation, matching by observed city
characteristics.
In addition, we match towns by geographic location, based on longitude and latitude. As a rich
literature in labor economics (Card and Krueger 1997) has argued, comparing places in close
proximity can help to overcome omitted variable problems. We thus compare directly towns that

15
are no more than a few kilometers apart, where one saw a pogrom in 1349 while the next one(s)
did not.27
Full vs. Restricted Sample
The interpretation of β depends on the sample used. For the full sample, β describes the average
increase in 20th century anti-Semitism (ASi) in cities with Black Death pogroms, as compared to
all cities without pogroms in 1349. The comparison thus includes cities without documented
medieval Jewish communities. In other words, the control group contains cities for which
‘treatment’ (i.e., Black Death pogroms) was probably impossible because there was no Jewish
settlement. The restricted sample addresses this issue. Here, β compares cities with Black Death
pogroms with those without violent attacks on their confirmed Jewish population in 1349.
Results are similar across datasets.
Overview of results
We begin by demonstrating a strong relationship between attacks during the Black Death and
pogroms in the 1920s, as well with votes for the Nazi Party (NSDAP) in May 1928. As discussed
in Section II, the Nazi Party had a strong focus on anti-Semitism until about 1928. Medieval
pogroms also predict votes for the anti-Semitic DVFP in 1924, when the Nazi Party was banned.
In addition, we find strong results for the deportations of Jews after 1933, as well as letters to the
editor of the particularly anti-Semitic Nazi newspaper Der Stürmer. Finally, we turn to assaults
on synagogues during the ‘Night of Broken Glass’ in 1938. While the majority of synagogues
was attacked, the local variation again reveals a strong relationship with pogroms in 1349.
A Comparison of Two Cities
To fix ideas, let us compare two cities. We will focus on Würzburg, population 101,000 in 1933,
with Aachen, population 162,000. Würzburg had a Jewish community since 1100 (Alicke 2008),
and Aachen since 1242 (Avneri 1968). The former saw a pogrom during the Black Death; the
latter did not.
Würzburg’s Jews suffered persecution early. A pogrom in 1147 destroyed the community.
During the Rintfleisch pogroms in 1298, some 800 Jews died. During the Black Death, the
bishop’s pro-notary, Michael de Leone, recorded his feelings in 1349 in two poems. He

27

More precisely, Black Death pogroms occurred between 1348 and 1350. For ease of exposition, we refer to them
as pogroms in 1349 in the following.

16
concluded that ‘the Jews deserved to be swallowed up in the flames’ (Cohn 2007). In Würzburg
there were also pogroms in the 1920s; the Stürmer published 23 letters from readers (a frequency
10 times higher than average). Würzburg had a Nazi share of the vote in May 1928 of 6.3%,
when the mean district recorded 3.4%. We know that 943 Jews were deported after 1933 (out of
a community of 2,145 in 1933, equivalent to 44%).28
The city of Aachen provides a stark contrast with Würzburg. Jews were first recorded in 1242,
paying taxes. For the 13th century, several Jews born in Aachen are recorded in the lists of the
dead of other towns. The town had a ‘Judengasse’ [street for Jews] in 1330. For Aachen, the
Germania Judaica explicitly states that there is no record of anti-Semitic violence, neither before
the Black Death nor during it. This is despite the fact that, in 1349, citizens of Brussels wrote to
the Aachen authorities urging them “to take care that the Jews don’t poison the wells” (Avneri
1968). Aachen also saw no pogroms in the 1920s. The Stürmer published only 10 letters (or less
than half the number for Würzburg, despite a population that was 60% larger).29 Only 1% of
voters in Aachen backed the NSDAP in 1928. 502 out of 1,345 Jews are known to have been
deported, or 37% of the total. Next, we investigate how general these differences are.
Pogroms in the 1920s
Pogroms in the 1920s were infrequent and highly localized affairs. While embedded in a broader
context of anti-Semitic agitation and acts, such as attacks on shops, we only count recorded acts
of physical violence. Cities with Black Death pogroms had, on average, significantly more
pogroms in the 1920s than cities without pogroms in 1349. As Table 4 shows, our full sample
comprises 1,245 cities with observations on pogroms in both 1349 and the 1920s (panel A). In
294 of these, there were Jewish communities prior to the Black Death (panel B). In 73% of these
localities (215 out 294), the Black Death coincided with pogroms. The 1920s saw 33 pogroms in
Weimar Germany overall. The frequency of attack was 8.4% in the 215 cities with pogroms in
1349, versus 1.5% in the remaining 1,030 cities without medieval Jewish settlements and/or
Black Death pogroms. The fact that a town experienced a medieval pogrom thus raises the
probability of witnessing another pogrom in the 1920s by a factor of approximately 6. The
contrast is even more striking if we focus only on localities with confirmed medieval

28

This does not imply that 56% were not deported. The files of the Bundesarchiv are not perfect, and especially in
the later stages of the war, record-keeping degenerated. Also, the survival of evidence was less than assured at a
time of numerous bombing-raids, etc. In addition, emigration of Jews before 1939 likely accounts for much of the
gap.
29
In both cities, synagogues were destroyed in 1938.

17
communities of Jews (panel B of Table 4): 19 pogroms were reported for the 294 cities, and out
of these, 18 occurred in cities that also saw Black Death pogroms.
[insert Table 4 here]
Table 5 reports regressions of pogroms in the 1920s on Black Death pogroms. There is a positive
and significant association both for the full sample (columns 1 and 2) as well as for the restricted
sample (columns 3-6). The effect is quantitatively important, with Black Death pogroms
increasing the probability of 1920s pogroms by approximately 7 percent, from roughly 1% to
more than 8%. Both magnitude and significance are robust to controlling for population, the
percentage of the population that is Jewish, as well as the share of Protestants.30 We add the
latter to the list of exogenous variables because Protestant regions on average were more prone
to vote for the Nazi Party (Falter 1991). As columns 5 and 6 show, both Probit and propensity
score matching estimation confirm the OLS results.31
Finally, columns 7 and 8 give the results for geography-based matching in the full and restricted
sample, respectively. The mean and median distances between matched cities are low – around
10-25 km.32 The distance is shorter in the full sample where more potential matches are
available. We find significant effects, of a similar magnitude as in the previous specifications.
This strongly suggests that our findings are not driven by unobserved heterogeneity at the local
level.
[insert Table 5 here]
While a history of medieval violence against Jews is associated with statistically significant and
large shifts in the probability of another pogrom, the correlation is not perfect. Not all towns that
burned their Jews in 1348-50 saw attacks in the 1920s – the majority did not. Many factors can
reduce the extent to which anti-Semitic attitudes survive in one location. At the end of the
empirical results section, we examine some of the city characteristics that systematically reduce
persistence.

30

Where we do not have city- or town-level observations for control variables, we use precinct-level data. Standard
errors are clustered at the precinct level.
31
Following Abadie et al. (2004). We use 4 matches for propensity score estimation based on control variables. This
offers the benefit of not relying on too little information, while it avoids incorporating observations that are not
sufficiently similar. Results are very similar when changing the number of matches.
32
In order to match cities that are as close to each other as possible, we restrict the number of matches to two. We
effectively compare each city that had a Black Death pogrom with the two nearest cities that did not. When
increasing the number of matches to four – as in the matching based on controls in column (6) – the results are very
similar, while distance increases by about one half in both full and restricted sample.

18
Election Results
We now turn to parliamentary elections during the Weimar Republic. The May 1928 election is
arguably the most reliable indicator for anti-Semitism because the NSDAP emphasized the antiSemitic and radical side of its program strongly in the early- and mid-1920s. Thereafter, it
aspired to greater respectability in the eyes of middle class voters, the NSDAP toned down this
part of its ideology. Table 6 shows the outcomes of four elections between 1924 and 1933,
divided into cities with and without Black Death pogroms. Panel A presents the results for the
full sample, while panel B is restricted to cities with medieval Jewish population. In the two
earlier elections, vote shares for the anti-Semitic DVFP and NSDAP are more than one
percentage point higher in cities with pogroms in 1349.33 In the 1928 election, this means that the
NSDAP added more than a third to its typical vote share in cities with pogroms in 1349. Those
numbers hold for both the full sample and the restricted sample.
[insert Table 6 here]
Table 7 shows the corresponding regressions. Column 1 reports the effect of medieval pogroms
on NSDAP votes for all cities in our sample; column 2 adds a variety of controls. Columns 3 and
4 repeat this exercise for the restricted sample. In all cases, we find a significantly positive
correlation, and its magnitude indicates that the NSDAP vote was approximately 1.5% higher in
cities with anti-Semitic violence in 1349. Here, the NSDAP added more than one third to its
average vote share of approximately 3.5%. The control variables show that Protestants voted in
greater numbers for the NSDAP than the average population, confirming Falter (1991).34 The
average share of Protestants is about one half in both the full and the restricted sample.
According to the point estimates in columns 2 and 4, an increase of the share of Protestants by
one standard deviation (.33) raises the NSDAP votes by about 1 percentage point – an effect
slightly smaller than that of medieval pogroms. Workers typically voted for the Social
Democrats or the Communists (Childers 1983). Accordingly, we find a negative and significant
coefficient on the percentage of blue collar workers. An increase by one standard deviation
(.075) is associated with a 1% lower NSDAP vote share. Finally, the percentage of Jews in the
population is not significantly correlated with NSDAP votes in 1928.
[insert Table 7 here]

33

In 1924, the NSDAP was officially banned and ran candidates with the DVFP.
Other authors attribute the relative strength of the NSDAP in Protestant areas to its weakness in proposing policies
that could have appealed to farmers in Southern (Catholic) areas (King et al. 2008).
34

19
Column 5 shows the results for a Poisson maximum likelihood regression because the
distribution of NSDAP votes in 1928 is heavily right-skewed (see Figure 2). Following
Wooldridge (2002), linear models may not be appropriate for ‘corner-solution’ specifications,
where a significant mass of the non-negative observations is close to zero. The ML results
confirm our earlier findings. The estimated coefficient implies that the average effect of a
pogrom in 1349 on NSDAP votes in 1928 is .463×.039=.0181, where .039 is the average vote
(panel B of Table 6). In column 6, we use Propensity Score Matching (based on the previously
used control variables) to estimate the average treatment effect of Black Death pogroms. This
addresses the concern that covariates influence both treatment (pogroms in 1349) and response
(anti-Semitism in Weimar Germany). This methodology confirms our results in terms of
magnitude and significance.
To illustrate the strength of our findings, consider the two towns of Königheim and Wertheim.
They are 10.3 km apart and had populations of 1,549 and 3,971 in 1933, respectively. Both had a
Jewish settlement before the Black Death. Königheim did not see a pogrom during the plague,
but Wertheim did. The NSDAP received 1.6% of valid votes in Königheim in 1928; in
Wertheim, it received 8.1%. The analysis in columns 7 and 8 generalizes this type of comparison
by matching all towns in our restricted dataset to their two nearest neighbors with a different
history of medieval anti-Semitic violence, using their GPS coordinates. The corresponding
results confirm the statistical significance and magnitude of the previous estimates.
Table 8 repeats the same regressions for the German Völkisch Freedom Party (DVFP) in May
1924. We find similar results to those for NSDAP votes in 1928. On average, Black Death
pogroms increase the DVFP vote by 2-3 percentage points. To put things in context, in the
sample as a whole, the DVFP polled 6.9% in 1924.35 The results with control variables show
strong and significant increases in the vote share for the DVFP where medieval pogroms
occurred. These findings are confirmed when we use Poisson maximum likelihood estimation
(column 5), standard matching estimation (column 6), or matching by geography (columns 7 and
8).36
[insert Table 8 here]

35

The coefficient on pogrom 1349 is insignificant in the specification in column 3, where the fit is also very low.
Once additional controls are included, improving the R2, the variable becomes again significant.
36
Using the average vote corresponding to the restricted sample (panel B in Table 6), the average effect of a pogrom
in 1349 on DVFP votes in 1924 is .266×.086=.023, according to the Poisson ML estimate in column 5.

20
Next, we analyze the correlation of Black Death pogroms with NSDAP election results in 1930
and 1933. We find that the effect becomes weaker in 1930 and vanishes in 1933. Table 9 shows
that the estimated coefficient is still positive and significant in the 1930 election for two out of
four specifications. The magnitude of the effect is unchanged as compared to 1928, despite the
fact that the NSDAP won about five times more votes in 1930 (see Table 6). This suggests that
the number of Nazi voters with historically rooted anti-Semitic motives did not grow during the
rise of the NSDAP. For 1933, the coefficient becomes negative and insignificant for all except
the full sample OLS (column 5), where it is marginally significant. Because of the declining
importance of anti-Semitic agitation for the NSDAP after 1928, it is easy to rationalize the
declining correlation with medieval pogroms. In addition, as the party received an ever larger
share of the popular vote (see Figure 2), it becomes more difficult to identify extreme local
attitudes.
[insert Table 9 here]
Deportations, Stürmer letters, and assaults on synagogues
We now turn to additional indicators of anti-Semitism in Nazi Germany. We begin with
deportations of Jews between 1933 and 1944. While the result of a centrally directed policy,
deportations in any one town and village partly reflected the level of hostility shown by local
authorities, as well as support or denunciations by neighbors and acquaintances.
Table 10 reports regressions of deportations during the Nazi regime on Black Death pogroms.
We use data on deportations at the city level for the period from 1933-45, controlling for initial
Jewish population – measured in 1933 (panel A) and 1939 (panel B). The OLS estimate for the
full sample in column 1 is significantly positive, suggesting an increase in deportations by 13.7%
in cities with medieval pogroms. In the restricted sample, we find a coefficient of 14% (column
2). The coefficient is statistically insignificant, which is, however, not surprising. In addition to
the reduced sample size in column 2, the deportation variable is strongly right-skewed, with a
large share of zero or close-to-zero observations (this holds even for the natural logarithm, as
used in columns 1-4). Thus, the OLS estimator is probably inappropriate (Wooldridge 2002). In
columns 3 and 4, we use the matching estimator, which does not rely on a particular probability
distribution. The results are positive and highly significant. In addition, we use Poisson ML
estimation in columns 5 and 6. This avoids log-linearizing the dependent variable and thus
preserves the higher moments of the distribution (Silva and Tenreyro 2006; Santos Silva,
Tenreyro, and Windmeijer 2008). This specification also shows a strong positive effect of Black
Death pogroms on deportations in Nazi Germany. On average, 211 Jews were deported from

21
cities in the restricted sample. Thus, the coefficient of .239 from the ML estimation implies that
the difference in deportee numbers is more than 50 (i.e., 24 percent) for cities with vs. without
pogroms in 1349. Matching by geography in columns 7 and 8 confirms our results.37
[insert Table 10 here]
After 1933, more than half of Germany’s Jews emigrated. This creates a potential issue with the
results in panel A. More anti-Semitic tendencies may have triggered more emigration before
1939, and thus fewer deportations thereafter. To address this, we repeat the analysis, controlling
for the remaining Jewish population in 1939. Results are very similar overall, as panel B of Table
10 shows.38 In particular, the OLS results in columns 1 and 2 suggest an even larger effect than
in panel A – about 37% more deportations in cities with Black Death pogroms. A simple way to
illustrate our results is to compare deportations from towns and cities with and without 1349
pogroms graphically (Figure 4). We plot the residual of a regression of the log of the number of
deportees on the log of Jewish residents in 1939. The distribution for cities with Black Death
pogroms is shifted sharply to the right, indicating that their Jewish inhabitants were deported
more often.
[insert Figure 4 here]
Next, we turn to letters to the editor of the Nazi newspaper Der Stürmer. In towns with Black
Death pogroms, there was one letter sent to the editors for every 4,064 inhabitants; in towns
without a pogrom, the frequency falls to one per 5,032. Table 11 shows that the correlation
between 1349 pogroms and the number of Stürmer letters is significant in the full, but not in the
restricted sample under OLS. Again, the dependent variable is heavily right-skewed; OLS may
not be appropriate. Columns 3 and 4 therefore report matching estimation results, and columns 5
and 6 use Poisson ML estimation. Both methodologies find a strong positive effect, and the
matching by geographic location in columns 7 and 8 shows the same results.39 Der Stürmer
received 10-27% more letters, after controlling for population, from cities with Black Death
pogroms. Both the size of a city (as expected) and of the Jewish population also go hand-in-hand
with more Stürmer letters. The estimated impacts are sizeable. For example, a doubling of
Jewish population is associated with 26-33% more Stürmer letters, similar to the result for
medieval pogroms (columns 1 and 2).

37

Because deportations are conditional on the initial Jewish population, we also use the number of Jews in 1933 as a
matching variable. This creates matches with greater distance as compared to previous estimates.
38
The sample size is reduced because some smaller towns had lost (or did not report) their Jewish population in
1939.
39
Distances are slightly larger than above because we also match by city population.

22
[insert Table 11 here]
Finally, we examine assaults on synagogues during the ‘Night of Broken Glass’ on 9 November
1938. We limit our analysis to localities that were home to synagogues, and find that towns with
a history of pogroms had a markedly greater tendency to attack. Table 12 shows that of 972 cities
with synagogues in 1938, 245 had Jewish communities in the Middle Ages. In the sample as a
whole, 94.7% of cities with medieval pogroms saw synagogues damaged or destroyed in the
‘Night of Broken Glass.’ In cities without Black Death Pogroms, the corresponding figure was
substantially lower – 79.8%. When restricting our sample to the 245 cities that had both a Jewish
community before the Black Death and a synagogue in 1938 (panel B of Table 12), we find that
95% of cities with pogroms in 1349 damaged or destroyed their synagogue, as compared to 82%
for cities without Black Death Pogroms.
[insert Table 12 here]
Table 13 reports the statistical association between Black Death pogroms and an indicator
variable for whether a city’s synagogue was damaged or destroyed during the ‘Night of Broken
Glass.’ We show that there is a positive, significant, and robust effect. Columns 1 and 2 report
the coefficient for all cities with synagogues, while columns 3-6 restrict the sample to cities that
also had Jewish communities in 1349. Our controls include the logarithm of total and Jewish
population. The latter is significant and positive in all specifications. Additional controls are the
percentage of Jews and Protestants, as well as the unemployment rate and the share of blue collar
workers from the 1933 census.40 The significance of our results is confirmed by both Probit and
Matching estimation in columns 5 and 6, respectively, as well as by geography-based matching
in columns 7 and 8. The estimated coefficients indicate that cities with Black Death pogroms
were about 5-15% more likely to damage or destroy their synagogues during the ‘Night of
Broken Glass.’
[insert Table 13 here]
Principal Component Analysis
Do the different proxies used so far capture a single underlying pattern of anti-Semitism? We
examine this by performing principal component analysis on the five variables used previously.41

40

We use the 1925 proportion of Protestants because this figure is not available in the 1933 census data.
Those include Pogrom in the 1920s, %DVFP votes in 1924, %NSDAP votes in 1928, Stürmer letters, and the
indicator variable for damaged or destroyed Synagogue during the Night of Broken Glass. We do not include
deportations because those require controlling for initial Jewish population.
41

23
The first principal component explains .34 of the variance in our sample, and has positive factor
loadings for all variables. This strongly suggests that places that showed signs of Jew hatred in
one dimension were also more likely be anti-Semitic in other ways. Crucially, the same pattern
of association between anti-Semitism in the 20th century and during the Black Death is visible
when we use the first principal component as our dependent variable (Table 14). In order to
interpret the results, we normalize all variables, with the exception of the POGi1349 indicator.
Thus, the coefficients of POGi1349 tell us by how many standard deviations the principal
component increases in cities with medieval pogroms. According to the estimates, this effect is
large. Black Death pogroms raise the dependent variable by .27–.57 standard deviations. This is
similar in magnitude to the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the share of the
Protestant population. A one standard deviation increase in the percentage of blue collar workers,
on the other hand, decreases the dependent variable by roughly .2 standard deviations.
[insert Table 14 here]
When transmission failed
Our results suggest a high degree of continuity in terms of anti-Semitic acts and sentiment at the
local level. We examine if there are subsets of our sample where persistence is weaker, and focus
on four conditioning variables – membership of the Hanseatic League, city growth 1750-1933,
Free Imperial cities, and cities ruled by bishops. 42 In each case, local economic and political
conditions are expected to differ from the rest of the sample.
In Table 15, we examine if the transmission of anti-Semitic attitudes looks visibly different for
these subgroups. We begin with Hanseatic cities. These were mostly (but not exclusively)
German self-governed trading cities with a strong history of independence. They were typically
ruled by a Patrician elite, grown rich from long-distance trade.43 For Hanseatic cities (columns 1
and 2), the interaction term with POG1349 is negative and significant. The combined effect
implies that the degree of transmission from the medieval period is essentially zero. Note that at
the same time, membership in the Hanseatic League itself does not systematically alter Jewhatred in the 1920s and 1930s. What has disappeared is the predictability of 20th century hatred
based on medieval pogroms. This is true in both the restricted and the full sample. A similar
observation holds for cities with substantial immigration (columns 3 and 4). To show this, we

42

We take membership information on the Hanseatic League from Daenell (1905). Data on Imperial cities and those
ruled by bishops is from Jacob (2010).
43
At the height of its influence, the Hanseatic League counted more than 80 members. Led by Lübeck, the Hanseatic
League included cities from Wisby in Sweden and Riga in Latvia to Roermond in modern-day Holland. Our full and
restricted sample include 45 and 34 Hanseatic cities, respectively.

24
include an indicator for above-and below-median population growth between 1750 and 1933.44
Cities that grew faster than the median saw substantially and significantly less persistence of
anti-Semitic attitudes.
[insert Table 15 here]
We also include interactions with two variables for which we do not expect a clear effect on
persistence. First, Free Imperial cities (membership partly overlapped with the Hanseatic
League) only owed allegiance to the Emperor, and not to regional princes. They were directly
represented in the Imperial diet. Many of them were self-governed by bourgeois elites. Free
Imperial cities also show lower levels of persistence (columns 5 and 6), but the difference in
effects is not statistically significant. Finally, we look at cities ruled by local bishops. These were
governed by the equivalent of a religious prince. They were less important as commercial centers
than other Free Imperial cities. We find that levels of anti-Semitism are somewhat higher. The
coefficient on the interaction term is positive, but insignificant.
The finding for population growth has a clear interpretation: Where a large inflow of outsiders
weakened the transmission of attitudes from one generation to the next, anti-Semitism in the 20th
century cannot be predicted by 14th century attitudes. This suggests that the overall pattern of
persistence documented in this paper reflects relatively low levels of mobility overall. Long-term
transmission is also absent for members of the Hanseatic League – the cities that were most
active in long-distance trade. For them, past pogroms do not predict more anti-Semitism in the
interwar period. A similar (but weaker) result obtains for Free Imperial cities, which also had a
history of self-governance and were often local or national centers of commerce, but where
trading traditions were on average not as strong as in the Hanseatic League. Interestingly, for
cities run by bishops, the opposite pattern emerges – persistence is even stronger than in the rest
of the sample (but not significantly so).
Our results suggest that a history of political independence alone is not sufficient to undermine
the long-term transmission of anti-Jewish sentiment. The interpretation we favor is that antiSemitism is part of a broader pattern of discrimination against outgroup members. The costs of
such discrimination must have been higher in cities actively involved in trade, and those where

44

Ideally, we would like to use city growth starting after the Black Death. However, observations on city size are
scarce, reducing our sample to a handful of cities that are already large in the Middle Ages. Instead, we use Bairoch
et al. (1988) to obtain figures for 1750 – the earliest date that gives us more than 100 observations. Cities in this
subsample are mostly larger than average.

25
many new citizens arrived in the 19th century. These are the towns where the pattern is no longer
passed from generation to generation.

IV. Robustness and Interpretation of Results
In this subsection, we test the robustness of our results. We also run a placebo test for extremist
attitudes in general, using election results for the right-wing German National People's Party
(DNVP) in 1924. In addition, we show that anti-Semitism persisted even if Jewish communities
disappeared as a consequence of Black Death pogroms, and that coefficients from estimating the
full sample should be interpreted in a similar vein as those from the restricted sample. Finally,
we present additional evidence on post-WWI anti-Semitism in an everyday setting.
Medieval characteristics, unobservables and matching on all attributes
Throughout our empirical analysis, we control for covariates that might have a confounding
effect. For example, in the analysis of voting results, we controlled for unemployment and for the
share of Protestants, among other variables. So far, all control variables have reflected 20th
century city characteristics. We now add two indicators for cities’ economic and political role:
Whether they had market rights and whether they were incorporated at the time of the Black
Death. Table 16 shows the results. Neither of the two indicators, nor their interaction with
POG1349 is significant. At the same time, our earlier findings are unaffected. The same is true
when we construct the two dummy variables for the year 1920.45
[insert Table 16 here]
Next, we perform an additional check to deal with unobserved heterogeneity. We use precinctlevel fixed effects to capture the influence of unobservable factors at the local level that might
have persisted between the 14th and 20th century. There are 417 precincts in our full sample, and
232 in the restricted one. The fixed effect results are therefore very restrictive. About half of our
observations are ‘lost’ because the corresponding precincts contain only one city in the sample.
Nonetheless, the magnitude of our results is largely unchanged, and most of them remain
statistically significant, as Table 17 shows.46

45

For this specification, both cities with Market rights and incorporated cities appear to have higher levels of antiSemitism in the full sample, but this effect is insignificant in the restricted sample.
46
All precincts with only one city have been excluded from the regressions, so that the number of observations in
Table 17 reflects the identifying variation when including fixed effects.

26
[insert Table 17 here]
In our previous propensity score estimations, we either matched by geographic location or by
control variables. Table 18 presents an additional robustness check – matching estimation based
on all characteristics for which we have data.47 Both magnitude and statistical significance of the
results confirm our previous findings.
[insert Table 18 here]
Right-wing extremism vs. anti-Semitism
It is possible that the association between medieval violence and voting results for the Nazi Party
simply reflect more right-wing or violent attitudes. We use a ‘political experiment’ to separate
anti-Semitic from right-wing votes cast in 1924. Following the murder of the Jewish German
Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau in 1922, the right-wing DNVP expelled several vociferous
anti-Semites from its ranks. As a result, the party split, with the newly-formed DVFP pursuing a
similarly nationalist and reactionary program as the DNVP, but with a markedly more radical
anti-Semitic twist.48 On average, the DNVP won about 15% of votes, as compared to 7% for the
DVFP.
We have already shown that the DVFP gained more seats in localities with a past of medieval
pogroms (Table 8). If this is not simply a reflection of generally more right-wing attitudes, we
expect the closest (but less anti-Semitic) competitor DNVP to register fewer votes in towns and
cities with an anti-Semitic past. Table 19 demonstrates this: DNVP votes were about 2-4 percent
lower in cities with pogroms in 1349. This is similar to the additional votes gained by the DVFP
in these cities (Table 8). Since the programs of the two parties were similarly nationalist and
right-wing overall, these findings point towards anti-Semitism rather than extreme political
attitudes driving the voting behavior in cities with Black Death pogroms.
[insert Table 19 here]

47

We use four matches, as we did when matching by non-geographic controls. Because of the extended set of
matching variables, the median distance between matched pairs is larger– approximately 50km for the full sample
and 65km for the restricted sample.
48
According to Levy’s (2005) entry on the DNVP, “Hitler … thought that the Nationalists were demagogic rather
than sincerely anti-Semitic and that they were only willing to fight for their own narrow economic interests. Their
shopworn anti-Semitism was trotted out only at election time. Suspicions regarding the seriousness in the matter of
the Jewish Question were confirmed when moderates gained control of the party, a process accelerated by the
murder of Walther Rathenau…”

27
Extinction of Jewish communities in 1349, and full vs. restricted sample
Panel A of Table 20 sheds light on the interpretation of full vs. restricted sample results.
Whenever we use the full sample, we implicitly compare cities with Black Death pogroms to all
other cities. Some but not all of them will have been home to a medieval Jewish community.
Panel A of Table 20 directly includes a dummy variable for cities that had Jews in 1349 but saw
no Black Death pogroms. The variable is insignificant in all specifications. This suggests that
towns without Jewish communities in the Middle Ages showed the same level (or lack) of antiSemitic attitudes and behavior in the 20th century as those that had Jewish communities, but did
not witness Black Death pogroms. While this finding is no statistical proof for the validity of our
implicit assumption in using the full sample, it alleviates the concern that we misinterpreted the
full sample results.49
[insert Table 20 here]
Panel B of Table 20 examines if the link between Black Death pogroms and anti-Semitism in
interwar Germany is present even in towns and cities whose Jewish communities vanished
completely in 1348-50.50 We demonstrate this by splitting the indicator variable for POG1349 into
two parts: First, Jewish communities that vanished in 1349 as a result of attacks, and second,
Jewish communities that suffered pogroms but survived. Both generally have a positive and
significant effect for most dependent variables, and they are mostly indistinguishable in a
statistical sense from each other. The only exception is for deportations. This suggests that 20th
century anti-Semitism was broadly similar (or somewhat stronger) in cities where Jewish
communities were extinguished in 1349, compared to those places where they were attacked but
survived as a community.
Low-level anti-Semitism in the Weimar Republic
How much can our indicators for anti-Semitism in the Weimar period be trusted to reflect antiJewish sentiment, as opposed to generally violent or xenophobic attitudes? To shed light on this
question, we collect information on everyday anti-Semitism. During the Weimar period, some
towns declared themselves off limits to Jewish visitors in their entirety. In most cases, individual
hotels and inns warned that Jewish guests were not welcome. A Jewish newspaper, the Central-

An additional supporting fact is that throughout the paper, coefficients on POG1349 are very similar for the full and
the restricted sample.
50
To code communities as vanished, they need to be explicitly mentioned as such in the Germania Judaica. For
many cities, several centuries passed before Jewish communities returned. In others, Jews settled again after only a
few decades.
49

28
Vereins-Zeitung, published a comprehensive list of such establishments every year in May.51 We
use the 1931 edition, and first examine if we can find the same pattern of persistence as for other
indicators of anti-Semitism.
[insert Table 21 here]
Table 21 gives an overview. In total, 90 locations contained at least one openly anti-Semitic inn,
restaurant, or hotel. In the subsample of cities and towns with Jewish settlements in the 14th
century, the contrast is stark – those places that burned their Jews are twice as likely to have antiSemitic hotels and inns (the probabilities are 3.7% vs. 8.3%). For the entire sample, the
probability of a location without a 1349 pogrom reporting at least one hotel, inn, or restaurant off
limits to Jewish guests is 6.8%; in those that had pogroms, the proportion is again higher, 8.3%.
[insert Table 22 here]
In Table 22, we investigate the covariance of the ‘no Jews’ indicator with other measures of antiSemitism. We control for population size in all regressions because larger cities are more likely
to have at least one hotel on the ‘no Jews’ list. While we do not find statistically significant
results in each and every case, results overwhelmingly suggest that everyday discrimination is
correlated with the more extreme forms of anti-Semitism. In particular, we find a positive
correlation of the ‘no Jews’ indicator with the principal component. This suggests that our
indicators are valid measures of a pattern of anti-Semitism, broadly conceived.

V. Conclusion
At the time of the Black Death, Jews were burned in towns and cities all over Germany – but not
in all. In this paper, we demonstrate that the same places that saw violent attacks on Jews during
the plague also showed more anti-Semitic attitudes over half a millennium later: They engaged in
more anti-Semitic violence in the 1920s, were more likely to vote for the Nazi Party before 1930,
had more citizens writing letters to an anti-Semitic newspaper, organized more deportations of
Jews, and saw more attacks on synagogues during the ‘Night of Broken Glass’ in 1938.
Strikingly, violent hatred of Jews persisted despite the fact that Jews disappeared in many towns
and cities for centuries. Also, in contrast to many other findings in the literature on long-run
effects of culture, the ‘trait’ we investigate yields no immediate economic benefit – on the
contrary, the economic effect was likely negative because of the Jews’ important role as traders

51

We use the supplement to the issue from May 8, 1931, p. I-IV.

29
and financial intermediaries. Nonetheless, anti-Semitic acts were often repeated in the same
places more than half a millennium later.
Our findings lend qualified support to theories that explain anti-Semitism based on deep cultural
roots.52 The influence of medieval pogroms for 20th century anti-Semitism underlines the
importance of deeper historical antecedents of post-WWI German anti-Semitism at the local
level. The estimated effects are large. Our broad measure of 20th century anti-Semitism (the first
principal component) is about 0.3–0.6 standard deviations higher in cities that saw medieval
pogroms. At the same time, medieval pogroms are not sufficient to explain all of the variation in
the cross-section.
Finding persistence over six centuries is in need of explanation. Low mobility is one likely factor
– persistence disappears in faster-growing cities. In addition, we find partial support for
Montesquieu’s famous argument that trade encourages “civility” – Hanseatic cities with a
tradition of long-distance trade do not show persistence of anti-Semitism. In contrast, a history of
political independence in general only weakens persistence.
Many studies have asked if the rise of the Nazi Party should be interpreted as a direct
consequence of growing, broad-based anti-Semitism in the Weimar Republic. Our findings do
not support such an interpretation. While we still find a clear effect of medieval pogroms on the
Nazi vote in 1928, and a weaker one in 1930, this link vanishes as the party’s mass appeal grows.
The party’s political profile changed after 1928. In particular, it became less virulently antiSemitic in its propaganda. This is not to say that anti-Semitic sentiments didn’t contribute to the
electoral successes of the NSDAP, but the link with its deeper, historical roots became more
tenuous in the years leading up to the ‘seizure of power’ in 1933.53
One question for future research is how common the long-term persistence of inter-ethnic hatred
is. There is anecdotal evidence that it is not rare. For example, England, France, and Spain
expelled their Jews during the Middle Ages. Nonetheless, anti-Semitism lingered. Until recently,
Spanish children played a game called ‘Killing Jews’ around Easter – in a country where Jews
have been almost entirely absent since 1492 (Perednik 2003).54 England between 1290 and 1656

52

Goldhagen (1996) argued that the Holocaust reflected widespread, ‘exterminationist’ anti-Semitic beliefs. We find
that local precedent mattered, but this does not lend direct support to Goldhagen’s wider argument.
53
In this sense, our findings support the more revisionist claims by Heilbronner (2004). Our results also do not
suggest that deep-rooted anti-Semitism at the local level allowed the Nazi Party to garner enough votes for its bid for
power.
54
In a 2009 study by the Anti-Defamation League, five hundred people from Austria, France, Hungary, Germany,
Poland, Spain, and the United Kingdom were interviewed about the attitudes towards Jews. Together with Poland,
Spain was the most anti-Semitic (Anti-Defamation League, 2009).

30
was similar. “For almost four centuries the English people rarely, if ever, came into contact with
flesh-and-blood Jews. Yet they considered the Jews to be an accursed group of usurers, who, in
league with the Devil, were guilty of every conceivable crime…” (Glassman 1975).
Our results also have implications for the theory of cultural transmission. Models in the style of
Tabellini (2008) emphasize that parents direct educational investment towards traits that are
useful for the next generation. In contrast, work by Bisin and Verdier (2001) focuses on
‘imperfect empathy.’ Parents care only partly about the well-being of their offspring, and invest
heavily in making children more similar to themselves. We find persistence of a cultural trait
without immediate benefit over a long period, which seems to favor the Bisin-Verdier model. At
the same time, in towns where discrimination against outsiders was more costly (such as in
member cities of the Hanseatic League), there is no evidence that 14th century attacks still predict
20th century anti-Semitism. This lends support to models in which parental investment is partly
shaped by parents’ utilitarian motives (Tabellini 2008, Doepke and Zilibotti 2008).

References
Abadie, A., D. Drukker, J. L. Herr, and G. W. Imbens, 2004. “Implementing matching estimators
for average treatment effects in Stata.” Stata Journal 4(3): 290-311.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Matthew Jackson, 2011. “History, Expectations, and Leadership in the
Evolution of Cooperation.” Mimeo.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, 2005. “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance.”
Journal of Economic Literature 43(3): 762-800.
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, 2011. “Fertility and the Plough.” NBER
Working Paper No. 16718.
Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc, 2010. “Inherited Trust and Culture.” American Economic
Review 100(5): 2060-2092.
Aghion, Philippe, Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer, 2010. “Regulation and
Distrust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3): 1015-49.
Alicke, Klaus-Dieter, 2008. Lexikon der jüdischen Gemeinden im deutschen Sprachraum: Bd.1:
Aachen - Groß-Bieberau, Bd.2: Großbock - Ochtendung, Bd. 3 Ochtrup - Zwittau.
Gütersloher: Gütersloher Verlagshaus.
Almog, Shmuel, 1990. Nationalism & Antisemitism in Modern Europe, 1815-1945. New York:
Pergamon.
Anti-Defamation League, 2009. Attitudes towards Jews in Seven European Countries. New
York.
Arendt, Hannah, 1994. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Harcourt, Inc., New York.
Avneri, Zvi, 1968. Germania Judaica, Bd. 2: Von 1238 bis zur Mitte des 14 Jahrhunderts.
Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr.
Bairoch, Paul, 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the
Present, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

31
Becker, Sascha O., Katrin Boeckh, Christa Hainz, and Ludger Woessmann, 2011. “The Empire
is Dead, Long Live the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the
Bureaucracy”. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8288.
Benedictow, Ole Jorgen, 2004. The Black Death, 1346-1353: The Complete History.
Woodbridge: Boydell Press.
Birnbaum, Pierre, and Miriam Kochan, 1992. Anti-Semitism in France. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier, 2000. “‘Beyond the Melting Pot’: Cultural Transmission,
Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115(3): 955-988.
———, 2001. “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences.”
Journal of Economic Theory 97(2): 298-319.
Borut, Jacob, 2000. “Anti-Semitism in Tourist Facilities in Weimar Germany.” Yad Vashem
Studies 28: 7-50.
Botticini, Maristella, and Zvi Eckstein, 2007. “From Farmers to Merchants, Conversions and
Diaspora: Human Capital and Jewish History.” Journal of the European Economic
Association 5(5): 885-926.
Bracher, Karl Dietrich, 1970. The German Dictatorship: The Origins, Structure, and Effects of
National Socialism. New York: Praeger.
Broszat, Martin, 1960. Der Nationalsozialismus. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlag-Anstalt.
Brustein, William, and Ryan King, 2004. “Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust.”
International Political Science Review 25(1): 35-53.
Bullock, Alan, 1991. Hitler: A Study in Tyranny. New York: Harper Perennial.
Bundesarchiv, 2007. Gedenkbuch Opfer der Verfolgung der Juden unter der
Nationalsozialistischen Gewaltherrschaft in Deutschland, 1933 - 1945. Koblenz:
Bundesarchiv.
Burnett, Stephen, 1996. “Jews and Anti-Semitism in Early Modern Germany.” Sixteenth Century
Journal 27: 1057-1064.
Card, David, and Alan Krueger, 1997. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
Minimum Wage. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Childers, Thomas, 1983. The Nazi Voter: The Social Foundations of Fascism in Germany, 19191933. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Cohn, Samuel Kline, 2007. “The Black Death and the Burning of Jews.” Past & Present 196(1):
3-36.
Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong, 2010. “Was the Wealth of Nations
Determined in 1000 BC?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(3): 65-97.
Daenell, Ernst, 1905. Die Blütezeit der Hanse. Berlin: Reimer.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2008. “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of
Capitalism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2): 747-793.
Ettinger, Shmuel, 1980. “Jew-Hatred in its Historical Context.” In Antisemitism through the
Ages, edited by Shmuel Almog. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli, 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 146-177.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Jeremy Greenwood, and Nezih Guner, 2010. “From Shame to
Game in One Hundred Years: An Economic Model of the Rise in Premarital Sex and its
De-Stigmatization.” NBER Working Paper No. 15677.

32
Falter, Jurgen W., 1991. Hitlers Wähler. Munchen: C.H. Beck.
Fein, Helen, 1987. “Explanations of the Origin and Evolution of Anti-Semitism.” In The
Persistent Question: Sociological Perspectives and Social Context of Modern AntiSemitism, edited by Helen Fein. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Foa, Anna, 2000. “The Jews of Europe after the Black Death.” European Review 9(02): 237-238.
Glaeser, Edward, 2005. “The Political Economy of Hatred.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
120(1): 45-86.
Glassman, Bernard, 1975. Anti-Semitic Stereotypes Without Jews: Images of the Jews in
England, 1290-1700. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Goldhagen, Daniel, 1996. Hitler’s Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the Holocaust.
New York: Knopf.
Gottfried, Robert Steven, 1985. The Black Death: Natural and Human Disaster in Medieval
Europe. New York: The Free Press.
Grosjean, Pauline, 2011. “The Institutional Legacy of The Ottoman Empire: Islamic Rule and
Financial Development in South Eastern Europe.” Journal of Comparative Economics
39(1): 1-16.
Grosjean, Pauline, 2010. “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor as a Determinant of
Homicide in the US South.” Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Working Paper No. 2010.51.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2008. “Long Term Persistence.” NBER
Working Papers No. 14278.
Hackett Fischer, David, 1989. Albion’s Seed. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Hahn, Fred, 1978. Lieber Stürmer; Leserbriefe an das NS-Kampfblatt 1924 bis 194; eine
Dokumentation aus dem Leo-Baeck-Institut, New York. Stuttgart: Seewald.
Hamilton, Richard, 1982. Who Voted for Hitler? Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Haverkamp, Alfred, 2002. Geschichte der Juden im Mittelalter von der Nordsee bis zu den
Südalpen; Kommentiertes Kartenwerk. Hannover: Hahn.
Heilbronner, Oded, 2004. “German or Nazi Anti-Semitism?” In The Historiography of the
Holocaust, edited by Dan Stone. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hertzman, Lewis, 1963. DNVP: Right-Wing Opposition in the Weimar Republic, 1918-1924.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Jacob, Markus, 2010. “Long-Term Persistence: The Free and Imperial City Experience in
Germany”. Mimeo.
Jha, Saumitra, 2008. “Trade, Institutions and Religious Tolerance: Evidence from India.”
Stanford University Research Paper No. 2004.
Katz, Jacob, 1980. From Prejudice to Destruction: Anti-Semitism, 1700-1933. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, Martin Tanner, and Alexander Wagner, 2008. “Ordinary Economic
Voting Behavior in the Extraordinary Election of Adolf Hitler.” Journal of Economic
History 68(04): 951-996.
Levi, Primo, 1987. If This is a Man and The Truce. London: Abacus.
Levy, Richards S., 1974. The Downfall of the Anti-Semitic Parties in Imperial Germany. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
———, 2005. Anti-Semitism: A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution. Santa
Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
Lindemann, Albert, 2000. Anti-Semitism before the Holocaust. Harlow: Longman.
McNeill, William Hardy, 1975. Plagues and People. New York: Anchor.

33
Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon, 2011. “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
Africa.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Oberman, Heiko A., 1984. The Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Age of Renaissance and
Reformation. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Perednik, Gustavo, 2003. “Naïve Spanish Judeophobia”, Jewish Political Studies Review 15(34).
Putterman, Louis, and David Weil, 2010. “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long Run
Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(4): 1627-1682.
Salfeld, Siegmund, 1898. Das Martyrologium des Nürnberger Memorbuches. Berlin: Simion.
Santos Silva, Joao M.C., Silvana Tenreyro, and Frank Windmeijer, 2008. “Is it Different for
Zeros? Discriminating between Models for Non-Negative Data with Many Zeros.”
Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice Working Paper No. CWP20/10.
Santos Silva, Joao M.C., and Silvana Tenreyro, 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 88(4): 641-658.
Shachar, Isaiah, 1974. “The Judensau: A Medieval Anti-Jewish Motif and Its History”. London :
Warburg Institute.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg, 2009. “The Diffusion of Development.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124(2): 469-529.
Stachura, Peter, 1978. “Der Kritische Wendepunkt? Die NSDAP und die Reichstagswahlen vom
20 Mai 1928.” Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte 26(1): 66-99.
Striesow, Jan, 1981. Die Deutschnationale Volkspartei und die Völkisch-Radikalen 1918-1922. 2
Bde. Frankfurt a. M.
Tabellini, Guido, 2008. “The Scope of Cooperation: Norms and Incentives.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 123(3): 905-950.
Toch, Michael, 2003. Die Juden im Mittelalterlichen Reich. München: Oldenbourg.
———, 2010. “The Formation of a Diaspora: the Settlement of Jews in the Medieval German
Reich.” Aschkenas 7(1): 55-78.
Walter, Dirk, 1999. Antisemitische Kriminalität und Gewalt. Bonn: Dietz.
Wawrzinek, Kurt, 1927. Die Entstehung der Deutschen Antisemitenparteien, 1873-1890. Berlin:
Ebering.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

34

Appendix: Data
Medieval data
As described in section II, we use Germania Judaica [GJ] from Avneri (1968) as our principal
source. We first establish the presence of a Jewish community based on it being included in GJ,
volume II, which is for the period 1238-1350. Where later work by Alicke (2008) mentions that a
Jewish community existed during this period, we modify the variable for confirmed settlement
accordingly. For each town, city or village where GJ mentions pogroms, violent attacks on the
Jewish population, the burning of Jews, or the wholesale extermination of the Jewish community
in 1348-50, we code our dummy variable for Black Death pogroms, POG1349, as unity, and zero
otherwise.
Data on 20th century violence and anti-Semitic attitudes
We collected data on pogroms in the 1920s, on the number of Stürmer letters, on deportations,
and on attacks on synagogues. Our source for all of these with the exception of the Stürmer
letters is Alicke (2008). For pogroms in the 1920s we use a dummy that equals one for cities
with documented pogroms during this period. Since Alicke focuses on ‘positive’ information,
i.e., only those events that actually occurred are mentioned, this variable is always assumed to
take the value zero unless stated otherwise in Alicke’s encyclopedia. In order for riots and the
like to qualify as a pogrom-like event, the coding followed closely the definition of a pogrom as
a violent outrage against the Jewish population, involving physical violence against and/or the
killings of people. Therefore, political agitation through Brandreden (incendiary speeches),
attacks on Jewish shows, or the desecration of cemeteries was not coded as a pogrom. Only when
physical violence against at least one Jewish inhabitant is mentioned in Alicke does this variable
take the value of unity.
From Alicke (2008), we also take data on the existence of a synagogue in 1933 (coded as 1 if
mentioned as such, and 0 otherwise), as well as on the extent of attacks in 1938 during the ‘Night
of Broken Glass’ (Reichskristallnacht). We constructed two dummy variables – one for
destroyed synagogues, and one for damaged ones. For the former, we assign a value of zero if no
synagogue/s still in use in 1933 were destroyed during Reichskristallnacht. “Destruction”
occurred if the relevant building was damaged at least to an extent that it became unusable, in
which cases Alicke mostly uses the term “zerstört” (destroyed). The variable then takes the value

35
1. We code our variable for synagogue damage in a locality zero if no synagogue/s still in use in
1933 was damaged during Reichskristallnacht. “Damage” we define as any inventory of a
synagogue was destroyed or the physical fabric of the building itself was damaged but remained
intact. The variable takes the value 1 in these cases. From these two variables, we create a
combined variable for synagogues destroyed or damaged.
As an additional variable, the number of published letters to the editor from the anti-Semitic
newspaper Der Stürmer is included in our dataset. For the years 1935 to 1938, all letters to the
editor published in one of three different categories were counted provided their place of origin
matched a locality in our dataset. The three categories are: (1.) Letters that were published as
articles, e.g., a schoolgirl writing about her classmates still interacting with Jewish pupils. (2.)
Letters in which individual Jews or people still talking to/doing business with Jews are
denounced. (3.) The category “mailbox” in which Der Stürmer answers questions about Jews
(“how many Jews live in xyz town?”). We count letters in these three categories for all three
years in our analysis, and sum them by locality.
Election data
We use election data initially collected by Jürgen Falter (1991) and his team. The source for their
database are the official statistics of the Weimar Republic (Statistik des Deutschen Reiches). The
vote for each party is calculated as the ratio of the number of valid votes received, divided by the
total number of valid votes cast. For May 4, 1924, we analyze the results for the DeutschVölkische Freiheitspartei (DVFP) as well as for the Deutschnationale Volkspartei (DNVP). For
the elections of May 20, 1928, September 14, 1930, and March 5, 1933, we focus on the
Nationsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei (NSDAP).
For the socio-economic correlates in our section on elections, we use data from Falter (1991),
derived from the censuses of 1925 and 1933. These allow us to control for the number of
inhabitants, the percentage of the population that is Protestant, the share of Jews, and the
percentage of blue-collar workers.
Deportations
The German Federal Archives have compiled a comprehensive list of Jewish deportees during
the Nazi period (Bundesarchiv 2007). We use the second, expanded and improved edition. It
contains information on 159,972 individuals (Jewish or presumed Jewish by the authorities) who
lived in what was considered Germany proper between 1933 and 1945. The database is available
online (http://www.bundesarchiv.de/gedenkbuch/directory.html). We consulted the database by

36
entering every single locality in our dataset into the search engine (“Wohnort”), and then
recorded the number of listed deportees for the years 1933-45. A typical entry reads:

Lehmann, Helen
geb. Mayer
* 24. Juli 1876 in Maikammer
wohnhaft in Meckenheim

Lehmann, Helen
née Mayer, born 24.7.1876
living in Meckenheim (Rhineland)

Deportation:

deported from Camp de Vernet on 19th of

ab Camp de Vernet

August to Auschwitz (extermination camp)

19. August 1942, Auschwitz,
Vernichtungslager

37

FIGURES

Figure 1: Pogroms in 1348-50
Map of Weimar Republic: Pogrom frequency is defined at the precinct level as the number of cities with pogroms in
1349 divided by the number of cities with a Jewish community. The lowest category (0-.001] indicates Jewish
settlement with no pogroms. We define pogrom frequency=1.1 if a precinct has more than one city with a Jewish
community and pogroms in each of these cities.
Detailed map: Copied from Haverkamp (2002). Locations with a confirmed Jewish settlement in the 14th century are
indicated by a dark grey circle; a red square indicates a pogrom during the time of the Black Death.

38

DVFP 1924
NSDAP 1930

NSDAP 1928
NSDAP 1933

8

Density

6

4

2

0
0

.2

.4
.6
percentage of votes for NSDAP

.8

Figure 2: Electoral results for the DVFP and NSDAP, 1924-1933 (kernel density estimates,
by district)

39

Figure 3: Percentage of votes for the NSDAP in the German national election of 1928

40
no pogroms 1348-50

pogroms in 1348-50

Density of Residuals

.6

.4

.2

0
-2

-1

0
Residuals

1

Figure 4: Deportations of Jews, conditional on Black Death Pogroms
Note: Residual of a regression of ln(deportations) on ln(Jewish population in 1939).

2

41

TABLES

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Population in 1933$
% Jewish in 1933
% Protestant in 1925
Synagogue in 1933

mean

Std.dev

min

max

Obs.

22,331
.023
.549
.794

138,272
.032
.329
.405

138
.000047
.00897
0

4,449,125
.377
.987
1

1,393
1,145
1,400
1,359

.027
.032
.069
113.4
1.75
.828
.262
.172

.162
.043
.087
1597.3.7
11.08
.378
.440
.377

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
.359
.593
55,807
354
1
1
1

1,377
1,292
1,254
1,331
1,401
1,079
1,401
1,269

Indicators for 20thC anti-Semitism
POG1920s
NSDAP1928
DVFP1924
DEPORT
STÜRMER
SYNATTACK
Medieval Jewish settlement
1349
Black Death pogrom (POG )

Table based on full sample (including all cities with Jewish population in 1920/30). POG1920s is an indicator variable for pogroms
in each location during the 1920s; NSDAP1928 is the vote share of the NSDAP in the May 1928 election, DVFP1924 is the vote
share for the Deutsch-Völkische Freiheitspartei in May 1924; DEPORT is the number of deportees from each locality;
STÜRMER is the number of anti-Semitic letters to Der Stürmer; SYNATTACK takes the value 1 if a synagogue was destroyed or
damaged in the ‘Night of Broken Glass’ in 1938, and 0 otherwise. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years
1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
$
The largest city in the sample is Berlin, which is composed of several boroughs. It is followed by Hamburg, Cologne, and
Munich.

Table 2: Correlations between main variables
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

POG1349
1920s

POG
DVFP1924
NSDAP1928
$
DEPORT (resid.)
ln(1 + STÜRMER)
SYNATTACK

1
.1627*
.1177*
.1094*
.1633*
.3248*
.1558*

1
.1289*
.0832*
.1009
.2043*
.0373

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

1
.6239*
-.0197
.0868*
-.0196

1
.0052
.0207
-.0294

1
.2139*
.0194

1
.1733*

1

Table based on full sample (including all cities with Jewish population in 1920/30). *significant at the 1% level. POG1349 takes
the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. POG1920s is an indicator variable for pogroms in each
location during the 1920s; NSDAP1928 is the vote share of the NSDAP in the May 1928 election, DVFP1924 is the vote share for
the Deutsch-Völkische Freiheitspartei in May 1924; DEPORT is the number of deportees from each locality; STÜRMER is the
number of anti-Semitic letters to Der Stürmer; SYNATTACK takes the value 1 if a synagogue was destroyed or damaged in the
‘Night of Broken Glass’ in 1938, and 0 otherwise.
$
Residual of a linear regression of ln(deportations) on ln(Jewish population in 1939)

42

Table 3: City-level outcome variables and medieval pogroms
(1)
(2)
City population growth
1300-1933 1750-1933
--- full ---

Dep. Variable:
Sample

POG1349
Observations
Adjusted R2

(3)
%Jews ‘33

(4)
(5)
(6)
City population growth
%Jews ’33
1300-1933 1750-1933
--- restricted ---

-.802
(.506)

-.252
(.167)

.00139
(.00165)

.159
(.584)

.0539
(.259)

.00146
(.00184)

53
.227

144
.003

1,032
.215

45
.040

109
-.016

299
.086

All regressions run by OLS. Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. City population data for 1300 and 1750
from Bairoch et al. (1988). Additional control variables are: ln(City population) in 1300 in columns 1 and 4, ln(City population)
in 1750 in columns 2 and 5, and ln(City population) in 1933 in columns 3 and 5.

Table 4: Black Death Pogroms and Pogroms in the 1920s

No
Yes

Panel B: Cities with Jews in 1348-50
Pogrom in 1349

No
1,015

Yes
197

Total
1,212

(98.5%)

(91.6%)

(97.4%)

15

18

33

(1.5%)

(8.4%)

(2.6%)

215

1,245

Total 1,030

Pogroms in 1920s

Pogroms in 1920s

Panel A: All Cities
Pogrom in 1349

No
Yes
Total

No
78

Yes
197

Total
275

(98.7%)

(91.6%)

(93.5%)

1

18

19

(1.3%)

(8.4%)

(6.5%)

79

215

294

43
Table 5: Dependent variable: Pogrom 1920s
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

OLS

OLS

.0661***
(.0189)

.0711***
(.0228)

Sample

POG1349

full
.0692***
(.0193)

(4)

(5)

OLS
Probit
--- restricted ---

(6)
ME#

(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.

.0633***
(.0241)

.849**
(.423)

.0622***
(.0193)

.0176***
(.00552)

.0354**
(.0156)

.251***
(.0969)

(mv)

Median Distance
10.5
20.7

% Jewish '25

-.0116
(.519)

-.0863
(1.798)

-.0886
(13.89)

(mv)

Mean Distance
20.5
25.1

% Protestant
'25

.0271**
(.0131)

.0266
(.0461)

.328
(.391)

(mv)

294
.044

294

294

ln(Pop '25)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1,245
.026

1,243
.046

294
.013

.0873***
(.0239)

1,243

.0867***
(.0210)

294

Standard errors in parentheses * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years
1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
# Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in column (5). Treatment variable is Pogrom 1349. The
average treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches. ‘mv’ indicates
match variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using
the two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches is reported.

44

Table 6: Black Death Pogroms and Elections in Weimar Germany
Panel A: All Cities
Pogrom in 1349
No
Yes
Total
DVFP 1924
.064
.090
.069
NSDAP 1928 .030
.043
.033
NSDAP 1930 .186
.189
.187
NSDAP 1933 .463
.415
.455

Panel B: Cities with Jews 1349
Pogrom in 1349
No
Yes
Total
.074
.090
.086
.028
.043
.039
.179
.189
.186
.439
.415
.422

Table 7: Dependent variable: % vote for NSDAP in May 1928 election
(1)
Sample

POG1349

(2)

OLS – all cities
full
.0126***
(.00430)

OLS

(5)
$

OLS
ML
--- restricted ---

(6)
ME

#

(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.

.463***
(.173)

.0152***
(.00540)

-.000488
(.00120)

-.00175
(.00234)

-.0437
(.0603)

(mv)

Median Distance
10.5
20.7

-.554**
(.234)

-.799*
(.455)

-21.01
(14.35)

(mv)

Mean Distance
21.0
24.5

% Protestant
'25

.0330***
(.00624)

.0329***
(.0117)

.871***
(.296)

(mv)

% Blue collar
'33

-.122***
(.0319)

-.135***
(.0466)

-3.574***
(1.199)

(mv)

283
.055

283

% Jewish
'25

Observations
Adjusted R2

1,168
.011

1,167
.081

.0146**
(.00573)

(4)

.0167***
(.00609)

ln(Pop '25)

.0143***
(.00425)

(3)

283
.012

283

.00864***
(.00299)

1,166

.0151***
(.00416)

283

Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a
pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
$
Poisson maximum likelihood estimation.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in column (5). Treatment variable is Pogrom 1349. The average
treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches. ‘mv’ indicates match
variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the
two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches is reported.

45
Table 8: Dependent variable: % vote for DVFP/NSFP in May 1924 election
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

OLS

OLS

.0312***
(.00813)

.0164
(.0119)

Sample
1349

POG

full
***

.0264
(.00834)

(5)

(6)

OLS
ML$
--- restricted ---

(4)

ME#

.0219*
(.0123)

.266*
(.150)

.0212*
(.0120)

(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.
.0259***
(.00559)

.0260***
(.00805)

ln(Pop '24)

-.00374*
(.00224)

-.000415
(.00443)

-.00625
(.0529)

(mv)

Median Distance
10.4
20.2

% Jewish
'25

-1.275***
(.471)

-2.229***
(.760)

-28.28**
(11.28)

(mv)

Mean Distance
20.8
24.4

% Protestant
'25

.0795***
(.0125)

.0832***
(.0249)

.983***
(.295)

(mv)

% Blue collar
'33

-.163**
(.0698)

-.205*
(.107)

-2.538**
(1.199)

(mv)

279
.065

279

Observations
Adjusted R2

1,137
.013

1,136
.103

279
.002

279

1,135

279

Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a
pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
$
Poisson maximum likelihood estimation.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in column (5). Treatment variable is Pogrom 1349. The average
treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches. ‘mv’ indicates match
variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the
two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches is reported.

46
Table 9: Dependent variable: % vote for NSDAP after 1928
(1)
Year:
Sample

OLS
full

(2)

(3)

POG1349

.0126**
(.00618)

.0149
(.0118)

.0166
(.0123)

ln(Pop)

-.00636**
(.00294)

-.0106**
(.00413)

-.143*
(.0845)

Additional
Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

% Jewish’33

(4)

---1930 --OLS
ME#
GeoM.§
--- restricted --.0280**
(.0112)

(5)
OLS
full

(6)

(7)

-.0140*
(.00805)

-.00925
(.0145)

-.000265
(.0135)

(mv)

.00850**
(.00394)

-.00348
(.00526)

(mv)

-.558*
(.318)

(mv)

.328**
(.153)

1.075***
(.388)

(mv)

yes

yes

(mv)

yes

Yes

(mv)

979
.257

286
.159

286

1,005
.472

295
.356

295

286

(8)

---1933 --OLS
ME#
GeoM.§
--- restricted ---.00764
(.0181)

295

Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a
pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. Additional controls include: %Protestant ‘25, %Blue-Collar ‘33,
%Unemployed ‘33. Population is taken from the election data for the respective year.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in columns (2) and (4), respectively. Treatment variable is
Pogrom 1349. The average treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches.
‘mv’ indicates match variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the
two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches for columns (4) and (8) are respectively: median
distance 21.3, 21.0; mean distance 24.8, 24.9.

47
Table 10: Deportations 1933-1944
Dep. Variable:

Sample

(1)
OLS
full

ln(1 + # of deported Jews)
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS
ME#
ME#
--- restricted ---

# of deported Jews
(5)
(6)
ML$
ML$
--- restricted ---

ln(1+#dep. Jews)
(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.

PANEL A: Controlling for Jewish population in 1933

POG1349

.138*
(.0818)

.140
(.142)

.369**
(.163)

.540***
(.144)

.239***
(.0675)

.165**
(.0776)

.212*
(.113)

ln(# Jews '33)

.928***
(.0238)

1.046***
(.0346)

(mv)

(mv)

1.026***
(.0210)

.880***
(.0937)

Median Distance
30.2
37.5

no

no

(mv)

no

yes

958
.658

255
.775

255

255

255

Mean Distance
42.5
44.9
958
255

Additional Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

255

.569***
(.198)

PANEL B: Controlling for Jewish population in 1939
1349

POG

.373***
(.0963)

.342**
(.170)

.543**
(.252)

.630***
(.164)

.124
(.111)

.104
(.101)

.679***
(.189)

ln(# Jews '39)

.733***
(.0255)

.802***
(.0436)

(mv)

(mv)

.936***
(.0230)

.593***
(.126)

Median Distance
37.1
47.6

no

no

(mv)

no

yes

624
.753

186
.809

186

186

186

Mean Distance
49.1
53.4
624
186

Additional Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

186

.815***
(.276)

Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 134850, and 0 otherwise. Additional controls include: ln(pop ‘33), %Protestant, %Jewish, %Blue Collar.
$
Poisson maximum likelihood estimation.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in columns (1) and (2), respectively. Treatment variable is
Pogrom 1349. The average treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches.
‘mv’ indicates match variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude, latitude, and ln(# Jews '33) in
panel A / ln(# Jews '39) in panel B for each city, using the two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest
matches is reported.

48
Table 11: Letters to the editor, Der Stürmer
Dep. variable:

ln(1 + number of letters)
OLS
full

OLS

POG1349

.107*
(.0587)

.0452
(.0843)

.219***
(.0845)

.272***
(.0986)

.380**
(.166)

.316*
(.163)

.162**
(.0795)

ln(# Jews '33)

.260***
(.0240)

.333***
(.0507)

(mv)

(mv)

.557***
(.0886)

.759***
(.166)

Median Distance
30.1
36.0

ln(Pop '33)

.147***
(.0159)

.194***
(.0478)

(mv)

(mv)

.238**
(.0996)

.0534
(.169)

Mean Distance
40.9
41.2

no

no

(no)

(mv)

no

yes

1,013
.511

277
.577

277

277

277

277

Additional
Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

(4)

(5)

ln(1+#letters)
(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.

(2)

Sample

(3)

number of letters

(1)

ME#
ME#
--- restricted ---

(6)

ML$
ML$
--- restricted ---

.268***
(.100)

1,267

299

Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years
1348-50, and 0 otherwise. Additional controls include: %Protestant, %Jewish, %Blue Collar.
$ Poisson maximum likelihood estimation.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in columns (1) and (2), respectively. Treatment variable is
Pogrom 1349. The average treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches.
‘mv’ indicates match variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude, latitude, and ln(Pop ‘33) for each
city, using the two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches is reported.

Table 12: Black Death Pogroms and Assaults on Synagogues
Panel A: All Cities with Synagogue

Panel B: Cities with Jews 1349

No
Yes
Total

Pogrom in 1349

No
158

Yes
10

Total
168

(20.2%)

(5.3%)

(17.3%)

625

179

804

(79.8%)

(94.7%)

(82.7%)

783

189

972

Syn. destroyed
or damaged?

Syn. destroyed
or damaged?

Pogrom in 1349
No
Yes
Total

No
10

Yes
10

Total
20

(17.9%)

(5.3%)

(8.2%)

46

179

225

(82.1%)

(94.7%)

(91.8%)

56

189

245

49
Table 13: Dependent variable: Synagogue damaged or destroyed in 1938
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

OLS

OLS

.0506**
(.0247)

.126**
(.0539)

Sample (cities w/ synagogue) full

POG1349

.149***
(.0217)

(4)

(5)

OLS
Probit
--- restricted ---

(6)
ME#

.111**
(.0527)

.605**
(.289)

.129**
(.0603)

(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.
.143***
(.0261)

.147*
(.0802)

ln(Pop '33)

.00466
(.0193)

.0168
(.0173)

.156
(.164)

(mv)

Median Distance
10.9
24.6

ln(# Jews '33)

.0661***
(.0209)

.0316*
(.0185)

.500***
(.168)

(mv)

Mean Distance
21.7
30.8

Additional
Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

no

yes

no

yes

yes

(mv)

972
.023

819
.080

245
.033

231
.084

231

231

971

245

Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 134850, and 0 otherwise. Additional controls include: % Protestant ‘25, % Jewish ‘33, % unemployed ’33, and % Blue Collar ‘33.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in column (5). Treatment variable is Pogrom 1349. The average
treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches. ‘mv’ indicates match
variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the
two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches is reported.

50
Table 14: Dependent variable: First principal component of 5 outcome variables$
(1)
Sample
POG1349

(2)

OLS
OLS
--- full --.560***
(.105)

.387***
(.102)

(3)
OLS
.313***
(.111)

(4)

(5)

(6)

OLS
ML#
--- restricted ---

ME##

.275**
(.117)

.0278**
(.0117)

.299**
(.130)

(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.
.571***
(.0658)

.410***
(.0732)

ln(Pop '33)

.197***
(.0422)

.133**
(.0612)

.0133**
(.00602)

(mv)

% Jewish
'33

.0897**
(.0371)

-.0293
(.0402)

-.00305
(.00409)

(mv)

Median Distance
10.4
20.7

% Protestant
'25

.308***
(.0524)

.224***
(.0748)

.0224***
(.00743)

(mv)

Mean Distance
20.7
25.0

% Blue collar
'33

-.214***
(.0559)

-.175***
(.0646)

-.0177***
(.00645)

(mv)

275
.067

275

Observations
Adjusted R2
$

1,107
.046

906
.133

275
.016

275

1,105

275

First principal component obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928, ln(1+Stürmer letters), and
indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed. The dependent variable and all control variables are standardized, so
that beta coefficients are reported. Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
#
Poisson maximum likelihood estimation.
##
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in column (5). Treatment variable is Pogrom 1349. The average
treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches. ‘mv’ indicates match
variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the
two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches is reported.

51
Table 15: Differences in Persistence. Dependent variable: Principal component$

Sample

(1)
(2)
Hanseatic
full
restr.

POG1349

.419***
(.109)

.298**
(.126)

Hanseatic

.00736
(.178)
-.471**
(.234)

-.103
(.193)
-.394*
(.231)

Hanseatic ×

POG1349

Pop. Growth
1750-1933

Pop. Growth ×

POG1349

(3)
(4)
Pop. growth
full
restr.
.695**
(.348)

.888***
(.266)

-.333
(.307)
-.716*
(.399)

.368
(.452)
-1.255**
(.485)

Free Imperial
Free Imperial ×

POG1349

(5)
(6)
Free Imperial
full
restr.
.386***
(.111)

.295**
(.122)

.317
(.385)
-.231
(.444)

.279
(.451)
-.270
(.483)

Bishop
Bishop ×

POG1349

Observations
Adjusted R2

906
.134

275
.074

133
.067

103
.093

906
.132

275
.062

(7)

(8)
Bishop
full
restr.
.376***
(.106)

.270**
(.119)

.254
(.341)
.0163
(.446)

.0287
(.321)
.0880
(.394)

906
.132

275
.061

All regressions run by OLS, including the controls: ln(city population ‘33), % Protestant ‘25, % Jewish ‘33, % unemployed ’33,
and % Blue Collar ’33 (all standardized). Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p
< .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
$
First principal component obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928, ln(1+Stürmer letters), and
indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed. The dependent variable is standardized.

52
Table 16: Controlling for economic characteristics. Dep. variable: Principal component$

Sample

POG1349
Market rights
Market rights ×

POG1349

(1)
(2)
Market 1349
full
restr.

(3)
(4)
Market 1920
full
restr.

.375***
(.117)

.252*
(.132)

.311**
(.123)

.255*
(.130)

.102

-.0780

.221***

.206

(.144)
-.0221
(.232)

(.167)
.102
(.213)

(.0837)
.0304
(.191)

(.141)
-.00494
(.198)

Incorporated
Incorporated ×

POG1349

Observations
Adjusted R2

906
.131

275
.061

906
.139

275
.070

(5)
(6)
Incorporated 1349
full
restr.

(7)
(8)
Incorporated 1920
full
restr.

.459**
(.195)

.385*
(.208)

.521**
(.206)

.462**
(.187)

.0343
(.0785)
-.123
(.231)

.0778
(.155)
-.168
(.238)

.181**
(.0858)
-.215
(.237)

.209
(.158)
-.254
(.232)

906
.131

275
.062

906
.135

275
.063

All regressions run by OLS, including the controls: ln(city population ‘33), % Protestant ‘25, % Jewish ‘33, % unemployed ’33,
and % Blue Collar ’33 (all standardized). Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p
< .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise.
$
First principal component obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928, ln(1+Stürmer letters), and
indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed. The dependent variable is standardized.

53
Table 17: Fixed effects at the precinct level
Dep. Variable:

(1)
1920s
pogroms

(2)
NSDAP
1928

(3)
DVFP
1924

(4)
Deportations

(5)
Stürmer
letters

(6)
Synagogue
attacks

(7)
Principal
Component$

PANEL A: All cities in precincts with more than one city

POG1349

.0658***
(.0207)

.0140***
(.00491)

.0285***
(.00534)

.278
(.181)

.162**
(.0764)

.0627
(.0401)

.353***
(.0896)

ln(Pop)

.00703
(.00568)

.0000189
(.00193)

-.00740***
(.00199)

.252***
(.0555)

.298***
(.0301)

.0652***
(.0143)

.242***
(.0399)

1,064
.373

818
.103

916
.653

.567***
(.0551)

ln(# Jews '39)
Observations
Adjusted R2

1,046
.043

968
.483

938
.736

480
.711

PANEL B: All cities in precincts with more than one city with Jews in 1349

POG1349

.0511
(.0453)

.0156**
(.00758)

.0185**
(.00743)

.787
(.751)

.220
(.255)

.319**
(.126)

.236**
(.0905)

ln(Pop)

.00125
(.0176)

-.000687
(.00460)

-.000790
(.00297)

.586*
(.320)

.465***
(.0878)

.0344
(.0271)

.122**
(.0604)

140
.405

123
.395

129
.634

.520**
(.237)

ln(# Jews '39)
Observations
Adjusted R2

138
-.156

131
.264

130
.882

71
.807

All regressions run by OLS at the city level. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the
value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. City population is taken from the election data for the
respective year in columns 1-3 (in column 1, values from the May 1924 election are used). In columns 4-7, city population is
from the 1933 census.
$
First principal component (standardized) obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928,
ln(1+Stürmer letters), and indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed.

54
Table 18: Matching by all characteristics, including geographic location
Dep.
Variable:

(1)
1920s
pogroms

(2)
NSDAP
1928

(3)
DVFP
1924

(4)
Deportations

(5)
Stürmer
letters

(6)
Synagogue
attacks

(7)
Principal
Component$

PANEL A: Full Sample

POG1349
Observations

.0498**
(.0221)

.00997**
(.00410)

.0154**
(.00669)

.549***
(.128)

.159**
(.0676)

.0642**
(.0298)

.244***
(.0923)

1,241

1,165

1,134

576

1,031

833

906

PANEL B: Restricted Sample

POG1349
Observations

.0731***
(.0178)

.0148***
(.00472)

.0271**
(.0107)

.822***
(.211)

.353***
(.0974)

.145**
(.0720)

.324***
(.105)

294

283

279

186

277

245

275

All regressions run by propensity score matching at the city level. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. Matching variables are: ln(city
population), % Protestant, % Jewish, % Blue Collar, as well as geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the four
closest matches. Column 4 uses ln(Jews’30) as an additional matching variable.
$
First principal component (standardized) obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928,
ln(1+Stürmer letters), and indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed.

Table 19: Dependent variable: % vote for DNVP in May 1924 election
(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

OLS

OLS

Sample

Full

(5)

(6)

OLS
ML$
--- restricted ---

(4)

ME#

POG1349

-.0324***
(.00946)

-.0216***
(.00797)

-.0381**
(.0185)

-.0283*
(.0156)

-.181*
(.100)

-.0316**
(.0159)

Controls

no

yes

no

yes

yes

(mv)

1,137
.007

1136
.284

279
.018

279
.261

279

279

Observations
Adjusted R2

(7)
(8)
GeoMatch§
full
restr.
-.0158**
(.00725)

-.0207
(.0182)

1,135

279

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the precinct level (clustered at the precinct level). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. Controls are the same, for each column, as
in Table 8.
$
Poisson maximum likelihood estimation.
#
Matching estimation based on the full set of control variables in column (5). Treatment variable is Pogrom 1349. The average
treatment effect is reported, using robust nearest neighbor estimation with the four closest matches. ‘mv’ indicates match
variable.
§
Matching estimation based on geography: Matching characteristics are geographic longitude and latitude for each city, using the
two closest matches. Distance between each city and its two closest matches for columns (7) and (8) are respectively: median
distance 10.4, 20.2; mean distance 20.8, 24.4.

55
Table 20: Extinction of Jewish communities in 1349, and full vs. restricted sample
Dep. Variable:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1920s
pogroms

NSDAP
1928

DVFP
1924

Deportations

Stürmer
letters

Synagogue
attacks

(7)
Principal
Component$

PANEL A: Cities without Jewish communities vs. cities with Jews and no pogroms in 1349

POG1349

.0640***
(.0187)

.0141***
(.00428)

.0320***
(.00820)

.0605
(.0843)

.217***
(.0634)

.0725***
(.0242)

.379***
(.105)

Medieval Jewish
Comm., no pogrom

-.00243
(.0130)

-.00203
(.00458)

.0106
(.0100)

-.173
(.123)

-.0355
(.0761)

-.0260
(.0524)

-.0464
(.125)

ln(Pop)

.0181***
(.00548)

-.000498
(.00120)

-.00367
(.00223)

.110***
(.0307)

.267***
(.0199)

.0464***
(.00655)

.200***
(.0433)

.842***
(.0333)

ln(# Jews '33)
Additional Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

no

yes

yes

no

no

no

yes

1,244
.043

1,167
.081

1,136
.103

958
.664

1,269
.384

972
.056

906
.132

PANEL B: Extinction of Jewish communities in 1349
Pogrom 1349,
Comm. vanished

.0476**
(.0209)

.0148***
(.00521)

.0347***
(.00975)

.208**
(.0942)

.234***
(.0761)

.0822***
(.0238)

.389***
(.122)

Pogrom 1349,
Comm. survived

.0990***
(.0377)

.0131**
(.00661)

.0239*
(.0129)

-.149
(.116)

.197**
(.0921)

.0619
(.0379)

.383**
(.172)

ln(Pop)

.0183***
(.00548)

-.000505
(.00121)

-.00385*
(.00226)

.105***
(.0306)

.265***
(.0194)

.0455***
(.00636)

.197***
(.0425)

.837***
(.0334)

ln(# Jews '33)
Additional Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

no

yes

yes

no

no

no

yes

1,244
.047

1,167
.080

1,136
.103

958
.665

1,269
.384

972
.056

906
.132

All regressions run by OLS at the city level for the full sample. Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p
< .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. POG1349 takes the value 1 if a pogrom occurred in the years 1348-50, and 0 otherwise. Additional
controls are: %Jewish, %Protestant, %Blue-Collar. Population is taken from the election data for the respective year in columns
1-3 (in columns 1, values from the May 1924 election are used). In columns 4-6, city population is from the 1933 census.
$
First principal component (standardized) obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928,
ln(1+Stürmer letters), and indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed.

56

Table 21: Cities with hotels prohibiting access to Jews and Pogroms in 1349

No
Yes
Total

Panel B: Cities with Jews in 1348-50
Pogrom in 1349

No
979

Yes
200

Total
1,179

93.2%

91.7%

92.9%

72

18

90

6.8%

8.3%

7.1%

1,051

218

1,269

‘No Jews’

‘No Jews’

Panel A: All Cities
Pogrom in 1349

No
Yes
Total

No
78

Yes
200

Total
278

96.3%

91.7%

93%

3

18

21

3.7%

8.3%

7%

81

218

299

Table 22: Cities with hotels prohibiting access to Jews and 20C anti-Semitism
Dep. Variable:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1920s
pogroms

NSDAP
1928

DVFP
1924

Deportations

Stürmer
letters

Synagogue
attacks

(7)
Principal
Component$

PANEL A: Full Sample
‘No Jews’

.0179
(.0224)

.00983*
(.00517)

.0261**
(.0104)

.00633
(.106)

.0738
(.0755)

.0253
(.0381)

.266**
(.126)

ln(Pop)

.0203***
(.00535)

.0000318
(.00122)

-.00285
(.00254)

.174***
(.0227)

.275***
(.0166)

.0512***
(.00564)

.159***
(.0435)

1,401
.358

1,079
.050

1,107
.030

.647***
(.0273)

ln(# Jews '39)
Observations
Adjusted R2

1,368
.024

1,292
.002

1,254
.006

697
.754

PANEL B: Restricted Sample
‘No Jews’

-.00448
(.0526)

.0209*
(.0117)

.0442*
(.0263)

.273*
(.165)

.220
(.148)

.0426
(.0441)

.499
(.371)

ln(Pop)

.0394***
(.0134)

-.00246
(.00231)

-.000985
(.00463)

.197***
(.0591)

.406***
(.0316)

.0506***
(.0104)

.237***
(.0735)

367
.448

302
.070

275
.041

.706***
(.0547)

ln(# Jews '39)
Observations
Adjusted R2

359
.040

346
.008

340
.007

235
.802

All regressions run by OLS at the city level for the full sample. Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the precinct level). * p
< .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Population is taken from the election data for the respective year in columns 1-3 (in columns 1,
values from the May 1924 election are used). In columns 4-6, city population is from the 1933 census.
$
First principal component (standardized) obtained from: Pogrom 1920s, %DVFP votes 1924, %NSDAP votes 1928,
ln(1+Stürmer letters), and indicator variables for Synagogue damaged or destroyed.

