                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE FINANCIAL CRISIS AND THE WELL-BEING OF AMERICANS

                                            Angus S. Deaton

                                         Working Paper 17128
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17128


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




The Hicks Lecture, Oxford, May 16th, 2011. I am grateful to the Gallup Organization for access to
their data, to Jim Harter of Gallup for his extensive help in understanding the design of the Gallup
Healthways Wellbeing Index survey, and to Sangeeta Agrawal, Jim Harter, and Frank Newport for
leading Gallup’s work on the adjustments discussed here. I thank Daniel Kahneman, Daniel McFadden
and Norbert Schwarz for extensive help and comments. I also acknowledge helpful comments on an
earlier version from Tony Atkinson, David Cutler, Paul Dolan, Marc Fleurbaey, Ori Heffetz, John
Helliwell, David Laibson, Richard Layard, John Muellbauer, Matthew Rabin and Arthur Stone. This
work was supported by the Gallup Organization and by the National Institute on Aging through grants
AG024928–06 and P30 AG024361 to Princeton and P01 AG05842-14 and R01 AG049629-01 to the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I am a consulting Senior Scientist with the Gallup Organization.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Angus S. Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Financial Crisis and the Well-Being of Americans
Angus S. Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 17128
June 2011
JEL No. E01,E32,H0,I31

                                               ABSTRACT

The Great Recession was associated with large changes in income, wealth, and unemployment, changes
that affected many lives. Since January 2008, the Gallup Organization has been collecting daily data
on 1,000 Americans each day, with a range of self-reported well-being (SWB) questions. I use these
data to examine how the recession affected the emotional and evaluative lives of the population, as
well as of subgroups within it. In the fall of 2008, around the time of the collapse of Lehman Brothers,
and lasting into the spring of 2009, at the bottom of the stock market, Americans reported sharp declines
in their life evaluation, sharp increases in worry and stress, and declines in positive affect. By the end
of 2010, in spite of continuing high unemployment, these measures had largely recovered, though
worry remained higher and life evaluation lower than in January 2008. The SWB measures do a much
better job of monitoring short-run levels of anxiety as the crisis unfolded than they do of reflecting
the evolution of the economy over a year or two. Even large macroeconomic shocks to income and
unemployment can be expected to produce only small and hard to detect effects on SWB measures.
SWB, particularly evaluation of life as a whole, is sensitive to question order effects. Asking political
questions before the life evaluation question reduces reported life evaluation by an amount that dwarfs
the effects of even the worst of the crisis; these order effects persist deep into the interview, and condition
the reporting of hedonic experience and of satisfaction with standard of living. Methods for controlling
these effects need to be developed and tested if national measures are to be comparable over space
and time.


Angus S. Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu
1. Introduction


The financial crisis that began in the summer of 2008 saw a rise in the unemploy-


ment rate from 4.8 percent in April 2008 to 10.6 percent at its peak in January


2010, a 4.4 percent drop in employee compensation over five months in 2009–10,


large stimulus-associated tax credits and rebates, a 4.7 percent drop of personal


disposable income in May 2008 and 1.7 percent in May 2009, as well as a collapse


and subsequent recovery of the stock market—the S & P 500 Index on March 6th,


2009 had fallen to 40 percent of its all time high of October 2007, and then more


than doubled again by end 2010. Through the fall in the market and the fall in the


prices of housing and of other assets, sixty percent of households saw their wealth


decline between 2007 and 2009, and 25 percent lost more than half of their


wealth, not including defined benefit pensions, Bricker et al (2011); these declines


were widespread, affecting large shares of households across all age, income, and


education groups, Chakrabarti et al (2011), Hurd and Rohwedder (2010). Financial


losses were associated with reductions in consumption, and many households


reduced consumption even without experiencing financial losses, Christelis et al


(2011), Shapiro (2010).


                                         1
   These are large fluctuations in magnitudes that matter to people. Income,


wealth, and joblessness are among the measures on which economists have


traditionally focused. In the well-being literature too, a host of studies identify


income and unemployment as two of the most important and reliable determinants


of self-reported subjective well-being (SWB). Unemployment, in particular,


typically exerts a larger negative influence than can be accounted for by the


associated reduction in income. Although there is less literature on the effects of


wealth on well-being, a 60 percent drop in the market has dramatic effects on


expected future incomes, especially for those who are nearing a retirement to be


funded out of accumulated saving or defined-contribution pension funds. These


events had different economic implications for people of different ages; the elderly


are not much affected by unemployment or employee compensation, but some are


susceptible to stock market fluctuations. Young people may shrug off falls in


wealth when they have not yet accumulated much and have many years before


they need it, while their parents, nearing retirement, may see an imminent threat


to their future.




                                           2
   The crisis brought harm to many, but it is a boon to researchers on subjective


well-being, for whom it provided an unparalleled opportunity to examine how


these events affected the standards of living, the emotional experiences, and life


evaluations of those who lived through it. Our ability to make this evaluation is


made possible by the data from the Gallup Healthways Well-being Index (hence-


forward GHWBI). Starting on January 2nd, 2008, Gallup has run a daily (landline and


cell-phone) telephone poll of 1,000 randomly-sampled adult Americans each day


who are asked about how their lives are going, whether they are satisfied with their


standard of living, and whether they experienced a range of feelings on the


previous day. Over the three year period examined here, from 2nd January 2008 to


29th December 2010, there are around a million observations on self-reported


well-being, as well as on demographics, income, occupation, employment status


and numerous health measures. These data allow daily tracking, not only of


national averages, but of the outcomes of different groups.


   In addition to investigating reports of well-being over the crisis, I look at a


range of methodological issues. One is the long-standing question of whether


variations in self-reported subjective well-being (SWB) over time correspond to


                                           3
what might be expected from cross-section analysis. A three year period is too


short to address the Easterlin paradox, that long-term growth appears not to


generate the increase in SWB that would be predicted from the positive effects of


income in the cross-section, but I can examine whether the large fluctuations in


income and unemployment generate fluctuations in SWB that match the findings


from the cross-section. The literature on well-being over the business-cycle, Di


Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald (2001, 2003), Wolfers (2003), di Tella and


MacCulloch (2009) has relied on data pooled over several countries, rather than on


tracking well-being over time within a single country as here, although Stevenson


and Wolfers (2008) show that the output gap in the US predicts well-being. This


literature also argues that people dislike inflation and unemployment, even


controlling for their own experience, which would drive a wedge between the


cross-sectional and time-series effects of macroeconomic outcomes, see also


Clark, Knabel and Rätzel (2011) for discussion and reinterpretation.


   I also ask whether the temporal tracking of self-reported well-being measures


is useful for economic policy beyond the standard dashboard of measures such as


employment, income, and financial market indicators. Many happiness researchers


                                         4
argue that SWB provides a deeper and more comprehensive measure than standard


economic indicators and should take priority over them. That SWB should be


routinely collected by national statistical agencies, at least as a supplementary


measure, was given impetus by the positive recommendations in Stiglitz, Sen, and


Fitoussi (2009), and many statistical offices in Europe are currently moving in this


direction. Yet questions remain. Although SWB measures have led to many


important insights in the cross-section—for example about the relative importance


of income and unemployment, or of marriage and marital dissolution, or of non-


priced amenities—the usefulness of average SWB for macroeconomic monitoring


over time is far from established, and investigating that is one of my main


concerns in this paper.


   The paper is constructed as follows. I start, in section 2, with a brief discussion


of concepts of well-being, including reminders of longstanding concerns about


happiness measures in general, and within SWB measures, the differences between


hedonic and evaluative measures of well-being; this distinction is important in


what follows. Section 3 discusses the behavior of the life evaluation over the crisis,


and documents the sensitivity of the measure to questionnaire order effects. It also


                                          5
presents an attempt to repair the series to permit substantive analysis. Section 4


shows what happened to life evaluation and hedonic experience over the crisis,


and Section 5 relates that experience to macroeconomic magnitudes such as


income, unemployment, and the stock market. Section 6 concludes.




2. Preliminaries: concepts and measures of well-being


Self-reported well-being is my main topic in this paper, but I do not wish to


approach it uncritically, but rather to keep in mind longstanding objections to


these measures. Sir John Hicks, after whom this lecture is named, played a central


role in banishing cardinal utility from economics, replacing it with “choice” utility,


an ordinal representation of preferences, together with a welfare economics that


eschewed interpersonal comparisons and, at the individual level, emphasized the


income required to attain a given standard of living. This long standing skepticism


has been eroded in recent years by a literature in economics and psychology that


has demonstrated the usefulness of self-reported well-being measures in a


number of contexts. Nor has choice utility gone unscathed. Experimental work has


also found biases in recollections of events that will sometimes cause choices to

                                           6
deviate from people’s own preferences, Kahneman, Wakker and Sarin (1997)


suggesting that direct measures of momentary feelings, integrated over time,


might be more reliable guides to decision that remembered utility.


   Yet many of the original concerns remain important. One of the most important


is associated with adaptation to circumstances. If people become accustomed to


economic misery, so that the response of SWB to such pain is only temporary, the


continuing harm is no less real nor demanding of policy attention just because


people say that they are used to it. Sen (1985, 14) notes that “a person who is ill-


fed, undernourished, unsheltered, and ill can still be high up in the scale of


happiness or desire fulfillment if he or she has learned to have `realistic’ desires


and to take pleasures in small mercies.” By accepting people’s own assessment in


such circumstances, “the metric of happiness may, therefore, distort the extent of


deprivation in a specific, and biased way,” and “it would be ethically deeply


mistaken to attach a correspondingly small value to the loss of well-being because


of this survival strategy,” Sen (1987, 45–6). I accept these arguments, and believe


that we should not base policy on a measure that is subject to hedonic adaptation.


Yet the extent to which any particular measure of SWB is actually subject to the


                                          7
adaptation critique is a question that can be investigated empirically, so that it is


possible that Sen’s concern is hypothetical, or is hypothetical for some measures


but real for others. Note also that Sen does not deny the goodness of happiness in


and of itself, only that it is an unreliable indicator of overall well-being. Put


differently, “(t)he central issue is not the significance of happiness, but the alleged


insignificance of everything else, on which many advocates of the happiness


perspective seem to insist,” Sen (2009, 173). Beyond that, not everyone accepts


that questions about pleasure, or about how life is going, reveal anything about


those aspects of life that are the most important or most meaningful, Nussbaum


(2007).


   A second concern, documented in the psychology literature, focuses on the


measurement of SWB, particularly in response to questions about the evaluation of


life as a whole. The answers to these questions are often treated as if “global


feelings of well-being . . . remain relatively constant over extended periods, and


that people can describe them with candor and accuracy,” Campbell (1981, quoted


in Schwarz and Strack, 1999). But as Schwarz and Strack’s review makes clear,


actual reports “do not reflect a stable inner state of well-being” that is always


                                            8
available, but rather judgments that are formed in response to the question, which


makes them subject to context effects, Schwarz and Strack (1999, 61). That these


warnings must be taken seriously will be amply documented in the results


presented below.


   One key distinction is between “living life” and “thinking about life,” Kahneman


and Riis (2005). On the one hand, there is a range of feelings that comprise


emotional well-being (or hedonic well-being or experienced happiness); these


feelings, such as enjoyment, sadness, happiness, anger, stress, or worry, are


mostly evanescent and rapidly forgotten, but make up the hedonic texture of life


as we live it. On the other hand, there is the assessment or evaluation of life as a


whole that is prompted by questions about life satisfaction or about how life is


going overall.


   The gold-standard for measuring emotional well-being is experience sampling,


by which people are randomly prompted to record their current activities and


feelings; a less demanding alternative is the Day Reconstruction Method (DRM),


Kahneman et al (2004), by which people are asked to reconstruct their activities


over the previous day, and to associate feelings experienced during each episode.


                                          9
Experience sampling and the DRM both allow the construction of hedonic well-


being measures by summing over episodes. The American Time Use Survey


contains a DRM module. In the Gallup data, a DRM is not feasible, but respondents


are presented with a list of emotions, such as stress, worry, and happiness, and


are asked to say yes or no to questions about whether they experienced a lot of


each on the previous day. In this paper, I shall look at a range of these feelings,


including happiness, smiling, enjoyment, sadness, worry, stress, and anger, as well


as a similar question about physical pain.


   Life evaluation is most often measured by a question that asks people to report


on a several point scale how satisfied they are with their life as a whole. In the


Gallup surveys, the question is Cantril’s (1965) Self-Anchoring Scale, a ladder


question which asks respondents on which rung they stand of an 11-rung ladder


where 0 is the “worst possible life for you” and 10 is the “best possible life for


you.” It is possible that this ladder question, analyzed here, is a purer question of


life evaluation than is life satisfaction, where the use of the word “satisfaction”


invites contamination by the respondent’s current hedonic state. The 11-point


scale, with equally spaced “rungs,” invites respondents to think of equal intervals


                                          10
as having the same interpretation, so that the difference between 1 and 2 is the


same as the difference between 8 and 9, which permits analysis in terms of means


rather than, for example, ordered probits, though differences in results are


typically not important.


   That hedonic and evaluative well-being behave differently has been reported in


a number of studies. Kahneman et al (2004) find, contrary to their initial hypo-


thesis, that measures of affect are more subject to adaptation and less tightly


linked to long-term life circumstances than are measures of life evaluation.


Kahneman and Deaton (2010) find that reports of life evaluation (Cantril’s ladder),


positive affect, negative affect, and stress are all better at higher incomes.


However, while the effects of income on affect and stress satiate at an annual


income of around $75,000, higher incomes continue to be associated with higher


life evaluation throughout beyond $75,000, with the average ladder approximately


linear in the logarithm of household income. In a similar vein, life evaluation, but


not affect, is better among more educated people.




                                          11
   Figure 1 explores the distinction in another way and shows the average reports


for life evaluation and for affect for each day of the week. The average reported
            8




                                                                         .8
                                                     Mean positive affectt
    Mean ladder score
                  6




                                                                 .6
          4




                                                          .4
    2




                                                    .2          0
            0




                        S   S   M   T   W   T   F                             S    S   M   T   W   T   F
                                                                .8
            .8




                                                      Mean stress free
    Mean not blue




                                                                   .6
               .6




                                                          .4
       .4




                                                    .2
            .2
            0




                                                                0




                        S   S   M   T   W   T   F                             S    S   M   T   W   T   F




Figure 1: Mean ladder and affect by day of the week

Notes: Averages are taken over all respondents from January 2nd, 2008 to December 29, 2010.
Positive affect is the average of the fractions of respondents who said that they experienced a lot of
smiling, enjoyment, and happiness in the previous day. Not blue is one minus the average of
respondents who reported a lot of worry or sadness in the previous day. Stress free is the fraction
of respondents who did not report a lot of stress on the previous day

ladder, in the top left panel, shows essentially no variation over the week, while


positive affect, negative affect, and stress (here coded so that higher is always


better) all show superior hedonic outcomes at weekends than in the week, with


Fridays intermediate between week and weekend. At this daily frequency, affect

                                                                              12
responds to circumstance, while life evaluation does not. (Note that Americans


generally evaluate their lives very highly, around 7 on a scale of 0 to 10, and that


most people experience a great deal of positive emotion, little negative emotion,


and no stress.) There are also marked differences in patterns of life evaluation and


of affect over the life-cycle. Stone et al (2010) replicate the now familiar finding


that life evaluation falls with age until middle age, rising mildly thereafter, but also


a remarkably large decline in reported stress, worry, and anger with age. This is


consistent with socioemotional selectivity theory, Carstensen et al (1999),


according to which people, as they age, acquire emotional capital, a set of skills


that allows the ever-more successful avoidance of negative emotional experiences.


These benefits of age, together with more modest increases in positive emotional


experience, perhaps offset the increase in physical pain and may help account for


the increase in overall well-being with age in spite of deteriorating health.


   That the ladder responds to long-term circumstances and emotions to short-


term circumstances is further supported by international evidence from Gallup’s


World Poll, which asks similar questions in more than 150 countries around the


world. In Deaton (2008), I show that, across countries, average ladder scores are


                                          13
linearly related to the logarithm of per capita GDP. There are large differences


across countries, from Togo, Benin, and Chad, with average ladder scores between


3 and 4, to Denmark, with an average ladder score around 8. An Increase of 1 in


the log of per capita GDP is associated with an increase in the average ladder score


of 0.84, and the simple correlation is 0.83, Deaton (2008, Table 1, Figure 1.) For


future reference, it is important to note that international differences in income are


very large compared to what is seen in time-series; a difference in log GDP of 1


corresponds to a GDP that is 2.7 times as large or about 20 years of rapid


economic growth, while Togo’s per capita income is barely two percent of that of


the United States, a difference that took a quarter of a millennium to establish.


   In contrast to life evaluation, the average hedonic experiences of countries are


only weakly related to per capita GDP. The fraction of the population that reports a


lot of happiness yesterday is only mildly related to national income, essentially


because of a few outliers such as, at the bottom, Togo, which is notably unhappy


and, at the top, the US, where the pursuit of happiness is constitutionally


guaranteed. Otherwise, there are happy and unhappy countries at all levels of GDP


per capita. Hence, as far as self-reported happiness (the affect) is concerned, the


                                         14
data support Sen’s argument that even the poorest people in the world are often


happy, although when we look at life evaluation, poor people generally recognize


that their lives are going badly. That the hedonic and evaluative components of


well-being have such different correlates implies, not only that they are different


concepts that reflect different parts of human experience, but that we must


consider each separately in assessing what happened over the financial crisis. A


single broad measure of “happiness” will not do. From now on, I shall use the term


“happiness” for happiness proper, referring to the hedonic experience of being


happy, and I shall keep life evaluation for the judgment of life as a whole, as in the


Cantril ladder. The evidence cited in this section shows that the emotional


measures adapt to life circumstances, at least over the long term, and that this is


not true, or at least less completely true, for measures of life evaluation.




3. Life evaluation in the crisis


Figure 2 shows the daily average of the ladder from the beginning of 2008 to the


end of 2010; I have shown it as a 21 day moving average in order to remove the




                                          15
day to day sampling variance which otherwise obscures the trends. In order to


         Lehman collapse
   7.5




           Election day

             Inauguration
   7




                                                     ???
   6.5
   6




   01 Jan 08                01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10         01 Jan 11
                                        Interview Date




Figure 2: Mean ladder for general population and for over 60s

Notes: The broken line is for the population aged 60 and above, the solid line for the whole
population. The underlying data are daily averages, and the figure shows 21-day triangularly
weighted moving averages

minimize jumps, I use a unit sum triangular weighting scheme with maximum


weight (1/11) on the central observation, with weights declining by equal amounts


(1/121) for ten days on either side. The broken line is for those aged 60 and over,


the solid line for the whole population. As has often been found in the literature,


see Stone et al (2010) for these data, the elderly generally do better on life


                                                   16
evaluation measures. Although there are features of these plots that make sense—


for example, the sharp drop in well-being around the time of the collapse of


Lehman Brothers—they are often very hard to explain. The oddest feature is that


the ladder should be higher at the end of the period than at the beginning; indeed,


according to this figure the general population had more than recovered from the


crisis by the spring of 2009, even though unemployment was still rising, and even


though the stock-market, although past its low in March, was still far below its


values before the crash. The graphs also show a sharp drop in well-being on


Election Day, and a somewhat more credible spike on the day that President


Obama was inaugurated. The huge increase on April 6th, 2009, is substantively


inexplicable; although the moving average smoothes over days, the key dates are


easily checked by going back to the raw data. The boost to the ladder would


require a more than doubling of per capita GDP, and the main events of the day—


the earthquake in L’Aquila in Italy, Robert Gates unveiling of the US defense


budget, or even the winning of a country music award by American Idol winner


Carrie Underwood—are surely insufficient to explain an increase in well-being that


is the single largest change over this otherwise very eventful period.



                                         17
   In fact, the largest changes in the ladder are driven, not by real events, but by


changes in question order in the GHWBI survey, the context effects discussed in


Section 2. Gallup’s own analysis is presented in Newport (2011), and in more detail


in Agrawal and Harter (2011), an analysis that was carried out in parallel with this


paper, and is consistent with the results that I present. Here I confine myself here


to a summary of the main points, and an outline of the methods used to correct


the data.


   Gallup uses its daily poll to collect information on political preferences,


including whether the respondent plans to vote, if so for whom, who is preferred


in a primary, whether the respondent approves of the President’s performance, or


whether or not the country is headed in the right direction. Because 2008 was an


election year, and because these polling questions are important to Gallup whose


statisticians are well aware of context effects, they were placed first in the survey,


immediately prior to the ladder question. The precise questions were changed


frequently depending on the election calendar so that, for example, voter


preference questions were dropped on the eve of the Presidential Election, and the


Bush approval question was dropped when he left office. Changes in ladder scores


                                          18
at the time of these events prompted Gallup to randomly split the sample, with


half the respondents being asked the political questions as usual, and half the


respondents being asked none, so that the first question they were asked was the


ladder of life evaluation. This randomized controlled trial enables us to assess the


effect of asking the political questions as opposed to not asking them, and it turns


out that these questions cause a large negative effect on reported well-being.


People appear to dislike politics and politicians so much that prompting them to


think about them has a very large downward effect on their assessment of their


own lives; over the 111th Congress (2009–2010), only 25 percent of the population


approved of Congress, then one of the lowest numbers in history. Indeed, as we


shall see, the effect of asking the political questions on well-being is only a little


less than the effect of someone becoming unemployed, so that to get the same


effect on average well-being, three-quarters of the population would have to lose


their jobs. Not everyone becomes unemployed, but either half or all of the


respondents are asked the political questions.




                                           19
   Figure 3 shows the 21-day moving averages of mean ladder scores, split by the


two randomized forms of the survey. The two forms were identical until January
    7




                                  Form 2
    6.8




                                               Transition question added
    6.6




                                                              Obama approval retained
                                                              Satisfaction with the way US
    6.4




                                              Inauguration       is going removed
    6.2




          Political questions
                                           Form 1
          dropped from F2
    6




    01 Jan 08                   01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10                 01 Jan 11
                                            Interview Date




Figure 3: Average ladder score by questionnaire type

Notes: 21-day triangular weighted averages of averaged daily data for the population as a whole.
Forms 1 and 2 are two versions of the questionnaire, identical until the beginning of the shaded
area, after which the political questions at the beginning of the questionnaire were removed from
form 2. The end of the shaded period shows the date on which a “transition” question about life
satisfaction was added to the questionnaire after the political forms and before the ladder question.

5th, 2009, after which the political questions were dropped from form 2; this is


shown as the beginning of the shaded area in the figure. During the shaded



                                                    20
period, which ends on April 5th, form 1 respondents were asked political questions


(which changed occasionally) while form 2 respondents were asked none. The


difference between the solid and the broken line, about 0.6 of a rung on the


ladder, is the negative effect of the political questions on life evaluation; it is about


the same size as the decline in the ladder from the beginning to the end of 2008.


The form 1 spike is on inauguration day; on this day, and this day only, there were


no political questions on either form; the difference between the two means on


that day was 0.15, and appears much larger in the figure because of the moving


average.


   After the end of the shaded period, on April 6th, 2009, Gallup added a


“transition question” between the political questions and the ladder question. After


asking the political question to form 1 respondents, the interviewer asked, “Now


thinking about your personal life, are you satisfied with your personal life today?”


This is intended to remove the effects of the political questions by refocusing the


respondent’s attention, and the figure shows that it is remarkably, if not totally,


successful in doing so; see Schwarz and Schuman (1997) for discussion of such


buffer questions to offset order effects. From April 6th on, the difference falls from


                                           21
0.6 of a rung to less than 0.1 of a rung. Starting August 18th, the political


questions were reduced from two to one; the question about satisfaction with the


way that things are going in the US was dropped, retaining only a question about


approval of President Obama. Once that is done, the form 1 and form 2 means are


indistinguishable.


   For the period from January 6th, 2009, we have available a “clean” measure of


the ladder from the half of the sample who were asked no prior political questions.


This is useful but leaves unanswered the main question, which is the evolution of


well-being through 2008, for which it is necessary to make some corrections.


There is no assumption-free or non-parametric way of doing this, but there is a


very strong correlation between the ladder and the responses to questions about


the respondent’s standard of living, questions that are asked later in the survey.


There are two relevant questions: “Are you satisfied with your standard of living,


all the things you can buy and do?” with a Yes/No answer, and “Right now, do you


feel your standard of living is getting better or getting worse?” with answers


“Getting better, staying the same, or getting worse.” The answers to both of these


questions predict the ladder with high significance. When I use the “clean” data,


                                          22
from form 2 for 2009 on or after January 6th, to regress the ladder on the standard


of living answers, and collapse the predictions to get a daily time series, the


correlation between this prediction and the actual ladder is 0.54. When I do the


same for the period before January 6th, and during which there are much larger


fluctuations in the series, the correlation is 0.80.


   My corrections are as follows. Using the “clean” data, I fit an ordered probit to


the 11 ladder values (0 to 10) using the standard of living questions as predictors,


and then use the results to predict the probabilities of each rung for each house-


hold in the period up to January 5th, 2009. These predicted probabilities are then


used to give an expected ladder value for each household. Figure 4 shows the


daily mean of these predicted values as the lower (light broken) of the two upper


lines; for the period after January 6th, I use the actual ladder from form 2, dropping


form 1. The bottom line is the original, contaminated, ladder score, and even this


first correction makes a dramatic difference to the behavior of well-being over the


crisis. Most importantly, and in contradiction to the original graph, the corrected


series estimates that, on average, well-being had not recovered to its January


2008 level by the end of 2010.


                                           23
                        7.2
                                        Fully corrected         Forms
                                                                split
                                    7
Mean ladder score, raw or corrected
                        6.8




                                             Partially
                                             corrected
                                                                                  US going in right
                                                          Election                direction removed
              6.6




                                        Original ladder
   6.4




                                               Lehman                Transition
                                                                     question
                        6.2




                       01 Jan 08                             01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10   01 Jan 11
                                                                         Interview Date




Figure 4: Correcting the ladder for context effects

Notes: The bottom line is the original, uncorrected ladder. The middle line uses only form 2 after
the political questions were removed, and imputes the ladder prior to the split from the answers to
two standard of living questions. The top line makes a further correction for bias in the answers to
the standard of living questions. See text for details. All plots are 21-day triangularly weighted
moving averages of population means.

                     This correction likely still understates well-being at the beginning of the period.


The reason is that the values used for the adjustment, the answers to the standard


of living question, are themselves biased downward by the political questions,


even though there are sixteen or so (depending on skip patterns) (mostly health


related) questions between the ladder and the standard of living question; see


                                                                                    24
Bishop (1987) for an example of an order effect that persists in spite of the


insertion of up to 101 intervening questions. That this happens here can be


established from an analysis of the period from January 6th (when the political


questions were removed from form 2 respondents) to April 5th, 2009, when the


“transition” question was added to form 1. From January 21st, after the


inauguration, the political questions (approval of Obama, satisfaction with way


things are going in the US) did not change, so there is clean randomized treatment


and control design. Respondents who were given the political questions over this


period were 3.6 percentage points less likely to report satisfaction with their


standard of living than those who were not asked; the t-value on this is greater


than 10. For the future standard of living, where there are three answers, an


ordered probit shows a similarly significant downward shift. Since political


questions in one form or another were asked throughout 2008, it seems likely that


the standard of living answers were biased downward throughout that period,


which means that my first correction is probably insufficient.


   The political questions changed several times over the election period, so that I


cannot immediately apply the results from the randomization period to the earlier


                                         25
period. However, a detailed analysis shows that changes in the political questions


had only a small effect compared with the effect of there being political questions


at all; with 1,000 observations every day, regression discontinuity methods can be


used to investigate what happens as the questions change. So it seems that any


political question will depress the answers to the ladder and that the effects persist


through the questionnaire into the standard of living and some other questions.


   I have therefore made a second adjustment to all of the data prior to January


6th, 2009 based on the use of the pure randomization period discussed above. The


method is as follows. From the ordered probit calculated for the first adjustment


and estimated on the full “clean” period, I calculate the predicted x’b, and then


compare the values of this index between experimentals and controls over the


randomization period. This gives me an estimate of the downward bias from the


political questions, which I add back in, to give x’b+δ, say, which I then use in


place of x’b with the originally estimated cut points, to calculate a predicted set of


probabilities for each rung for each household. From these, I calculate a predicted


ladder for each household. The moving average of the daily mean of this series is


the top line in Figure 4. This second adjustment is modest compared with the


                                          26
first—the standard of living responses are not nearly as badly affected as is the


ladder by the political questions—but it further shifts up the early well-being


measures, suggesting more strongly still that Americans are indeed still some way


from recovering from the crisis.




4. Riding the waves: life evaluation and hedonics over the crisis


Stock market fluctuations have a direct effect on those who own assets, and are


thus important for linking the financial crisis to the well-being of individuals.


Ideally, the data would allow us to separate people with direct, indirect, or no


involvement in the market, but this information was not collected. One imperfect


way to look at this issue is to look at effects across the age and income


distributions. Rather than use the corrected ladder itself, I look directly at the


fraction of people who report that they are satisfied with their standard of living.


This series tracks the ladder closely, which is why it works for the correction, and


although it is also contaminated by the political questions, it is much less so than


is the case for the ladder. Judgments about standard of living are of interest in




                                          27
their own right, and can readily be decomposed by age or income. Figure 5 shows
Fraction reporting they are satisfied with their standard of living
                                                                      1




                                                                                                      80+
                                                                      .9




                                                                                           70-79
                                                                      .8




                                                                                          60-69
                                                                      .7




                                                                                  18-59
                                                                      .6




                                                                      01 Jan 08           01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10   01 Jan 1
                                                                                                      Interview Date




Figure 5: Fractions of the population satisfied with their standard of living, by age
group

Notes: 21-day moving averages of daily averages by age group.



the results disaggregated by age group, showing the working age population, 15–


59, as well as 60–69, 70–79, and 80 and over. As is the case for the ladder itself,


the fraction of people satisfied with their standard of living rises with age, even


though the level of income itself falls with age; among other things, this result



                                                                                                             28
demonstrates that neither the ladder nor the standard of living question is a


recode of income. All groups showed some decline in their standard of living from


spring 2008 until late in the year, and there was some recovery through 2009. But


the severity of the effects diminishes with age, and the crisis had a barely


perceptible effect on those aged 80 and above. Interestingly, the 60-69 age group


was affected as severely as those under 60, possibly because of their greater


dependence on the market through defined-contribution pensions. The oldest


group, whose pension income is unlikely to depend on the market, are the least


affected by the crisis.


   Figure 6 shows the corresponding information by household income group; this


is somewhat less satisfactory, because about a quarter of respondents either


refuse to answer the question or report that they don’t know, and are therefore


dropped from the analysis. That people who live in higher income households are


more likely to be satisfied with their standard of living is no surprise. More difficult


to explain, at least through the wealth channel, is that the impact of the financial


crisis on perceived standards of living is much larger—about twice as large—for




                                          29
those whose incomes are below $4,000 a month than for those whose incomes are


                                                                      More than $7,500 a month
                                                          .9
Fraction reporting satisfaction with standard of living
                                                          .8




                                                                                     $4,000 to $7,500
                                                          .7




                                                                                          $2,000 to $4,000
                                                          .6




                                                                                                  Up to $2,000 per month
                                                          .5




                                                          01 Jan 08      01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10            01 Jan 11
                                                                                     interview date




Figure 6: Satisfaction with standard of living by household monthly income level

Notes: Question is about whether you are satisfied with your standard of living plotted as 21-day
moving averages by household income groups

more than $4,000 a month; compare the top two graphs in Figure 6 with the


bottom two, especially towards the end of 2008. An obvious hypothesis is that the


rich were affected by the wealth shock and the poor by unemployment but, as we


shall see, the decline in standard of living perceptions happened before


unemployment began to rise.




                                                                                                  30
    .4
            SV



                                    SV       Mean of worry and stress
                        Christmas
    .3




                    Election        Market                           SV
                  Lehman            trough               Christmas        Physical pain
    .2




                                           Mean of not happy, not enjoying, not smiling, sad



                                                 Anger
    .1




    01 Jan 08                  01 Jan 09                      01 Jan 10                   01 Jan 11
                                           interview date




Figure 7: Negative hedonic experience, 2008 to 2010

Notes: 21-day moving averages of underlying daily averages over the whole population. The top
line is the averages of the fractions reporting worry or stress on the previous day. The second line
is the fraction reporting physical pain on the previous day. The third line is the average of the
fractions who reported sadness, or did not report happiness, enjoyment, or smiling on the previous
day. The bottom line if the fraction of those reporting anger on the previous day. The vertical
broken lines represent, from left to right, St Valentine’s Day 2008, Lehman collapse, Election Day
2008, Christmas 2008, St Valentine’s Day 2009, the market trough, Christmas 2009, and St
Valentine’s Day 2009.

   The effects of the financial crisis can also be seen in the reports of hedonic


well-being. In Figure 7 I have grouped together the various experiences, averaging


and changing signs as necessary, so that higher numbers always mean worse


outcomes. The underlying positive emotions (smiling, enjoyment, happiness)

                                                         31
appear to be unaffected by the presence or absence of the political questions at


the beginning of the survey; there is no significant difference in outcomes by form


over the randomization period. These questions are deeper in the questionnaire


than even the standard of living questions. However, people are somewhat more


likely to express negative emotions when they have been asked the political


questions at the beginning of the survey. Over the randomization period, asking


the political questions increases reported anger by 0.006, stress by 0.017, and


worry by 0.006; the effect on worry is barely significant, that on anger has a t-


value of 2.5, and that on stress a value of 5.0. These results mean that the top and


bottom lines in Figure 7 overstates worry, stress, and anger at the beginning of the


period, and although even the largest effect, for stress, is not very large, it is


enough to suggest that the average of stress and worry is still somewhat higher at


the end of 2010 than it was in early 2008.


   The results in Figure 7 are an important part of the overall story. Hedonic


experience, particularly worry and stress, but also physical pain, deteriorated


during the crisis, becoming rapidly worse during the summer and fall of 2008,


recovering briefly during the year-end holidays, only to reach their worst values


                                           32
around the time that the stock market was at its lowest. There is a (small) increase


in hedonic affect in all of these measures on St Valentine’s Day, and a much larger


one around the Christmas holidays. As the stock market revived, negative affect


fell. By mid-2010, there is very little trace of the crisis in these measures—though


admittedly it is hard to detect small trends among the variance—even though the


crisis continued in terms of lower incomes, employment, home and stock prices.


These results are consistent with hedonic adaptation, especially in the positive


measures (happiness, enjoyment, smiling, not being sad). Worry and stress (which


behave similarly to one another) are particularly sensitive to the crisis, at least in


terms of the increase in the fraction of the population reporting them. Hedonic


adaptation is somewhat less clear for worry and stress than for the positive


emotions. Although these series are came close to full recovery by mid-2010, they


never quite reached their original values, especially if we recognize that there is


some upward bias in the series at the start of the period.


5. Correlates of changes in well-being over the crisis


The literature on the correlates of SWB has identified many factors that consist-


ently show up as important for one or more measure. Some of these factors, like


                                           33
health, education, marital status, or religiosity, are also important in the GHWBI


data, but they do not change quickly enough at the population level to be


candidates for explaining the fluctuations that I am considering here. This is


obviously not true of income and of employment, both of which saw rapid changes


over the crisis; the literature finds that both contribute to well-being, and that


becoming unemployed has a very large negative effect on well-being. Two early


studies are Clark and Oswald (1994), who find that being unemployed is worse


than being divorced or separated, and Winkelman and Winkelman (1998), who use


the German panel data to show that the effect of unemployment operates in


addition to the effects of lost income. The relationship between stock market


prices and well-being seems to have been less researched, perhaps because it is


not easily addressed in cross-sectional data; while it is true that individuals are


differentially affected according to their exposure to a market shock, the effects of


the shock are identified from whatever determines stock holding, not from the


shock itself. Exploring the link between stock prices and well-being requires


relatively high frequency time-series data.




                                          34
   To tie the well-being outcomes in the GHWBI to the crisis-related behavior of


income and unemployment requires, as a preliminary, matching of the Gallup data


to official series on income and unemployment. This is not straightforward, given


that one is daily, seasonally-unadjusted while the other is typically monthly and


seasonally adjusted. Beyond that, the GHWBI asks a single question on monthly


household income, and the respondent is asked to choose from a set of income


intervals; we have no way of knowing how the respondent interprets this question,


nor whether the respondent is well-informed about his or her household’s income.


Single questions about household income are far from perfect, but are still


informative, see Micklewright and Schnepf (2010). Gallup has also experimented


over time with several sets of questions about work status, so the data do not


contain a consistent unemployment measure over the whole three year period.


   I have calculated an estimate of log income for each respondent by filling in


mid-points assuming that income is log-normally distributed; this is possible for


the three-quarters of all respondents who answered the income question. This is


clearly at best a rough and ready measure of income, but averaged over congres-


sional districts, there is a correlation of 0.96 with log median income from the


                                         35
American Community Survey, Kahneman and Deaton (2010). For the current


comparison, I have averaged log income over all respondents for each day, and


over each day in each month, and compared the results with BEA data on per


capita disposable income and on total employee compensation, both of which are


available only on a seasonally adjusted basis.
           8.4




                                 18-59
           8.2
    Mean log income




                       60-69
                                                            70-79
7.8         8




                                                        80+
           7.6




           01 Jan 08           01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10       01 Jan 11
                                           interview date




Figure 8: Mean log income by age group

Notes: 21-day weighted moving averages of raw means of reported log incomes. Note that 25
percent of the sample either refused to answer or said they did not know.




                                                       36
   Figure 8 shows the means of the logarithms of reported income by age group.


For the typically working age-group 18 to 59, there is a sharp reduction in


reported incomes from late 2008 through to the middle of 2009. This roughly


corresponds to a drop in employee compensation in the BEA statistics. However,


this reduction in income is either much less or altogether absent among the other


age groups. From the summer of 2009 onwards, the reported incomes of the


working-age group are not distinguishable from those of the age group 60 to 69,


who are typically retired. The incomes of the two older groups, although lower,


actually increased after early 2009. It is notable that the two stimulus-related


payments, one in April to June 2008 (tax rebates) and May and June 2009 (one


time $250 transfers sent to those receiving social security, SSI, railroad retirement


benefits, and veteran benefits) make no appearance in this figure, although a


graph of the official series is dominated by those two spikes. This is an interesting


finding in its own right. Either people did not recall these transfers or, more likely,


did not think of them as income.




                                          37
   Unemployment series are shown in Figure 9. For the periods where they


overlap, the two series are quite close, reflecting the considerable amount of work
   .12




                      BLS Unemployment rate
                      (seasonally unadjusted)
   .1
   .08




                                    Gallup G1K measures of unemployment
                                    (not seasonally adjusted)
   .06
   .04




   01 Jan 08                01 Jan 09                    01 Jan 10        01 Jan 11
                                        Interview Date




Figure 9: Unemployment rates from BLS and Gallup Healthways Wellbeing Index Poll

Notes: Both series are seasonally unadjusted



that Gallup has done to match the data from the BLS. The timing of unemployment


is important, and is quite different from the timing of the stock market. Although


unemployment inched up during the events of the fall of 2008, the big rise was


between November 2008 and March 2009—a period when the market was also



                                                  38
falling—but it then continued to rise, albeit more slowly, reaching a (seasonally


unadjusted) peak of 10.6 percent in January 2010. The unemployment conse-


quences of the financial crisis came much later than the financial crisis itself.


Table 1: OLS regression coefficients of unemployment and of log income

                   Unemployed          t-value             Log income          t-value

Ladder             –0.821              (42.4)              0.412               (75.1)




Smile              –0.057              (14.3)              0.027               (23.9)

Enjoy              –0.035              (9.2)               0.038               (35.4)

Happy              –0.047              (13.9)              0.033               (34.5)




Anger              0.057               (15.4)              –0.024              (23.2)

Worry              0.179               (36.9)              –0.050              (36.5)

Stress             0.052               (19.1)              –0.031              (21.8)

Sad                0.114               (29.2)              –0.048              (43.9)




Pain               0.048               (11.2)              –0.058              (47.7)

Notes: Estimated using approximately 163,000 observations from January 2nd, 2010 to August 31st,
2010 for which there are data on both unemployment and income using the final definitions of the
former. For the ladder, the left-hand side variable runs from 0 to 10; for the other experienced
emotions, the left-hand side variable is dichotomous. Also included in the regressions were
dummies for other kinds of employment status, marital status, age group, sex, Hispanic status, and
race. The comparison group for unemployment is full time employees




                                                 39
   The ordinary least squares regressions in Table 1 show that, in the cross-


section, unemployment and income play the expected roles in conditioning both


life evaluation and hedonic experience. People who report themselves unemployed


are 0.80 of a ladder rung below those who are in full-time employment.


Compensating for this would require an increase of 1.89 in log income, or more


than a six-fold increase in income itself; this compensation is close to, but


somewhat smaller than that calculated by Winkelman and Winkelman (1998) using


German panel data. Income is also good, and unemployment bad, for both positive


and negative emotions, as well as for physical pain. (Note that these estimates are


likely inflated by reverse causality; disabilities cause pain and make people less


likely to be in the labor force, and people with more positive emotion and less


negative emotions may have better outcomes as a result, see also Graham, Eggers,


and Sukhtankar, 2004.) Unemployed people are particularly more likely to be


worried and sad, and these are also the two cases (along with stress) where the


ratio of the unemployment coefficient to the log income coefficient is the highest.


As repeatedly found in the literature, unemployment is associated with poor life


evaluation and poor hedonic outcomes, and is so independently of (and in addition


to) the effects of (current) lost earnings.
                                              40
   Based on these cross-sectional results, we might expect variations in income


and unemployment to be the main drivers of well-being over the financial crisis,


with the role of the stock market an open question. But it should be already clear


from the timing in the figures that unemployment cannot provide a good account


of the time-series, at least on its own. To look at the correlates more formally, I


start with the daily averages and with the relation between income and the ladder.


   The correlation between mean log income (from the Gallup data) and the mean


corrected ladder is 0.32, and the regression coefficient 0.71 (t=11.0) which is


substantially larger than the cross-sectional coefficient in Table 1. This difference


is in the opposite direction to that predicted by the Easterlin paradox. Both the


correlation and the regression coefficients are biased down by the fact that both


the daily ladder and daily mean log income contain substantial day to day


sampling error. The daily corrected ladder is correlated with the S&P 500 at 0.46,


and the regression of the corrected daily ladder on mean log income and the log of


the S&P 500 index reduces the coefficient on the former to 0.33 (t=4.2) while the


coefficient on the log of the stock index is 0.31(t=11.4). The high correlation


between the corrected ladder and the market is shown in Figure 10; although it is


                                         41
clear that most of the correlation comes at the (low) frequency of the crisis itself,


some higher frequency correlation is visible too.
                                 1400




                                                                                                 7.1
                                                                      Corrected mean ladder
                                             S & P 500
                                 1200
 S & P 500 index (broken line)




                                                                                                  Corrected ladder (solid line)
                                                                                                                             7
                                 1000




                                                                                                              6.9
                                 800




                                                                                                 6.8
                                 600




                                                                                                 6.7
                                 01 Jan 08    01 Jan 09            01 Jan 10              01 Jan 11
                                                      Interview Date




Figure 10: Corrected mean ladder and SP500 index

                     Moving to monthly data, so as to use the unemployment data from the BLS at


the price of reducing the number of observations to 36, the ladder remains


correlated (0.43) with the SP 500, and in a regression of the corrected ladder on


the log of the SP 500, unemployment, and the log of employee compensation,




                                                                 42
unemployment is significantly positively related to the ladder, the log SP 500 has a


t-value of 7.2, and employee compensation is insignificant.


   Averages of emotions and physical pain are also significantly correlated with


average log income on a daily basis; as is the case for the ladder and once again


contrary to the Easterlin paradox, the coefficients are all (absolutely) larger than


the cross-section coefficients in Table 1. On monthly data, with only 36 monthly


data points, fluctuations in the SP 500 are correlated with all of the hedonics


except physical pain; neither the unemployment rate nor employee compensation


have any effect conditional on the market. For physical pain, only the unemploy-


ment rate has predictive power in the monthly data. That the market is more


closely related to hedonic outcomes and to the ladder in monthly than in daily data


is consistent with Figure 10 (and similar figures for hedonics) in which there is


little high frequency correlation.


   In addition to these regression results, it is informative to check whether the


changes in SWB over the whole three year period are what might be expected from


the cross-sectional results. We know that unemployment is twice as high at the


end of the period, and that some measures of income also fell, and we need to


                                          43
know if these changes—which are very large in business cycle terms—show up in


the well-being data. For the ladder, the corrected average value in January 2008


was 7.07, which had fallen to an average of 6.99 in December 2010. To make the


point, I take the largest possible changes in income and unemployment that are


consistent with the data, a decline of 5 percent in the former, and an increase of 5


percentage points in the latter. From the cross-section regressions in Table 1,


these changes should cause the ladder to fall by 0.06, somewhat less than


calculated, but surely within any reasonable margin of error given the corrections


for the order effects. Similar calculations for the hedonic experiences show that


the positive emotions do not respond as they should. Predicted from


unemployment and income, the fractions reporting smiling, enjoyment, and


happiness should all decrease by 0.004. In fact, enjoyment is actually higher (by


0.014) at the end of the period, and happiness and smiling are exactly the same at


the end of 2010 as they were at the beginning of 2008. By contrast, the negative


emotions are all higher at the end of the period, and the increases are larger than


predicted from the cross-section regressions and the changes in income and


unemployment, by twice or more, especially if we allow for some elevation at the


beginning of the period from the presence of the political questions.
                                         44
   We might conjecture that the positive emotions are more subject to hedonic


adaptation than are the negative emotions, or that the negative emotions respond,


not only to personal circumstances, but to the macroeconomic environment in


general. But there is a more important point. Even in the face of some of the


largest macroeconomic disruptions since the great depression, both the actual and


predicted changes in these well-being measures are very small, possibly smaller


than our ability to detect given the difficulties of measuring well-being. Even with


30,000 observations each month as here, the standard errors of the monthly


averages for the hedonics range from 0.002 to 0.003, which would mean that we


would just be able to detect the predicted effects of a major macroeconomic


upheaval with a 5 percentage point increase in the rate of unemployment and a 5


percent fall in average income.


   It is true that, for an individual, unemployment is associated with very large


declines in reported well-being. It is also true that the increase in unemployment


after the financial crisis was very large by business-cycle standards. Yet that very


large increase affects only one twentieth of the population. In consequence, even


major changes in unemployment predict only small changes in average well-being.


                                         45
Detecting such changes presents both statistical and conceptual challenges. A


decline in the ladder of 0.06 is (a little) smaller than the standard error in the


ladder on the daily sample of 1,000 respondents, and is only three times larger


than the standard error from a monthly sample of 30,000 respondents. But 0.06 is


an order of magnitude smaller than the mean effect on the ladder of adding


political questions to the beginning of the survey. In a sense, cross-sections of


individuals are much more like cross-sections of countries than they are like a


time-series for a single country. The differences in incomes across countries are


many times larger than the differences in income to be expected over a few years


or even over a few decades; the differences in income between the US and China or


the US and Togo took hundreds of years to come about. So the fact that the ladder


is highly correlated with incomes across countries, or with income and unemploy-


ment across individuals, tells us very little about what will happen if we use the


measure to track national well-being over time.


6. Conclusions


Perhaps my most surprising substantive finding is how closely well-being tracked


the stock market over the 1,000 days of 2008, 2009, and 2010. Yet it is surely


                                          46
wrong that we can abandon income, unemployment, and well-being measures in


favor of a stock market index. Most Americans have no direct or indirect financial


interest in the stock market, so whatever is the mechanism it cannot work through


personal portfolios, or at least not entirely so. My guess is that for much of the


financial crisis, the stock market became the most watched indicator, not only of


the present, but also of the future. As suggested by Dan McFadden in comments


on this paper, both SWB and the stock market were likely responding to the same


underlying stream of news, assessing its implications for the future. During the


early spring of 2009, with a newly installed administration, and a stock market that


was falling even beyond the already precipitous drop at the end of 2008, it was


reasonable enough to have dire fears about the future—indeed the stock market


itself was reflecting that fear—and those fears were heavily reinforced by media


coverage, sending highly correlated interpretations of the events to a large


segment of the population. From mid-2008 to mid-2009, the stock market was


the indicator of the state of the economy, something that would not necessarily be

true in more normal times. The pattern in Figure 10 may simply reflect the


peculiarities of this particular recession. In any case, the correlation with the


market reinforces that even at best, the well-being measures are not measuring
                                          47
current well-being, in the sense of today’s level of real income, but also picking up

the fear of the future associated with evolving economic news. For those who own


assets to support future consumption, the effect is immediate. For lower income


households, who are less likely to own market assets, and whose well-being was if


anything more affected by the market, market movements may generate changes


in expectations about unemployment. In standard intertemporal models, today’s


calculation of lifetime utility reflects not only what is happening to today’s


instantaneous utility, but also the expected utility of future outcomes, predictions


of which are changed by today’s news. Such effects would be amplified if “news”


utility is important in and of itself, as in Kőszegi and Rabin (2009) or Kimball and


Willis (2006).


   How do measures of self-reported well-being survive the stress-testing


provided by the financial crisis? They perform well in that they respond to income,


unemployment, and the stock market in the directions that we would expect. Yet


they are more successful as gauges of short-term fear or hope for the future than


of the current state of well-being in terms of income or employment. The worry




                                          48
and stress (see Figure 7) that came with these events is surely real enough, and


worth measuring and taking into account in policy.


   Even so, there are serious problems in using well-being measures for tracking


the performance of the economy over time. They cannot be expected to change


much in response to even historically large changes in macroeconomic activity—


the predicted (and actual) effects are just too small. Detecting these changes in


real time will require very large standing samples and even then, risk being


swamped by the much larger short-term effects of day to day events that are


sometimes clearly important—a major stock market crash, or events such as 9/11,


Metcalfe, Powdthavee, and Dolan (2011)—but sometimes have only dubious


implications for well-being. We also know from the effects of the political


questions in the Gallup surveys that the measures are sensitive to the context in


which they are asked. In one sense, this is a technical issue that could be dealt


with by suitable positioning of the questions, or by the use of buffer questions,


though we do not currently know how to do so in a way that would ensure


comparability over time or over countries. But the sensitivity induced by question


context extends to sensitivity to news and events widely portrayed in the media—


                                         49
for example the large one-day effect of the fall of Lehman Brothers. While it is


conceivable that, as is sometimes argued for the stock market, the SWB measures


are giving an accurate take on expected future well-being, it seems more plausible


that, like the stock market, they have actually very little to do with well-being. As


McFadden suggests in comments on this paper, we may be looking at “cognitive


bubbles” that are essentially irrelevant for any concept of well-being that we care


about. It is an important future task to explore whether or not SWB are excessively


sensitive to changes in the market and to other news.


   It is possible that the ladder question used in the Gallup surveys is more


sensitive to context effects than are other evaluative questions such as questions


about satisfaction with life or with one’s standard of living. But this seems most


unlikely; questions about the standard of living and about emotion are also


affected in the Gallup data, even though they are asked long after the political


questions that make people feel worse about their lives.


   There are many unresolved challenges before well-being measures become a


standard part of macroeconomic monitoring, however useful such measures are in


and of themselves. The measures have proved themselves in the cross-section


                                          50
   across different groups, for example for looking at the effects of life circum-


   stances, such as ill-health, divorce, or unemployment. They still have a long way to


   go in establishing themselves as good time-series monitors for the aggregate


   economy. In a world of bread and circuses, measures like happiness that are


   sensitive to short-term ephemera, and that are affected more by the arrival of St


   Valentine’s Day than to a doubling of unemployment, are measures that pick up


   the circuses but miss the bread.




References:


Agrawal, Sangeeta, and James K. Harter, 2011, “Context effect on life evaluation
      items: forming new estimates for data prior to Jan. 6, 2009,” Gallup Technical
      Report.
Bishop, George F, 1987, “Context effects on self-perceptions of interest in
      government and public affairs,” Chapter 10 in Hans-J. Hippler, Norbert
      Schwarz, and Seymour Sudman, eds., Social information processing and survey
      methodology, New York. Springer-Verlag. 179–99.
Bricker, Jesse, Brian K Bucks, Arthur Kennickell, Traci L Mach, and Kevin Moore, 2011,
      “Drowning or weathering the storm? Changes in family finances from 2007 to
      2009,” NBER Working Paper No. 16985, April.
Campbell, Angus, 1981, The sense of well-being in America, New York: McGraw Hill.
Cantril, Harvey, 1965, The pattern of human concern, New Brunswick, NJ. Rutgers
      University Press.
Carstensen, Laura, Derek M Isaacowitz, and Susan T Charles, 1999, “Taking time
      seriously: a theory of socioemotional selectivity,” American Psychologist, 54(3),
      165–81.

                                            51
Chakrabarti, Rajashri, Donghoon Lee, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar, 2011,
      “Household debt and saving during the 2007 recession,” NBER Working Paper
      No. 16999, April.
Christelis, Dimitris, Dimitris Georgarakos, and Tullio Jappelli, 2011, “Wealth shocks,
      unemployment shocks and consumption in the wake of the great recession,”
      http://ssrn.com/abstract=17929881
Clark, Andrew E. and Andrew J. Oswald, 1994, “Unhappiness and unemployment,”
      Economic Journal, 104 (424, May), 648–59.
Clark, Andrew E, Andreas Knabe and Steffen Rätzel, 2011, “Boon or bane? Others
      unemployment, well-being and job insecurity,” Paris School of Economics, April.
Deaton, Angus, 2008, “Income, health, and wellbeing around the world: evidence
      from the Gallup World Poll,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22:2, 53–72.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald, 2001, “Preferences over
      inflation and unemployment: evidence from surveys of happiness,” American
      Economic Review, 91(1), 335–41.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald, 2003, “The
      macroeconomics of happiness,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 809–
      27.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCulloch, 2009, “Happiness, contentment, and other
      emotions for central banks,” Chapter 6 in Christopher L. Foote, Lorenz Goette
      and Stephan Meier, eds., Policymaking insights from behavioral economics,
      Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 311–66.
Graham, Carol, Andrew Eggers, and Sandip Sukhtankar, 2004, “Does happiness pay?
      An exploration based on panel data from Russia,” Journal of Economic Behavior
      and Organization, 55 (3), 319–42.
Hurd, Michael D, and Susan Rohwedder, 2010, “Effects of the financial crisis and Great
      Recession on American households,” NBER Working Paper No. 16407,
      September.
Kahneman, Daniel and Angus Deaton, 2010, “High income improves evaluation of life
      but not emotional well-being,” PNAS, 2010: 1011492107v1-201011492.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan Krueger, David A Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A
      Stone, 2004, “A survey method for characterizing daily life experience: a day
      reconstruction method,” Science, 306 (December 3rd), 1776–80.



                                            52
Kahneman, Daniel and Jason Riis, 2005, “Living and thinking about it: two
      perspectives on life,’ in Felicia A. Huppert, N. Baylis, and B. Keverne, eds., The
      science of well-being, Oxford. Oxford University Press, 285–304.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin, 1997, “Back to Bentham?
      explorations of experienced utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2),
      376–405.
Kimball, Miles, and Robert Willis, 2006,”Utility and happiness,” University of Michigan,
      Department of Economics, working paper, March 3.
Kőszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin, 2009, “Reference dependent consumption
      plans,” American Economic Review, 99:3, 909–36.
Metcalfe, David, Nattavudh Powdthavee, and Paul Dolan, 2011, “Destruction and
      distress: using a quasi-experiment to show the effects of the September 11
      attacks on mental well-being in the United Kingdom,” Economic Journal, 121,
      F81–F103.
Micklewright, John and Sylke V. Schnepf, 2010, “How reliable are income data
      collected with a single question?” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series
      A, 173:2, 409–29.
Newport, Frank, 2011, “Adjustments to the Gallup-Healthways life evaluation scores,”
      September 8, http://www.gallup.com/poll/149006/Adjustments-Gallup-
      Healthways-Life-Evaluation-Scores.aspx
Nussbaum, Martha, 2008, “Who is the happy warrior? Philosophy poses questions to
      psychology,” The Journal of Legal Studies, 37:S2, S81–S113.
Schwarz, Norbert and Frtiz Strack, 1999, “Reports of subjective well-being:
      judgmental processes and their methodological implications,” Chapter 4 in
      Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, eds., Well-being: the
      foundations of hedonic psychology, New York. Russell Sage, 61–84.
Schwarz, Norbert and Howard Schuman, 1997, “Political knowledge, attribution, and
      inferred interest in politics: the operation of buffer items,” International Journal
      of Public Opinion Research, 9:2, 191–5.
Sen, Amartya K.,. 1985, Commodities and capabilities, Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Sen, Amartya K., 1987, On ethics and economics, Oxford. Blackwell.
Sen, Amartya K., 2009, The idea of justice, Cambridge, MA. Belknap.
Shapiro, Matthew, 2010, “The effects of the financial crisis on the well-being of older
      Americans: evidence from the cognitive economics study,” University of
      Michigan, http://www-personal.umich.edu/~shapiro/papers/CogFinCrisis.pdf
                                             53
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2008, “Economic growth and subjective well-
      being: reassessing the Easterlin paradox,” Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity, Spring, 1–87.
Stiglitz, Joseph, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi, 2009, Report of the commission
      on the measurement of economic performance and social progress, available at
      http://www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/en/index.htm
Stone, Arthur A., Joseph E Schwartz, Joan E Broderick, and Angus Deaton, 2010, “A
      snapshot of the age distribution of psychological well-being in the United
      States,” PNAS, 107(22), 9985–90.
Winkelman, Liliana and Rainer Winkelman, 1998, “Why are the unemployed so
      unhappy? Evidence from panel data,” Economica, 65 (257, Feb.), 1–15.
Wolfers, Justin, 2003, “Is business cycle volatility costly? Evidence from surveys of
      subjective well-being,” International finance, 6(1), 1–26.




                                            54
