                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MOBILE BANKING: THE IMPACT OF M-PESA IN KENYA

                                             Isaac Mbiti
                                            David N. Weil

                                        Working Paper 17129
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17129


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We are grateful to Taryn Dinkelman, John Driscoll, Frederik Eijkman, James Habyarimana, Stephen
Mwaura, Benno Ndulu, Pauline Vaughn, Dean Yang and seminar participants at Tulane University
and the NBER Africa Success Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Emilio Depetris
Chauvin, Federico Droller, Richard Amwayi Namolo, Angeline Nguyen, Scott Weiner and Jingjing
Ye provided superb research assistance. We are grateful to the Financial Sector Deepening (FSD)
Trust of Kenya and Pep Intermedius for providing us with data. Financial support for this research
was graciously provided by the NBER Africa Success Project. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Isaac Mbiti and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Mobile Banking: The Impact of M-Pesa in Kenya
Isaac Mbiti and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 17129
June 2011, Revised June 2014
JEL No. E40,O16,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

M-Pesa is a mobile phone based money transfer system in Kenya which grew at a blistering pace
following its inception in 2007. We examine how M-Pesa is used as well as its economic impacts.
Analyzing data from two waves of individual data on financial access in Kenya, we find that increased
use of M-Pesa lowers the propensity of people to use informal savings mechanisms such as ROSCAS,
but raises the probability of their being banked. Using aggregate data, we calculate the velocity of
M-Pesa at roughly four person-to-person transfers per month. In addition, we find that M-Pesa causes
decreases in the prices of competing money transfer services such as Western Union. While we find
little evidence that people use their M-Pesa accounts as a place to store wealth, our results suggest
that M-Pesa improves individual outcomes by promoting banking and increasing transfers.


Isaac Mbiti
Department of Economics
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer Street
Dallas, TX 75275-0496
imbiti@smu.edu

David N. Weil
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
david_weil@brown.edu
1       Introduction



M-Pesa is a money transfer system operated by Safaricom, Kenya's largest cellular phone
provider. M-Pesa allows users to exchange cash for "e-float" on their phones, to send e-float to
other cellular phone users, and to exchange e-float back into cash. The story of the growth of
mobile telephones in Africa is one of a tectonic and unexpected change in communications
technology. From virtually unconnected in the 1990's, over 60 percent of Africans now have
mobile phone coverage, and there are now over ten times as many mobile phones as landline
phones in use (Aker and Mbiti, 2010). Even with the story of mobile phones' growth as a
background, the growth of M-Pesa is startling. Within eight months of its inception in March
2007, over 1.1 million Kenyans had registered to use M-Pesa, and over US$87 million had been
transferred over the system (Safaricom, 2007). By September 2009, over 8.5 million Kenyans
had registered to use the service and US$3.7 billion (equivalent to 10 percent of Kenya's GDP)
had been transferred over the system since inception (Safaricom, 2009). This explosive growth
was also mirrored in the growth of M-Pesa agents (or service locations), which grew to over
18,000 locations by April 2010, from a base of approximately 450 in mid-2007 (Safaricom, 2009
and Vaughan, 2007). By contrast, Kenya has only 491 bank branches, 500 postbank branches,
and 352 ATMs (Mas and Ng'weno, 2009). While the mobile telephone is within sight of
becoming a mature business, e-money services like M-Pesa are still in their early days and are
continually evolving in response to competitive pressures and customer needs. Despite all the
attention M-Pesa has received, there is little quantitative evidence on its economic and social
impacts.

        The combination of widespread cellular communication and the ability to transfer money
instantly, securely, and inexpensively are together leading to enormous changes in the
organization of economic activity, family relations, and risk management and mitigation, among
other things. A decade ago, family members in different parts of Kenya had a very limited scope
of communicating with relatives in distant parts of the country, and they faced even greater
difficulties in sending or receiving remittances. Now, in many cases, appeals for assistance and
the availability of resources can be communicated, and money can be transferred almost
instantaneously. Among the changes observers have noted are changes in the the nature, pattern
and impact of remittances. Morawcyznski and Pickens (2009) observe that M-Pesa users sent
smaller but more frequent remittances, which resulted in overall larger remittances to rural
areas. They also observe that urban migrants using M-Pesa visited their rural homes less
frequently, potentially weakening the social ties between migrants and their home communities.
Researchers have also noted the potential of M-Pesa to affect savings. Morawcyznski and
Pickens (2009) observe that users often keep a balance on their M-Pesa accounts, thereby using
the system as a rudimentary bank account despite the fact that the system does not provide
interest. In addition, Vaughn (2007) notes that some individuals stored money in M-Pesa due to
safety considerations, especially when travelling across the country. Using ethnographic methods
in three communities, Plyler et al. (2010) argue that M-Pesa has enabled small businesses to
expand and grow and has also increased the circulation of money in these communities.
        The explosive growth of M-Pesa has inevitably inspired a great deal of discussion about
what the system really is and what it could grow to be. Is it simply a low-cost money transfer
system competing with (or replacing) modalities such as cheques and Western Union? Is it a
nascent form of electronic money that will someday largely displace cash? Can it be used as a
savings account? Is it a means by which financial services can be provided to the unbanked?
Suri and Jack (2011) report that three out of four M-Pesa users indicate that they use it to save
money. Recently, the potential for M-Pesa to be a savings vehicle has received even more
attention, as Safaricom and Equity Bank have introduced M-Kesho, an interest-bearing savings
account that is directly linked to M-Pesa.

        In this paper we examine how M-Pesa is being used in Kenya. We combine data from a
number of sources including micro-level survey data (the FinAccess surveys), transaction data
from M-Pesa agents, price data from money transfer companies, and aggregate data from
Safaricom and the Central Bank of Kenya. We pay particular attention to the question of
whether M-Pesa is solely a low-value money transfer system or a nascent form of a means of
saving, providing broader financial access for people who are unbanked.

        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly discuss the
structure of M-Pesa. In Section 3, we examine M-Pesa’s role as a money transfer service. We
also examine the characteristics of users, explore data on the distribution of withdrawal and
deposit sizes, and analyze the effect of M-Pesa on alternative money transfer modalities. In
Section 4, we examine microeconomic evidence of how M-Pesa affects outcomes such as the
propensity of individuals to use financial institutions as well as to accumulate savings. In
Section 5, we explore the monetary aspects of M-Pesa, including the velocity of e-money
circulation. Section 6 addresses the question of why people do not store much value in their M-
Pesa accounts. Section 7 concludes.



2         M-Pesa Structure



Basic Structure

There are three basic transactions that customers conduct with M-Pesa.

       A customer may deposit money at an M-Pesa outlet in return for e-float (called a "cash-
        in" transaction.) The customer is required to show a valid identification document, and
        his identity and the amount of the deposit are logged in a book kept at the outlet. Upon
        receipt of the money, the M-Pesa agent enters the customer's telephone number and
        deposit information into his/her cell phone, and the customer waits at the outlet window
        until he/she receives a confirmation text message that e-float has been deposited. Unless
        the system is running slowly (which happens occasionally), the whole transaction takes
        about a minute or less.
      A customer may exchange e-float for cash at an M-Pesa outlet (called a "cash out"
       transaction.) Again, the customer must show a valid identification document, and the
       transaction is logged. The customer tells the the shop clerk how much cash he/she wants,
       then chooses "withdraw cash" on the M-Pesa menu on his phone, enters the amount to be
       withdrawn (plus the relevant fee), and enters the agent number. The agent then receives a
       text indicating that the transaction is complete, and the agent then gives the appropriate
       amount of cash to the customer. This whole transaction takes about one minute.

      Finally, a user may transfer e-float from his/her phone to another phone. Our study refers
       to such a transfer as a “person-to-person transfer,” even though one or both of the parties
       may be an institution or firm. The user enters the phone number of the recipient and the
       amount to be transferred on his/her cellphone. The sender and recipient each receive a
       text message stating that money has been transferred.

These three basic transactions can be combined in a number of ways. For example, a user may
deposit cash and send the full amount deposited to another user, who can then withdraw the full
amount transferred. We refer to this use as "deposit-transfer-withdraw." Alternatively, a user
who receives a transfer from one person may transfer the e-float to some other user instead of
withdrawing cash. E-float could circulate in this manner indefinitely, like conventional cash. A
third usage possibility is where a user deposits cash and then later withdraws it him/herself
without having transferred it. Anecdotally, it is said that people do this for safety when they are
traveling (Vaughan, 2007; Morawczynski, 2009).

        The usage patterns described above can be mixed in varying ways. For example, a user
may receive a transfer and withdraw some of the value while transferring some of the remaining
amount elsewhere and leaving some e-float in his account for future transactions. Of particular
interest to us is a pattern in which a user might receive a transfer and not withdraw it right away
for several reasons: to economize on transaction fees, to economize on the effort of going to an
M-Pesa outlet, or to benefit from the safety of storing value on a phone rather than in cash. M-
Pesa is safer than cash because a PIN is required to perform any transaction. If a phone is stolen
or lost, the M-Pesa funds are safe unless the PIN has been compromised. If the PIN is
compromised and funds are transfered to another account, the legitimate account holder can
recover his/her funds if they have not been withdrawn by the fraudulent recipient by initiating a
transfer reversal through the customer service department.

         One of our goals is to better understand such patterns of use. One question in particular
is how much of the use of M-Pesa is of the deposit-transfer-withdraw type. To the extent that it
is used just this way, M-Pesa is primarily a simple money transfer service (which is hardly to say
that it isn't economically important). By contrast, other uses of M-Pesa suggest other functions.
To the extent that e-money circulates among several users between an initial cash-in transaction
and a final cash-out transaction, it can be seen as an evolving alternative to currency. Similarly,
to the extent that people hold e-float balances on their phones for significant periods of time, M-
Pesa can be seen as having aspects of banking (as will be seen below, one can even view it as
paying interest.)1

        All M-Pesa e-float is backed 100% by deposits held at three commercial banks in Kenya.
Interest earned on these deposits is donated to a charity, which allows Safaricom to avoid being
regulated as a bank. An extensive description of the arrangements between Safaricom and the
network of agents who service M-Pesa users can be found in Eijkman, Kendall, and Mas (2010)
and Suri and Jack (2011).



Pricing

 Table 1 shows the basic pricing scheme for M-Pesa. To deposit money, a user must register with
M-Pesa at an agent location. This is a relatively short process and only requires a valid
identification document such as a national ID or passport. Recipients of M-Pesa need not be
registered. There is a higher fee for sending money to non-registered users, but they are not
charged any fees to withdraw money and are unable to send the money onwards since they are
unregistered. The overall transaction fee is far lower for sending to a registered user than to a
non-registered user. In practice 70 percent of users are registered, and approximately 90 percent
of transactions are conducted by registered users.2

        The pricing structure of M-Pesa is simple and intuitive. However, the pricing structure
has a number of "notches" in the terminology of Slemrod (2010). These are points at which
incremental changes in customer behavior cause discrete jumps in costs. The incentives around
notches are far stronger than those observed at "kinks" in price schedules, such as points where
the marginal tax rate changes. For example, in the M-Pesa tariff schedule, the fee for
withdrawing up to 1-2,500 Ksh. is 25 Ksh., while the fee for withdrawing 2,501-5,000 Ksh. is 45
Ksh. Thus, a person who withdraws 2,600 Ksh. will be paying a marginal fee of 20 Ksh. (20%)
on the last 100 Ksh. withdrawn compared to a fee of 1% on the first 2,500 Ksh. withdrawn. The
response of users to the price notches in the M-Pesa tariff schedule should be informative about


1
  As mentioned above, Safaricom and Equity Bank are now introducing a new service called M-Kesho which allows
for mobile phone access to a low-cost bank account. There is no charge for opening the account, no periodic fees,
and no minimum or maximum balance (M-Pesa has a maximum balance of 50,000 Ksh.) Balances from 1-2,000
Ksh (approximately 0.13-25 USD) receive 0.5% interest per year; from 2,001-5,000 KSH, 1% per year; from 5,001-
10,000 KSH, 2% per year; and above 10,000 KSH ($125), 3% per year. Funds can be transferred without a free
from M-Pesa to M-Kesho, although transfer back to M-Pesa costs 30 Ksh. M-Kesho also offers microcredit and
insurance services. Microloans can be requested for 100-5000 Ksh, with a 10% application fee. Loans are approved
or rejected based on a credit score determined by looking at M-Pesa, M-Kesho, and Equity Bank account activity in
the last 6 months, and must be paid back within 30 days (a penalty of 3% of one's outstanding balance is charged for
every day after this 30-day period). Insurance can be obtained for 530 Ksh for a year if paid all at once, 830 Ksh for
the year if paid on a monthly basis, or 1030 Ksh for a year if paid on a weekly basis. For the first year, this
insurance is limited to personal accident related expenses (though this is fairly broadly defined), but after a year it is
upgraded to full life insurance (150,000 ksh. death or permanent disability benefit plus 20,000 ksh. funeral
expenses.)
2
    Refer to the data appendix for details on the computation of this variable
the optimization problems faced by users. Below, we explore this issue by looking at data on the
distribution of withdrawal sizes.



3         Uses and Economic Impacts of M-Pesa



3.1        M-Pesa as a Money Transfer System



3.1.1   Survey Results

How money was sent in 2006 and 2009


Prior to the introduction of M-pesa, individuals used a mixture of informal and formal channels
to transfer money. Larger bus companies such as Akamba Bus company or Scandinavia Bus
Company offered formal money or parcel transfer services, where recipients would collect the
funds at a designated bus terminal. However, smaller bus companies or independent mini-bus
operators (matatus) would perform these transactions informally, and in some cases the bus
driver would carry the funds with the promise to deliver them. In other cases, individuals would
disguise money transfers as packages and place them on the bus for delivery to the designated
terminal ( Kabbucho et al., 2003 and Morawczynski, 2009). The post office offered a variety of
different money transfer products including instant money transfer (postapay) and money orders
which would be delivered to the post office closest to the recipient (Kabbucho et al., 2003).
Banks and money transfer companies such as Western Union or Moneygram also offered
transfer services, although their outlet or branch networks were not as extensive as the post
office's.

        Figures 1 and 2 show the change in sending and receiving methods between 2006 and
2009. The figures show that the most common methods to send or receive money were through
friends, bus companies, or the post office in 2006. Over 50 percent of people sent money using
friends while close to 50 percent received money via this medium. Approximately 20 percent
sent money using the post office, while close to 30 percent received funds this way. Other formal
methods such as sending money through banks or money transfer companies like Western Union
were less common with less than 10 percent using these methods to send or receive funds.

        The inception of M-Pesa in 2007 dramatically changed the money transfer market. In less
than two years since its inception, M-Pesa was the leading money transfer method with over 50
percent sending money via M-Pesa and over 65 percent receiving funds through the system in
2009 (Figures 1 and 2). The emergence of M-Pesa as the dominant money transfer mechanism
virtually eliminated the use of post office products, bus companies, and formal channels such as
Western Union and banks, where between 3.5 percent and 0.4 percent of individuals now use
these methods to send or receive money (Figures 1 and 2). However, sending and receiving
funds through friends remains a popular means of money transfer, where 33 percent of
individuals send money via a friend and 22 percent receive funds through a friend in 2009
(Figures 1 and 2).



Uses of M-Pesa

Figure 3 summarizes the data on M-Pesa use from the 2009 Finacess Survey in descending order
of frequency. Close to 42 percent of M-Pesa users reported using the system to purchase mobile
phone airtime. Approximately 26 percent of users reported using M-Pesa to save money. While
this is a relatively high proportion, it is much lower than the 75 percent saving rate reported in
Jack and Suri (2011). Close to 20 percent of users also report using M-Pesa while travelling,
presumably for safety concerns as discussed in Vaughan (2007) and Morawczynski (2009).
Approximately six percent of users made donations via M-Pesa, and our experience in the field
suggests this has grown as currently the majority of calls for donations now include an M-Pesa
option. Only six percent claim to receive payments on M-Pesa, while only two percent claim to
receive salaries or wages by M-Pesa. Despite these low levels, 50 percent of M-Pesa users report
that they would like to receive their main income by M-Pesa, mainly due to speed and
accessibility. The main reported reasons for not wanting to use M-Pesa for the receipt of income
was a strong cash preference (30 percent) and a fear of losing their phone (25 percent).
Surprisingly, 17 percent of those who did not want to receive their income on M-pesa were
worried they could access the money too easily and thus spend it right away, while another 14
percent claimed their salary would not fit in M-Pesa. Almost 4 percent used an ATM to
withdraw cash from their M-Pesa account and 3 percent used M-pesa to buy goods or pay bills.
While the bill-paying prevalence was low in 2009, we expect this to grow as Safaricom has
initiated a number of strategic partnerships where customers may now pay for goods and services
using M-Pesa. For example, several hospitals, insurance companies, schools, and grocery stores
now accept M-Pesa payments. As argued in Aker and Mbiti (2010), these partnerships are part of
M-Pesa’s evolution from a pure money transfer system into a payment platform and a formal
(regulated) financial service.


3.1.2 Distribution of Withdrawals and Deposits

Our data comes from three M-Pesa outlets. As described in Eijkman, Kendall and Mas (2010),
Cyber Center is an urban outlet in the city of Kisumu, which has a population of 350,000. The
outlet is located near one of the city's markets. Katito is small town with a population of roughly
five thousand, located in a rural area about a one-hour trip from Kisumu. It also services
surrounding rural areas. Homa Bay is classified as a "district" outlet, meaning that it is in a
provincial market town with a population of roughly 20,000 on a main highway.
        Table 2 shows data on the distribution of withdrawal and deposit amounts at the three
outlets. Figure 4 show the histograms of the distribution of withdrawals from each outlet. The
most striking finding in this data is the extent to which a large part of the distribution is
composed of very small withdrawals. This is most visible in Katito, the rural outlet, where the
median withdrawal is only 900 Ksh. (about US $13). The 10th percentile of the distibution of
withdrawals in Katito is 250 Ksh., which implies that one-tenth of users pay a commission of
10% or more.3

        We can also use Figure 4 to address the issue of whether there is a large response to the
price notches in the M-Pesa tariff discussed above. Although we do not perform a formal test, in
most applicable cases we see remarkably little evidence of any response to these notches at all.
In the case of Katito, for example, the only price notch that is in the range of an appreciable part
of the data is at 2,500 Ksh. Although there is indeed a point of mass at this level, it is not out of
line with what one would expect given the similar masses at round numbers (500, 1,000, 1,500,
etc.). Indeed, there were many fewer withdrawals at 2,500 Ksh. than at 3,000 Ksh. We see this
for the other outlets as well. It is true that in Homa Bay, which has the largest withdrawals, there
are large spikes in the distribution at 10,000 and 20,000 Ksh., both of which are price notches.
Similarly, there is a spike at 10,000 at Cyber Center. This is consistent with users reacting to the
incentives of the price notches, but it is also possible that these large spikes are just due to these
figures being round numbers.

        As another test of whether users of M-Pesa change their behavior in response to
characteristics of the pricing structure, we examined data on deposit sizes. Specifically, we are
interested in the extent to which people transferring money take into account the fees paid by
those who withdraw money (and also the transfer fees that they pay themselves). If such a
deposits are made as part of a deposit-transfer-withdraw transaction, then the total fees of the
transaction will be 55 Ksh. (that is, 30 Ksh. for the transfer plus 25 Ksh. for the withdrawal). A
depositor who wanted the recipient to end up with, say, 1,000 Ksh. would have to deposit 1,055
Ksh. We think of small deposits in amounts ending with 55 Ksh. as being "fee aware." To the
extent that we see deposits of such amounts, it suggests to us that there is a confluence of three
factors: first, the depositor intends to transfer the full amount of his/her deposit (minus the
transfer fee); second that he/she expects the recipient to withdraw the amount of the transfer
received; and third that the sender wants the recipient to have access to a round-number amount
of money.

        Table 3 shows data on the deposits pooled from the three outlets described above. We
consider only deposit amounts below 2,600 Ksh., because the withdrawal fee rises after 2,500
Ksh.4 Our sample is 6,036 deposits. We tabulate deposits based on the last two digits of the
deposit size. The table shows that, not surprisingly, the biggest masses of the distribution are at
00, 50, and 25, which are simply round numbers. However, the fourth largest mass in the
distribution (6.8%) is indeed at 55, which clearly corresponds to awareness of fees. Further, the

3
  Although we do not have data that links withdrawals to transfers, it is likely that in most cases, someone who
withdraws 250 ksh. has just received this as a transfer, which cost the sender 30 ksh. Thus the overall cost of
receiving 225 ksh. after fees was 280 ksh., a loss of 19.6%.
4
  The withdrawal fee itself is not counted toward the price of a withdrawal. Thus a customer with a balance of Ksh.
2525 in her account could receive Ksh. 2500 in cash
fifth largest mass in the distribution is at 30 (4.0%), suggesting that some depositors are taking
into account transfer fees but not withdrawal fees. Nonetheless, our interpretation of this data is
that fee-aware deposits are relatively rare. Of course it is not clear which of the three factors
described above is failing in most cases.



3.1.3    The Impact of M-pesa on Money Transfer Companies

A number of papers have documented the impacts of mobile phones causing reduced price
variation in markets. Jensen (2007) and Aker (2010) find that the introduction of mobile phones
reduced price dispersion in fish markets in India and grain markets in Niger respectively. In these
instances the mobile phone technology has increased information flows, which has resulted in
price reductions. In contrast, the development and introduction of M-pesa can be viewed as a
"disruptive technology" (Bower and Christensen, 1995) or an example of "creative destruction"
(Schumpeter, 1942 and Aghion and Howitt, 1992), where M-Pesa revolutionized the money
transfer industry. As Figures 1 and 2 show, M-Pesa became the dominant money transfer
mechanism within 2 years of its inception. Ethnographic work by Morawczynski (2009) suggests
that M-Pesa's popularity has been driven by its speed, safety, reliability, extensive network of
outlets, and its price relative to the alternatives. Prior to the introduction of M-Pesa, Kabbucho et
al (2003) document that the cost of instantly sending US$100 through formal channels ranged
between US$12 (MoneyGram) and US$20 (bank wire transfer), while the cost slower formal
channels ranged from $3 (bus companies) to $6 (postal money order). Compared to these
alternatives M-Pesa offered a significantly cheaper method of instantly transferring funds, where
the cost of sending US$100 to a non-registered user by M-pesa was approximately US$2.50 in
early 2008, while the cost of sending to a registered user was even less (Safaricom, 2008).

        The dominance of M-pesa can also be observed in the the financial statements of the
competitors. Gikunju (2009) examines the financial statements of the Postal Corporation of
Kenya and finds that revenues and profits for its PostaPay money transfer service declined
rapidly after the introduction of M-Pesa and suggests that Western Union’s and MoneyGram’s
profits have also declined over the same period. Faced with obsolescence, money transfer
companies such as Western Union and MoneyGram have responded by cutting prices, even
though they are still unable to match M-pesa's superior convenience (Gikunju, 2009). Figure 5
shows the changes in the money transfer price schedule for Western Union and MoneyGram
from the pre-M-Pesa period to the post- M-Pesa period. Overall, these figures show a dramatic
reduction in the transaction prices of money transfers. On average, the commission (defined as
price to send money divided by the amount sent) charged for money transfers fell from
approximately 7% in 2003 to 3% in 2010. However, we cannot entirely attribute this decline to
the competitive pressures induced by the M-Pesa revolution as other factors such as general
technological changecould reduce transaction costs and thus reduce prices. Therefore, simple
before-and-after comparisons of the price changes will not be sufficient to identify the
competitive impact of M-Pesa on the prices of competitors.

     We employ a difference-in-difference estimation strategy in order to identify the impact of
M-Pesa on competitors prices. We construct a database of prices for the main formal competitors
in Kenya: MoneyGram and Western Union.5 We obtained the pre-M-Pesa price schedules from
Kabbucho et al (2003) and the current price schedules from each provider’s website. As each
firm uses different price brackets, we created consistent and comparable price schedules by
examining the commissions (price/send amount) for send amounts in 100 Ksh. intervals ranging
from each company’s minimum send amount to each company’s maximum send amount.5 Our
empirical strategy exploits the differences in maximum transaction limits between M-Pesa and
its competitors. Central Bank Regulations place a maximum transaction limit of 35,000 Ksh. on
M-Pesa, while the transaction limits of MoneyGram and Western Union transactions exceed
500,000 Ksh. Given these transaction limits, we would expect to see greater competitive
pressures due to M-Pesa on transactions below the M-Pesa threshold of 35,000 Ksh. compared to
transactions above that threshold. Figure 5 provides some suggestive evidence of this effect.
Focusing on Moneygram, we see that the prices for smaller transactions decreased dramatically,
while those for large transactions remained more static. A simple comparison of means above
and below the 35,000 Ksh. threshold and across time is shown in Table 4. This table shows that
there were larger reductions in the prices of transfers below 35,000 Ksh. compared to those
above. We can formally examine this assertion using the following empirical specification:


        p jkt   0   1under 35 j   2 post t   3 under 35 j  post t   j   k   jkt          (1)


where is the commission defined as price of sending j shillings, under35 is a dummy variable
that indicates whether the transaction amount j is less than 35,000 shillings, post is an indicator
variable for the post M-pesa period (i.e. 2010),  is a transaction amount fixed effect and  is a
company fixed effect. The coefficient of interest is  3 , which captures the impact of M-Pesa on
prices. The estimates from Equation 1 are shown in Table 5. These results show that the prices of
transactions below 35,000 shillings fell by six percentage points, which is approximately a 43
percent reduction in the prices of transactions under 35,000 shillings from 2003. Overall, prices
in this segment fell from approximately 14 percent to four percent; thus, our estimates imply that
competitive pressure from M-Pesa accounts for approximately 60 percent of the decline in prices
from 2003 to 2010.

        A potential concern with our estimation strategy is that we could be simply capturing
falling trends in prices. Since we only have two periods of data, we cannot include company
specific trends in our analysis. However, we can perform some falsification tests to ensure that
our results are not spurious. We create a series of false (and arbitrary) thresholds of 100,000,
125,000 and 150,000 Ksh. and estimate Equation 1 using these fake thresholds and restrict the
sample to transactions over 35,000 shillings to avoid M-Pesa effects. Table 6 shows the results of
this falsification exercise. We do not find negative effects of these false thresholds, but we do
find small but positive and significant impacts of this threshold suggesting that trends are not
driving our results discussed above.


5
  The Postal Corporation of Kenya also has an instant money transfer product called Posta Pay. However, we were
unable to collect pre-M-Pesa prices. We did have early 2008 prices and we do observe the same patterns as we show
in our regressions
         While M-Pesa has forced money transfer companies to lower prices, M-Pesa has also
induced these firms and other financial firms to improve their products and services. In some
cases, firms have partnered with M-Pesa to offer an integrated service. For example, Western
Union recently partnered with M-Pesa to offer international money transfers in which migrants
in the diaspora can now send remittances to their friends and family via M-Pesa with Western
Union serving as an intermediary. Pesa-Point, an independent network of ATMs, allows M-Pesa
users to withdraw cash using its large network of ATMs. Commercial banks in Kenya were
initially opposed to M-Pesa and lobbied the government to regulate M-Pesa and other mobile
money platforms under the commercial banking regulations (Njiraini and Anyanzwa, 2008).
After these efforts failed, banks partnered with M-Pesa to offer better services to customers and
in some cases became M-Pesa agents. There is also suggestive evidence that M-Pesa has
increased the efficiency of the banking system. According to a 2009 newspaper article, the
advent of M-Pesa has caused commercial banks to work toward speeding up the check clearing
process, which took a minimum of three days.6



3.2 Characteristics of Users



We use data from the 2009 FinAccess survey to examine basic patterns and characteristics of M-
Pesa users and their usage patterns. Overall, our data show that approximately 40 percent of
Kenyans have used M-Pesa, with close to 30 percent formally registered with Safaricom. As
discussed in Aker and Mbiti (2010), M-Pesa users are more likely to be younger, wealthier,
better educated, banked, employed in non-farm sectors, to own cell phones, and to reside in
urban areas (Table 7).

        We examine cross-tabulations of M-Pesa use by individual characteristics in Table 8.
Males, urban residents, banked individuals, the wealthy, the better-educated, and those employed
in the non-farm sector were more likely to use M-Pesa. Higher socio-economic status individuals
are more likely to use M-Pesa to purchase airtime, save and store money while travelling, and
use M-Pesa to pay wages than their respective counterparts. Focusing on saving patterns, Table 8
shows that 35 percent of banked individuals use M-Pesa to save while only 19 percent of
unbanked individuals used M-Pesa to save. Similarly, 30 percent of wealthy individuals report
using M-Pesa to save, while only 15 percent of poor individuals report doing so. Similar gaps are
also observed between the more-educated and less-educated individuals. When we examine the
characteristics of users who use M-Pesa as a safe-keeping mechanism while travelling, we find
very similar patterns to those found in savings. We find that the wealthier, more-educated, and
banked individuals are each approximately 2.5 times more likely to report using M-Pesa while
travelling when compared to their counterparts.



6
 "Why central bank position on mobile banking attracts wrath," 2/6/2009, The Standard
http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/InsidePage.php?id=1144015709&cid=457&
        We observe large differences in the frequency of M-Pesa use across demographic and
economic groups in Table 9. Individuals with bank accounts use M-Pesa almost three times as
much as those without bank accounts. Urban residents, richer individuals, the more-educated,
and those in the non-farm sector use M-Pesa almost twice as often as rural residents, poorer
individuals, the less-educated and those employed in the farm sector respectively. While those
with mobile phone used M-Pesa three times as often as those without phones, there are much
smaller differences between men and women (with men using M-Pesa 35 percent more
frequently than women). As Columns (2) to (5) suggest, these disparities are mainly driven by
differences in daily and weekly use, in which the banked are almost three times as likely to use
M-Pesa daily or weekly as the unbanked, and urban residents are almost twice as likely to use M-
Pesa daily or weekly compared to rural residents. While daily and weekly users are generally
more affluent, educated, and urban, they only account for 1.6 and 14.4 percent of all users
respectively, while 32.7 percent of users are monthly users, and 51.3 percent are irregular users.
However, using our annualized measure of M-Pesa usage, we find that daily users (1.6 percent of
users) account for 32 percent of transactions, weekly users account for 41 percent of transactions,
monthly users account for approximately 21 percent of transactions, and irregular users account
for only 6% of transactions.

        Overall, these simple cross-tabulations of the intensity of M-Pesa use and the main uses
of M-Pesa by individual characteristics reveal that the most intense users generally have higher
socio-economic status. Moreover, theses higher SES individuals are also more likely to use M-
Pesa in ways that could reap large economic gains such as savings. Taken together, these
patterns perhaps suggest that more affluent members of society are among the biggest
beneficiaries of M-Pesa. This, of course, does not preclude poorer and more vulnerable members
of society from reaping significant economic and social benefits from M-Pesa. More research
will be needed to examine the extent to which M-Pesa benefits are distributed across socio-
economic strata.



4.   Economic Impacts of M-Pesa: Micro-level evidence

 Morawcyznski and Pickens (2009) find that M-Pesa has changed the patterns of remittances.
This observation is supported by the 2009 FinAccess surveys which show that almost 35 percent
report that they have increased the frequency of sending transfers due to M-Pesa, while 31
percent report an increase in the receipt frequency of transfers due to M-Pesa. (Figure 6).
Surprisingly, 18 percent report a decrease in the sending frequency, while 22 percent report a
decrease in the receiving frequency, with the remainder reporting no change in transfer
frequency. Figure 7 shows the change in the amount of transfers received. Almost 35 percent of
users claim that they sent larger transfers due to M-Pesa, while 30 percent claim to have received
larger transfers because of M-Pesa. In contrast roughly 20 percent report decreases in the amount
of transfers sent or received, with the remainder reporting no change in the amount of transfers
received or reported. We find very strong correlations between reported changes in transfer
frequency and reported changes in the amount transferred. Over 85 percent of individuals report
the same effect for both changes in frequency and changes in transfer amount (for both sending
and receiving). For example, 87 percent of individuals who claim to have received transfers more
frequently report that the amount of transfer has also increased, and a very small percentage
report sending smaller transfers more frequently. This suggests that people do not in fact send
smaller transfers more frequently as reported in Morawcyznski and Pickens (2009). However, as
we have no data on the extent or magnitude of these changes, we are unable to examine the
magnitude of changes in the frequency or size of transfers due to M-Pesa.

        The qualititative studies on M-Pesa such as Morawczynski and Pickens (2009) have
suggested that M-Pesa serves as a partial substitute for the formal banking system. Prior to the
introduction of M-Pesa, most Africans were excluded from modern financial services. Using data
ranging between 2001 and 2005, Beck et al. (2007) show that African countries lagged in
financial access. During this period they show that Ghana had 1.6 branches per 100,000 and
Kenya had 1.3 branches per 100,000, while Uganda and Tanzania both had less than 0.6
branches per 100,000. The ATM penetration of these countries was even lower -- ranging from 1
per 100,000 in Kenya to less than 0.20 per 100,000 in Tanzania. In contrast, the U.S. had 31
bank branches and 120 ATMs per 100,000 people during that period. Perhaps partly as a result of
the small banking networks in many African countries, a low proportion of individuals have a
bank account. On average the FinScope surveys show that 30% of East and Southern African
adults have a formal bank account (FinMark Trust, 2008). These proportions range from a high
of 63% in South Africa to low of 9% in Tanzania. With the low levels of financial development
in many African countries, many observers have identified the potential for systems such as M-
Pesa to expand the reach of the financial system and provide a platform to deliver financial
services to the poor and excluded. Burgess and Pande (2005) show that the expansion of rural
banking in India significantly reduced rural poverty rates. While this was mainly driven by
increased access to credit, mobile systems such as M-Pesa could facilitate the expansion of
branchless banking, in which banks increase the financial reach using agents as intermediaries to
provide services to clients in rural and remote areas where the fixed costs of opening a branch
would be prohibitive (Pickens et al., 2009). This possibility, however, is contingent upon banks'
willingness to serve poorer clients and upon government regulations that promote or hinder
branchless banking.

        A number of qualitative studies such as Morawczynski and Pickens (2009) and Mas and
Morawczynski (2009) have explored the economic and social impacts of M-Pesa in Kenya. For
instance, Morawczynski and Pickens (2009) find ethnographic evidence that M-Pesa has
changed the savings behavior, the pattern of remittances, and has increased rural livelihoods.
While these studies provide suggestive evidence of the impacts of M-Pesa, they are generally
unable to quantify the effects of the system and are limited by their small sample sizes. An
exception is Jack and Suri's (2010) empirical study that shows that M-Pesa improves the ability
of households to smooth risks. We contribute to the literature by providing quantitative estimates
of the impact of M-Pesa in Kenya on a variety of economic and social outcomes including
financial access and usage. We combine the 2006 and 2009 Finaccess surveys and create a
balanced panel of the 190 sub-locations that were surveyed in both rounds in order to examine
the economic impact of M-Pesa on various outcomes pertaining to remittances, financial access,
and economic livelihood.7 Sublocations are the smallest administrative unit in Kenya and consist
of 2 to 3 villages in rural areas or a large neighborhood in a city. The summary statistics of this
estimation sample is shown in Table 10.
7
    See data appendix for more details on the construction of the estimation sample.
        We examine the relationship between M-Pesa and various economic and social outcomes
at the sublocation level using the following specification:

                        y jt   0   1 mpesa jt  X ' jt  2   3Tt   j   jt           (2)

  where mpesa jt is the proportion of individuals that use M-Pesa in sublocation j at period t, X is
a vector of controls including education, gender, age, marriage rate, and wealth, T is a time fixed
effect,  is the sub-location fixed effect that captures time invariant unobservable variables at
the sub-location level, and  is an idiosyncratic error term. y is a set of outcomes variables that
includes frequency of sending and receiving transfers, possession of a bank account, saving
methods and employment.

Simple regression estimation of equation (2) will lead to biased and inconsistent estimates if the
time-invariant unobservables (  ) or the time-varying unobservables (  ) are correlated with M-
Pesa use and our set of outcome variables. To circumvent this we employ a sub-location fixed
effects instrumental variable (FE-IV) procedure to eliminate the time-invariant heterogeneity and
biases due to endogenous M-Pesa adoption. Specifying Δ as the sub-location first-difference
operator, we can estimate the following fixed effect regression:

                                 y jt   0   1 mpesa jt  X ' jt  2   jt            (3)

        While biases due to time-invariant unobservables are eliminated in equation (3), the
estimates will still be biased and inconsistent if Δε is correlated with Δmpesa. We need an
instrument (or a set of instruments) that predicts M-Pesa use but does not directly impact our set
of outcomes. Both rounds of the data contain perceptions of the most common money transfer
methods; however, we focus solely upon the 2006 perception data as the 2009 perceptions would
be influenced by M-Pesa. Respondents are asked to identify the riskiest, slowest and costly
money transfer method. We focus on the proportion of residents that identify sending money
with a friend as the riskiest method, the proportion of residents that identify the post office as the
slowest and the proportion that identify money transfer companies as the most expensive. If
more respondents in a sub-location feel that their alternative means of transferring money are
inefficient, they would be more likely to adopt M-Pesa. Moreover, conditional on the sub-
location fixed effect, this 2006 perception should have no direct impact on outcomes (or the
change in outcomes). The identification assumption is conditional on the vector of controls (such
as wealth and education) and the sub-location fixed effect, the perceptions of the alternative
methods will only indirectly affect the set of outcomes (such as banking) through M-Pesa
adoption.

       We can specify the set of estimating equations for the FE-IV regression as:

                          y jt   0   1 mpesa jt  X ' jt  2   jt                   (4)

                          mpesa jt   0  Z ' j 0  1  X ' jt  2                      (5)
where Z is the set of instruments: the proportion that rank friends as the riskiest method to
transfer money in 2006, the proportion that rank the post office as the slowest method in 2006
and the proportion that rank money transfer companies as the most expensive option in 2006.

        The extent to which transferring funds through friends is risky will be mostly determined
by social capital and crime. In terms of financial access, the most plausible concern is that banks
are less likely to locate in these areas due to security concerns. Since these areas are more likely
to adopt M-Pesa then this would lead to an underestimate of the impact of M-Pesa adoption on
financial access. The are a number of factors that could determine efficiency of money transfers
via the post-office. First, these could reflect the motivation of post office employees. Employee
motivation could be driven by the quality of supervision. If better supervisors were located in
faster growing areas (which were more likely to see expansions of financial services), then this
would also lead to underestimates of the impact of M-Pesa adoption. Alternatively, the speed of
the post office could reflect the quality of transportation links or local infrastructure (e.g.
electricity, telephone links). If financial institutions were less likely to expand to these more
“isolated” areas, then this would again lead to an underestimate of the impact of M-Pesa
adoption. However, if these institutions were more likely to expand in these areas then our
methodology would overestimate the impact of M-Pesa adoption. However, we feel that the
costs of operating in “isolated” areas may be prohibitive for banks and thus we feel that they are
unlikely to expand in these areas. Finally, the speed of the post office could reflect Since the
price schedule for money transfer companies does not vary within Kenya, the perceptions of cost
are likely driven by marketing and word of mouth. If these companies target their marketing in
faster growing areas (which were more likely to see expansions of financial services), then this
would also lead to underestimates of the impact of M-Pesa adoption.

         The results from equations (2) to (3) are shown in Table 11. The estimates from the
random effects specifications show a positive relationship between M-Pesa adoption and
frequency of sending and receiving transfers, although only the estimate of sending transfers is
statistically significant. The estimates also show a strong positive association between M-Pesa
adoption and bank use, formal savings, and employment. In addition, the estimates show a
negative and statistically significant relationship between M-Pesa adoption and saving money
using secret hiding places. Similar patterns are observed in fixed effect specifications. The point
estimates on sending remittances, bank use, formal savings, and employment are very similar
when compared to the random effects specifications. However, we do observe the larger negative
correlations between M-Pesa and informal savings and using a secret hiding place to save
money.

        We estimate equations (4) and (5) in order to obtain causal estimates of the impacts of M-
Pesa. Table 12 shows first stage relationship between our set of instruments and the endogenous
variables. The estimates show that M-Pesa adoption was positively correlated with greater
proportions of individuals who rank using friends as the riskiest money transfer method.
Similarly, perceived slowness of transferring funds using the post office in period 0 and the
perceived cost of money transfer companies have positive and significant effects on M-Pesa
adoption. This set of instruments is highly significant, with a joint F test of 26, which is well
above the weak instrument thresholds.

        The FE-IV estimates of equation (4) and (5) are shown in Table 13. These estimates show
that M-Pesa adoption led to increases in the frequency of sending transfers. The point estimate
shows that if M-Pesa were universally adopted, individuals would send 5 more remittances per
annum. Evaluating this point estimate using the mean M-Pesa adoption rate of 40 percent, we see
that M-Pesa increased the frequency of sending remittances by 2, which is more than double the
2006 level. Our estimates imply that M-Pesa accounts for almost the entire increase in the
sending frequency of transfers between 2006 and 2009 (Table 10). This is consistent with Figure
6, which shows that 35% report increases in the frequency of sending transfers due to M-Pesa.
While we observe significant increases in the sending frequency of transfers, we surprisingly do
not find any effect of M-Pesa on the frequency of receiving transfers, even though 30% report
increases in frequency of receiving transfers due to M-Pesa.

        While M-Pesa has been touted for banking the "unbanked", there are no estimates on the
direct impact of M-Pesa on people adopting bank accounts. Row (5) of Table 13 provides this
evidence. These estimates show that increased M-Pesa adoption leads to greater bank use. The
point estimates imply that universal adoption of M-Pesa would increase the proportion banked
by 28 percentage points. Evaluated at the mean adoption rate of 40 percent, we see that M-Pesa
has increased the proportion banked by almost 11 percentage points, which represents a 58
percent increase over the 2006 banking level. As the data was collected prior to the integration of
M-Pesa with banks, this result could be driven by increases in money (or cash) by users. It could
also be driven by the complementarity between M-Pesa and banks. If M-Pesa were more
valuable or useful in combination with a bank (or vice versa), then increases in demand for M-
Pesa would also increase the demand for banking. This evidence provides some evidence that M-
Pesa does not entirely serve as a substitute for the formal banking system, but, rather, is viewed
(or used) as a complementary tool by individuals.

        Qualitative evidence from Morawczynski and Pickens (2009) suggests that M-pesa is
used as a saving instrument. This notion is supported by the 2009 round of the Finaccess survey
in which over 25% of individuals report using M-Pesa as a saving device. While we do not have
data on the amount saved, we do have information on the methods used to save and can therefore
examine the impact of M-Pesa on savings methods. Row (7) of Table 13 shows the impact of M-
Pesa on the use of informal saving mechanisms. Informal saving mechanisms include rotating
saving and credit associations (ROSCA), saving with a group of friends, savings given to a
family or friend for safe-keeping, and saving by storing funds in a secret place. While the
summary statistics show that the proportion of individuals using informal methods to save has
increased from 52 percent to 72 percent, our estimates show that M-Pesa decreases the use of
informal saving mechanisms. Evaluated at the mean M-Pesa adoption rate, M-Pesa would reduce
the prevalence of informal saving by 15 percentage points, approximately a 30% reduction from
the 2006 level. We observe similar effects for the use of secret hiding places to save money. Row
(8) of Table 13 shows that for the average adoption rate, M-Pesa would reduce the proportion of
people saving money in secret places by 30 percentage points, which is slightly greater in
magnitude than the 2006 level. Since we do not observe any changes in the use of formal savings
methods (which do not include M-Pesa), these results suggest that users are shifting savings from
informal tools to M-Pesa perhaps due to the superior security of M-Pesa.

        M-Pesa could also affect economic activity directly by increasing access to funds and
indirectly by increasing savings and banking rates. Plyler et al (2010) argue that M-Pesa has
promoted the growth rates of (small-scale) firms in the communities they studied, and they argue
that this was largely driven by the increased circulation of money in these communities. Figure 7
provides some supportive evidence of the increase in funds due to M-Pesa, in which almost 35
percent of individuals report that they sent larger transfers due to M-Pesa, while close to 30
percent report that they received larger transfers due to M-Pesa.

        We use employment as a measure of economic activity and examine the impacts of M-
Pesa on employment. We use a measure of employment that incorporates farm labor (own-farm
and on others farm), non-farm labor (such as civil service employment), and self-employment
(such as owning a shop). Individuals are considered employed if they are actively engaged in any
of these activities. Row (12) of Table 13 shows that M-Pesa is associated with increases in any
type of employment. For the average M-Pesa adoption level, M-Pesa would increase
employment by 12 percentage points, approximately a 15 percent increase from the 2006
employment level. While this is encouraging, Column (7) shows no impact of M-Pesa on non-
farm employment. This suggests that the increases in employment due to M-Pesa are driven by
changes in farm employment. One possible explanation is that the increased resource flows due
to M-Pesa are channeled towards farming, thus boosting the demand for labor and increasing
employment. Unfortunately, we do not have the data to investigate these underlying
mechanisms further.

        We perform some falsification tests to boost the credibility of our empirical
methodology. At the time the 2009 survey was collected, the international money transfer feature
of M-Pesa was not yet available. Thus, M-Pesa should have no impact on international money
transfers. Rows (14) and (15) of Table 13 show that we do not find any significant impact of M-
Pesa on international transfer patterns. This provides some reassurance that our methodology is
not flawed.

        An additional concern is that our results are driven by unobserved regional trends.
Ideally, with three rounds of data we would include a set of linear sub-location trends to address
this concern. However, since we only have two round of data, we attempt to mitigate these
concerns by including trends at the provincial level. We find that our results are robust to the
inclusion of these provincial level trends (results not shown).



5         M-Pesa Velocity and the E-Money Loop



5.1   Velocity
 As a measure of how people are using M-Pesa, and also for the purposes of understanding where
M-Pesa fits into a broader monetary framework, we are interested in calculating the "velocity" of
M-Pesa. In standard monetary economics, "transactions velocity" is defined as the frequency
with which the average unit of money is used in transactions. Transactions velocity is different
than the more frequently measured income velocity of money, which is simply nominal GDP
divided by the relevant money stock.

        In the case of M-Pesa, the potentially relevant transactions are deposit of money (creation
of a unit of M-Pesa), transfer, and withdrawl of money (extinguishing of a unit of M-Pesa). In
this respect, M-Pesa differs from cash, which, in a simple monetary system, would circulate in
transactions with only rare instances in which it is created or liquidated (although a piece of cash
may enter and leave the banking system many times over the course of its life) . As our measure
of M-Pesa velocity, we focus only on transfers, which are the closest analogue to purchases
using money in a simple monetary system -- indeed, if e-money is eventually used in a money-
like fashion, such transfers would play the role of transactions using money.

        Our measure of M-Pesa velocity is thus the total value of person-to-person transfers (per
unit time) divided by the average outstanding balance of e-float. For example, if 100 units of e-
float are created at the beginning of month, transferred from person to person five times in the
month, and extinguished at the end the month, then monthly velocity will be five. Notice that
having 100 units of e-float transferred from person to person five times in the month could
happen either because the people receiving transfers then transferred the e-float to someone else
or because each time a transfer was received, the recipient withdrew his cash and a new user
deposited cash and received e-float. We discuss this issue (the length of the "e-money loop") in
the next section.

        Of the two numbers required to measure velocity, the harder one to obtain is the
outstanding balance of e-float. As discussed above, all money deposited to create e-float is held
by a trust fund which holds deposits in commercial banks. Thus, the outstanding balance of e-
float is in principle perfectly observable at any point in time, both to Safaricom and to
regulators. This information is not always freely available, however. Weil, Mbiti, and Mwega
(2012) were able to obtain monthly data on the size of the trust balance from July, 2007 through
December, 2011.8

The trust balance is by construction identical to the quantity of e-float outstanding. However, in
the calculation of transfer velocity it is not clear how to treat e-float that is held by M-Pesa
agents. Conceptually, one might want to think of the relevant aggregate for calculating transfer
velocity to be e-float held on the phones of customers only. We can construct an estimate of this
quantity by subtracting estimated e-cash held on the phones of M-Pesa agents from the trust
balance. Eijkman, Kendall, and Mas (2010) report end of day e-float for different types of M-

8
  An earlier version of this paper used a different source of data regarding the size outstanding e-float. Specifically,
we used an audit of M-Pesa conducted by the Ministry of Finance in January 2009. That audit states that "whereas
the system transacted about 17 billion kshs in August 2008, the net deposit/residual value per customer (i.e. deposit
less withdrawals) was kshs. 203." We interpreted the figure of 203 Ksh. as outstanding e-cash per customer. We
now think that this interpretation was incorrect. Similarly, we now think that the value of velocity that we derived
based on this measure, which was between 11 and 14 transactions per month, was incorrect.
Pesa outlets. These range from 90,000 Ksh. for rural stores to 40,000 Ksh. for city stores. Rural
stores have particularly high end of day float because they do a primarily cash-out business.
City stores did a more balanced business, though with an excess of cash-in over cash-out. These
end-of-day figures do not correspond to beginning-of-day figures, of course. In our calculations
we chose a value of 50,000 Ksh. per M-Pesa agent. Multiplying this by the number of M-Pesa
agents gives our estimate of total e-cash held by M-Pesa agents. From the Safricom web site, we
have data on the number of agents monthly from April 2007 through April of 2011. For most of
the period for which we have data, the fraction of e-cash held by M-Pesa agents has been
relatively stable, and there is no discernible trend. For the last year in which we have data, it
fluctuates narrowly within the range of 10-12%

The other piece of information required for the calculation of transfer velocity is the monthly
value of person to person transfers. This is reported by Safaricom for the period April 2007-
April 2010. Using these data, Figure 8 shows our calculated value of transfer velocity monthly.
We show velocity both using the full size of the trust balance (labeled unadjusted) and
subtracting our estimate of e-cash held by M-Pesa agents. Both series show a significant upward
trend. For example, adjusted velocity rises from roughly two transfers per month in the first year
of M-Pesa’s operation to roughly four in the last few months for which we have data.

The calculated values of velocity seem to indicate that M-Pesa is functioning as a hybrid of a
money transfer system, on the one hand, and a means for storing value, on the other. Velocity of
four, for example, implies that the average unit of e-cash was transferred once per week. If M-
Pesa were purely being used as a money transfer system, we might expect that velocity would be
significantly higher. For example, a simple deposit-transfer-withdraw transaction might involve
e-cash being created (in the sense that it is transferred from an agent to a customer), transferred,
and extinguished (transferred back to an agent’s phone) in much less than a day. This would
imply a velocity of over 30 transfers per month. Since we know anecdotally that at least some
users indeed do not keep e-cash on their phones for very long, our estimates of velocity imply
that some other users are keeping their cash on phones for significantly longer than one week.
To give an example, velocity of four would be consistent with 30 users each making one transfer
of 1,000 Ksh. per month where the e-cash existed for only one day while at the same time 9 users
made one transfer of 1,000 Ksh. per month but held on to e-cash for an entire month. Note that
in this example, most e-cash at any point in time is held by non-frequent transactors, even though
most transfers are done by frequent transactors.

        The fact that velocity is trending upward over time suggests that the balance of users
within the system is moving in the direction of people who are less inclined to hold e-cash on
their phones and more inclined to use the system solely for transfers. This idea can be tested to
some extent by looking at the trends in balances per customer and monthly transactions per
customer. To construct balances per customer, we use the trust fund balance along with our
estimate of e-cash held by M-Pesa agents. Figure 9 shows our calculated value. Balances of e-
cash per customer are remarkably stable, in the neighborhood of Ksh. 700. (Note, however, that
there is an interesting decline between September of 2009 and April 2010. Since the latter
month is the last for which we can currently calculate velocity, this decline does explain some of
our measured rise in velocity.) This average figure represents a distribution of cash balances
about which we have no data, although presumably it is highly skewed with most customers at
any point in time having balances at or near zero. In the future we hope to get data on this
distribution. Figure 10 shows the value of monthly transfers per customer, which is stable at
around 2,500 Ksh. for the second half of the period in which we have data.



5.2       The E-Money Loop

Irving Fisher defined the "cash loop" as the number of transactions that a unit of currency goes
through between being withdrawn from a bank and returning to a bank. Analogously, we can
think of the "e-money loop" as the number of transfer transactions that the average unit of M-
Pesa goes through between being transferred onto a customer phone and being transferred back
from a customer phone to the phone of an M-Pesa agent.



    The length of the e-money loop is not necessarily related to the velocity of e-money. To see
this, think about the following two scenarios:

          Scenario #1: Mr. A deposits 100 Ksh. into M-Pesa on January 1. He transfers the money
           to Mr. B on January 15. Mr. B withdraws the money on February 1. Also on February 1,
           Mr. C deposits 100 Ksh. into M-Pesa, and transfers it to Mr. D. on February 15. Mr. D
           withdraws the money on March 1. In this case, velocity is 1 transaction per month, and
           the length of the e-money loop is also 1.

          Scenario #2: Mr. A deposits 100 Ksh. into M-Pesa on January 1. He transfers the money
           to Mr. B on January 15. Mr. B leaves the e-float on his phone until February 15, at which
           point he transfers it to Mr. C. The money is repeatedly transferred on the 15th of every
           month, and never withdrawn. In this case, velocity is one transfer per month while the
           length of the e-money loop is infinite.

    As with velocity, we can put together available scraps of information to get an estimate of the
length of the e-money loop. An audit of M-Pesa conducted by the Ministry of Finance in
January, 2009, says that "the system transacted about Ksh. 17 billion" in August 2008. What
does this number mean? According to Safaricom, the volume of person-to-person transfers that
month was 8.32 billion Ksh. It thus seems likely that 17 billion is the volume of cash-in plus
cash-out transfers. A different source (Mwangi and Ndung'u, 2009) gives the value of total
transactions for August, 2008 at just under 15 billion Ksh., and in this case the phrase "monthly
transactions" is explicitly defined as "deposits plus withdrawals." Given that one of the authors
of that study is chairman of the central bank of Kenya, it is likely that the figure is based on the
same (non-publicly available) data as the Ministry of Finance audit. Given the similarity in
magnitude and the similar phrasing, we take the 17 billion to be similarly referring to the value
of deposits plus withdrawals in the month.
    Given this observation, what is notable is how close the total of deposits and withdrawals is
to twice the value of person to person transfers. The relationship between deposits, withdrawals,
transfers, and the length of the e-money loop is9



                                                            2  transfers
                                      loop length                                                           (6)
                                                       deposist  withdrawals



Thus the data indicate that the length of the e-money loop is roughly one. This would be true if
all transactions took the form of deposit-transfer-withdraw. The total for deposits and
withdrawals would be less than twice transfers, and the length of the loop greater than one, if
there were some appreciable fraction of people who received a transfer and then sent the money
on somewhere else without doing a withdrawal. Similarly, the total for deposits plus
withdrawals would more than twice monthly person-to-person transfers if an appreciable number
of people used their phone to store money without transferring it. Of course, it is possible that
there was a good deal of both these activities (receiving money and transferring it onward
without taking money out, on the one hand, and depositing and withdrawing without transferring,
on the other), but the data are suggestive, at least to us, of the overwhelming majority of use
being of the deposit-transfer-withdraw type.

        Using data from Safaricom (for monthly person-to-person transfers) and from Mwangi
and Ndung'u (for monthly deposits to withdrawals) we can calculate the implied length of the e-
money loop for the period July, 2007-July, 2009. This is shown in Figure 8. It is interesting to
note that in the data the e-money loop starts out at slightly less than one before trending up to
almost exactly one. It is possible that the lower figure represents a different use of M-Pesa in the
program's early days (more cash storage and fewer multiple transfers), but it is also possible that
this is some sort of measurement error -- recall that the figure for total transfers given in the
Ministry of Finance audit was about 7% higher than the figure in Mwangi and Ndung'u (2009).



5.3    Implications for Measuring the Money Supply




9
  The key assumption required to derive this equation is that the system is in a steady state, where monthly deposits
are equal to monthly withdrawals. In this case (deposits + withdrawals)/2 is just equal to the quantity of deposits.
Also, in this case, transfers made in a given month would be equal to transfers that would eventually be made with
the e-money created in a given month (which in turn would be equal to that month's deposits.) The formula is not
fully accurate, since M-Pesa was in fact growing over time. Given information on the rate of growth M-Pesa and
M-Pesa velocity, one could construct a better estimate, but our sense is that it would not differ significantly.
As M-Pesa and other forms of electronic money have become more prevalent, economists have
turned their attention to the implications for measurement of monetary aggregates and the
relationship between money, prices, and real variables. To the extent that e-float is a form of
money, failure to measure it in monetary aggregates could lead policy makers astray. For
example, if the stock of e-float grew while conventional money did not, monetary policy would
be looser than policy makers thought.

        A natural initial approach to this problem would be to simply add the stock of e-money
into the measures of, say, M1. This is problematic for two reasons. First, at least in the case of
M-Pesa, the existing stock of e-money is backed 100% by transactions accounts held at
commercial banks. If these accounts are subtracted from M1 while M-Pesa balances are added,
the net effect is zero. Secondly, however, the transactions velocity of e-money may be higher
than the transactions velocity of other components of M1, such as cash. Put differently, a small
amount of M-Pesa, by circulating frequently, provides the same transaction (and transfer)
services as a much larger quantity of cash.

        If one had estimates of the transactions velocities of M-Pesa and the other components of
a monetary aggregate, it would then be possible to create a velocity-weighted index, in which
those components with higher velocity received a higher weight (see Spindt, 1985, for a
discussion). As shown above, getting a rough approximation of the velocity of M-Pesa is not
difficult, and with better data one could get a truly precise estimate. Unfortunately, measuring
the velocity of other monetary aggregates -- a problem on which monetary economists have been
working since the time of Jevons -- is much harder.

        For this reason, and also out of curiosity of how M-Pesa compares to other monies, we
have pulled together the few estimates of transaction velocity. The estimates span a number of
countries and historical eras and, therefore, pertain to a variety of institutional structures and
transaction technologies. This may explain some of the vast variation in the data.

        A common measure of the velocity of demand deposits is the "demand deposit turnover
rate," defined as the ratio of debits to demand deposits in a period to the average value of
demand deposits. In the United States, between 1919 and 1941, the annual turnover rate on
demand deposits at commercial banks varied between 19.4 and 53.6 (Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, 1976) . In more recent data, the turnover rate for banks excluding major
New York banks rose from 135 to 475 per month over the period 1980-1995 (U.S. Census
Bureau, Statistical Abstract, 1996). Engber (1965) presents data on demand deposit turnover in
East Africa between 1950-1963, over which period it rose from 4.1 to 9.9 per quarter. Using
data from Cletus (2004) the demand deposit turnover rate in Gambia between 1983 and 1993
varied between 2 and 11 transactions per month. In Taiwan in 2007, the annual turnover rate on
demand deposits was 328 (Republic of China, 2009). In Thailand, monthly demand deposit
turnover in 2009 averaged 41.10


10
  Bank of Thailand online data
query http://www2.bot.or.th/statistics/ReportPage.aspx?reportID=31&language=eng
        As far as currency goes, there are even fewer estimates of velocity. Irving Fisher's
calculations for the years around the beginning of the 20th century in the United States found
that transactions velocity of cash was in the neighborhood of 20 per year. Spindt (1985) applies
a method suggested by Laurent (1970) to look at the velocity of circulation of currency. His
estimate is that the velocity of currency in the United States ranged between 7 and 10
transactions per month over the period 1970-85. A study by the US Federal Reserve based on
household surveys (Avery et al., 1986) estimated the velocity of currency in 1984 at between 50
and 55 transactions per year. Feige (1987) estimates the length of the cash loop in the
Netherlands at approximately 4 transactions in data from the 1960s and 1970s.

        A preliminary conclusion from this exercise is that the transactions velocity of M-Pesa
(roughly four transactions per month) does not stand out as being much higher that of other
monetary components that are held by households, particularly cash. This is at least somewhat
surprising, since technologically, it would be possible for M-Pesa to have enormous transactions
velocity. In any case, for the present, even if a very large velocity adjustment were appropriate,
M-Pesa does not compare with other parts of the monetary aggregate. The average over the
period January-June 2008 of currency (M0) was 85.2 billion shillings, while currency plus
demand deposits (M1) was 393 billion shillings (Central Bank of Kenya, Statistical Bulletin,
June 2008). By contrast, our calculated value of outstanding e-float in August 2008 was 3.3
billion shillings.



6     Why Isn’t M-Pesa Used for Storing Value?



Much of the evidence presented in our paper is strongly suggestive of the conclusion that M-Pesa
is only rarely used for storing value for any significant period of time. This can be seen in the
low value of average M-Pesa holdings at a point in time (700 Ksh., or about ten dollars), the
velocity of four transactions per month, and in the short length of the e-money loop. Although a
significant fraction of users report that they use their M-Pesa accounts for storing money, such
storage is of relatively small amounts of money or for relatively short periods of time.

        Why don't people store more value on M-Pesa? One possible reason is that it does not
pay interest. If this is the case, then the implementation of M-Kesho or some other scheme to
pay interest on transactions could lead to a significant change in behavior. To gather insight into
this question, we could ask: at what interest rate would M-Pesa users store significant value on
their accounts?

       Part of the answer to this question can be gleaned by looking at behavior with respect to
withdrawals. Although M-Pesa balances do not pay explicit interest, holding money in M-Pesa
does yield interest in the form of reducing transaction costs. Consider the problem of an
individual who receives periodic transfers into his M-Pesa account. One strategy would be to
withdraw each transfer as it is received. An alternative would be to group two or more transfers
together and withdraw them all at once. The latter strategy holds money on the M-Pesa account
for longer, but involves lower costs.

        A general analysis of alternative withdrawal strategies would be enormously complex,
given the complexity of the price schedule as well as the stochastic nature and varying sizes of
transfer receipt. Here, we examine an extremely simple version of the problem to get a feel for
the magnitudes involved.

        Consider an individual who receives a transfer of 1,000 Ksh. on the first of every month.
We will allow for only two strategies: first, she can take out the money each time she receives a
transfer. Alternatively, she can wait until she has accumulated 2,000 (that is, every other month)
and take the money out then. On the M-Pesa price schedule, the price of withdrawing 1,000
Ksh. is the same as the price of withdrawing 2,000 (i.e. 25 Ksh.).

       Let W be the amount withdrawn, and C be the cost. The monthly interest rate r at which
an individual would be indifferent between these two strategies is given implicitly by the
equation



                                       W  C 2W  C
                              W C                                                       (7)
                                       1 r   1 r

where the left hand side is the present value of withdrawals net of costs using the first strategy
and the right hand side is the same thing using the second strategy. The solution is



                                            C
                                      r                                                   (8)
                                           W C

For the example just given (W = 1,000; C = 25), the solution is r=2.6%. On an annual basis this
is 36% -- certainly a high interest rate. Using a smaller value of the amount withdrawn, W,
would yield a higher implicit interest rate, as would considering an individual who received
transfers more frequently than every other month. For example, an individual who received and
withdrew 500 Ksh. every two weeks -- a scenario that seems like it might be consistent with
what we see in the data -- would be demonstrating a discount rate of at least 240% per year!

         The information on the distribution of withdrawal sizes can also be brought to bear here.
Although we do not solve the full scale problem, it is clear that for moderate interest rates there
should be a significant amount of bunching of withdrawals at the high end of price ranges -- that
is, just below the price notch. An individual who withdraws only a little more than the price
notch (say, 3,000 Ksh. when the price notch is at 2,500 Ksh.) and who is going to be receiving
another transfer in the next few months, is paying an enormous price to get his/her money early.
And yet the striking observation from our data on the distribution of withdrawal amounts is that
there seems to be no bunching at all at the price notch points. There are also, obviously, a very
large number of withdrawals of amounts that are far lower than, say, half of the price notch.

        Unfortunately, we do not have the data to be completely formal in this analysis. Above,
we described the distribution of withdrawal sizes and the frequency of withdrawals, but we do
not have these data at the individual level, and so we do not know their joint distribution. We
know that most withdrawals are made by individuals who withdraw frequently (every month or
more frequently), and that a good fraction of withdrawals are small enough (medians around
1,000 Ksh.) that two or more of them would fit under the 2,500 Ksh. price notch. We also know
that there is not a very large mass of withdrawals at the price notch -- at least no more than
would be expected given the fact that price notches are at round numbers. From this data is
seems reasonable to conclude that a significant fraction of withdrawals are made by people who
are applying high time discount rates, since otherwise they would be grouping their withdrawals
into more economical chunks.

        We can extend this example further by considering the costs borne by the sender as well.
 Although we don't have data on senders, it is a reasonable supposition that in many cases a
monthly withdrawal of 1,000 Ksh. is matched by a monthly transfer of the same amount. As
discussed above, the fee for transfers of any size is 30 Ksh. Thus there would be the possibility
that a husband or son working in the city could transfer Ksh. 2,000 once ever two months,
instead of Ksh. 1,000 every month. The total cost of such a transfer and withdrawal of either
1,000 or 2,000 Ksh. is 55 Ksh. (30 Ksh. for transfer and 25 Ksh. for withdrawal). Plugging this
cost figure into the equation above, the implicit interest rate at which a family would be
indifferent between transferring 1,000 Ksh. every month and transferring 2,000 Ksh. every two
months is thus 5.8% per month.

        A final observation that suggests that users of M-Pesa have high financial discount rates
comes from a discussion we had with an employee of Kenya Power and Light Corporation, the
country's electricity supplier. Electricity customers receive monthly bills, and must pay them
within a fixed time window or their power will be cut off. A bill-pay service was recently
established, whereby M-Pesa users could pay their bills through their cell phones, rather than by
directly visiting a KPLC office, post office, or bank, all of which involve waiting in a long line.
Despite the superior convenience of M-Pesa, the take-up of the service was relatively low; only
about 12 percent of the 1.2 million customers paid by M-Pesa, and we were curious as to why.
The employee's theory was that it had to do with the delay involved in paying with M-Pesa. The
M-Pesa payments were batch processed overnight and thus required between 24 and 48 hours to
clear, more time than paying in person where the payments were reflected instantly. Therefore
the person paying the bill by M-Pesa would have to have the money one or two days earlier than
otherwise. Evidently, this extra one or two days was, to most potential users, more valuable than
the huge convenience of not having to pay the bill in person. In fact the KPLC employee stated
that M-Pesa use for paying electric bills was actually declining due to this lag in processing.
This is again suggestive of very high time discount rates.

       It is important to note that the high financial discount rates that households apply to cash
that moves through M-Pesa do not necessarily imply that housholds highly discount the future
consumption flows or utility. As in a standard Baumol-Tobin model of cash management,
another reason to hold small cash balances is if there is a high cost of holding cash itself. Such a
cost could be due to theft in a conventional sense, which can be viewed as a tax on cash
balances. However, crime rates would have to be extremely high to justify the behavior we see.
A more likely cost of holding cash is the high implicit tax represented by the ability of other
family members to request either gifts or loans from one's available cash balances. This is notion
is supported by Ashraf (2009) who reports that women in Kenya often form secret saving
societies to hide income from their husbands. Finally, and somewhat similarly, holdings of cash
may simply raise temptations to spend that individuals find impossible to resist. The inability to
save cash-holdings has been shown to be a constraint to fertilizer adoption in Western Kenya
(Duflo et al. 2010) and promotes participation in ROSCAS which can act as a commitment
saving device (Gugerty, 2007). It could be that the extra transaction costs associated with
holding small cash balances are a price worth paying to avoid giving in to these temptations.

          These observations might be taken to suggest that the types of interest rates potentially
offered through cell phone banking will do little to alter the amount of money that people store
on their phones. However, recent literature on the financial lives of the poor may suggest
otherwise. Collins, et al., (2009), find that the world’s poor utilize a vast range of financial
instruments to meet different needs, and prioritize different qualities of these instruments based
on how they use them. For instruments used to smooth day-to-day consumption, they find that it
is most important to the poor that these keep their money secure and easily accessible, but pay
little attention to the interest they might earn. However, when the poor seek to accumulate what
Collins, et al. refer to as “usefully large sums” to pay for life-cycle events (such as weddings or
funerals) or other larger expenses, they do take into account the interest that different financial
tools can offer them, along with their security, reliability, and structure (for example, requiring
them to make periodic deposits to help ensure that they will succeed in building up a larger sum
of money). Based on this, we might say that M-Pesa has found a niche in the former realm of
day-to-day cash management, but not as much in the accumulation of larger sums. The
introduction of a program encouraging saving and offering interest, might allow mobile banking
to find an additional niche as a simple and secure financial tool for the accumulation of usefully
large sums. One survey found that 38% of respondents said that the feature they would most like
to see added to M-Pesa was the ability to earn interest on their accounts, making this the most
popular response (Jack, Pulver, and Suri, 2009) This suggests that interest will be an attractive
feature of M-Kesho. (As discussed above, M-Kesho will also offer insurance and micro loans,
which may also be attractive features.)



7.     Conclusion

In this paper we have examined M-Pesa from a number of different perspectives. Using firm-
level data from competing money transfer services we find that the introduction of M-Pesa has
led to significant decreases in the prices of competitors. In addition we examine micro-level data
from the Finaccess surveys, where we find that the frequent M-Pesa users are more likely to be
urban, educated, banked, and affluent. Our analysis of the 2006 and 2009 rounds of the Finacess
surveys reveal that M-Pesa use increases frequency of sending transfers, decreases the use of
informal saving mechanisms such as ROSCAS, and increases the probability of being banked.
This suggests that M-Pesa is complementary to banks, whereby the adoption of M-Pesa has
increased the demand for banking products.

         Although a significant number of survey respondents indicate that they use their M-Pesa
accounts as a vehicle for saving, our analysis of aggregate data suggests that the overwhelming
use of M-Pesa is for transferring money from individual to individual, with extremely little
storage of value. This can be seen in many ways. Our estimates of M-Pesa velocity, the number
of transactions per month for the typical unit of e-float, is roughly four transactions per month,
depending on some auxiliary assumptions. We also estimate the length of the "e-money loop,"
that is, the average number of person to person transactions that take place between the creation
and destruction of a unit of e-float. Our estimate is quite near one. Although we cannot be
certain, we take this as evidence that the vast majority of M-Pesa use is of the form of a cash
deposit, followed by a single person-to-person transfer of e-float, followed by a cash
withdrawal.

        Our analysis of data on the size and frequency of M-Pesa withdrawals also suggests that
M-Pesa users have relatively high opportunity costs of holding funds on their phones. For
example, there seems to be little evidence of users bunching several transfer receipts together
into a single withdrawal in order to economize on fees. This suggests that even if M-Pesa were
to pay interest at the same rate as banks, there would not be a significant change in the saving
behavior of users.




References

Aghion, Philippe & Howitt, Peter (1992). "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction",
Econometrica, vol. 60(2), pages 323-51, March

Aker, Jenny C. (2010). “Information from Markets Near and Far: The Impact of Mobile Phones
on Agricultural Markets in Niger.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics

Aker, Jenny and Isaac Mbiti. (2010). "Mobile Phones and Economic Development in Africa"
Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Ashraf, Nava. 2009. "Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An Experimental
Study in the Philippines." American Economic Review 99, no. 4, September 2009.

Avery, Robert B, Gregory E. Elliehausen, Arthur B. Kennickell, and Paul A. Spindt. 1986. "The
use of cash and transaction accounts by American Families," Federal Reserve Bulletin February,
pp. 87-108.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Soledad Martinez Peria. 2007. “Reaching Out: Access
to and Use of Banking Services across countries,” Journal of Financial Economics,

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). "Banking and Monetary Statistics
1941-1970".        Section     5.      Table    55.      September    1976,     accessed at:
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/publications/bms2/issue/60/download/106/section5.pdf

Bower, Joseph L. & Christensen, Clayton M. (1995). "Disruptive Technologies: Catching the
Wave" Harvard Business Review, January–February 1995

Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande. (2005). "Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian
Social Banking Experiment.” The American Economic Review, 95(3): 780-795

Central   Bank     of   Kenya.    "Statistical    Bulletin,    June    2008",   accessed    at
http://www2.centralbank.go.ke/downloads/statistics/bulletin/Junsb08.pdf

Cletus, Agu, 2004 "Efficiency of Commerical Banking in the Gambia," African Review of
Money, Finance, and Banking

Collins, Daryl, Jonathan Morduch, Stuart Rutherford & Orlanda Ruthven, Portfolios of the Poor:
How the World's Poor Live on $2 a Day, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson (2010). "Nudging Farmers to Use
Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya" American Economic Review,
Forthcoming


East African Standard Reporters "Why central bank position on mobile banking attracts wrath,"
2/6/2009, East African Standard
http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/InsidePage.php?id=1144015709&cid=457&

Eijkman, Frederik, Jake Kendall, and Ignacio Mas, "Bridges to Cash: the retail end of M-PESA"
2010.

Engberg, Holger L. 1965. "Commercial Banking in East Africa, 1950-1963," Journal of Modern
African Studies, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 175-200.

Feige, Edgard L. 1987. "The theory and measurement of cash payments: a case study of the
Netherlands" in R.D.H. Heijmans and N. Neudecker (eds.), The Practice of Econometrics:
Studies on Demand, Forcasting, Money and Income International Studies in Economics and
Econometrics, Vol. 15, Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

FinMark Trust. (2008) Finscope In Africa, 2008.
http://www.finscope.co.za/documents/2008/FSAfricaBrochure08.pdf
Gikunju, Washington (2009) "Mobile money transfers edge out rival operators" Business Daily,
September 14 2009. accessed at http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/-/539552/657466/-
/view/printVersion/-/2gufmtz/-/index.html

Gugerty, Mary Kay (2007) You Can’t Save Alone: Commitment and Rotating Savings and
Credit Associations in Kenya,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 55, pages
251-282

Jack, William, Caroline Pulver, and Tavneet Suri, "The Performance and Impact of M-Pesa:
Preliminary Evidence from a Household Survey" Power Point presentation, 2009:
http://technology.cgap.org/technologyblog/wp-
content/uploads/2009/10/fsd_june2009_caroline_pulver.pdf

Jack, William and Tavneet Suri (2010) "The Risk Sharing Benefits of Mobile Money” MIT
Working paper

Jack, William and Tavneet Suri (2011) "Mobile Money: The Economics of M-Pesa" NBER
Working Paper 16721

Jensen, Robert T. (2007). “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance
and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), p.
879 − 924

Kabbucho, Kamau, Cerstin Sander and Peter Mukwana "PASSING THE BUCK- Money
Transfer Systems: The Practice and Potential for Products in Kenya" MicroSave Africa Report.
Accessed                                                                                 at
http://microfinancegateway.org/content/article/detail/19594?PHPSESSID=332fab3a7849fc6358
83a38e113c62da

Kimenyi, Mwangi S., and Njuguna S. Ndung'u, "Expanding the Financial Services Frontier:
Lessons From Mobile Phone Banking in Kenya," Brookings Institution, October 16, 2009.
http://www.brookings.edu/articles/2009/1016_mobile_phone_kimenyi.aspx

Laurent, Robert D. 1970 "Currency Transfers by Denomination." Ph.D. dissertation, University
of. Chicago.

Mas, Ignacio and Olga Morawczynski. 2009 “Designing Mobile Transfer Services: Lessons from
M-Pesa” Innovations. (Forthcoming)

Mas, Ignacio, and Amolo Ng'weno, "Three keys to M-Pesa's success: Branding, channel
management and pricing," mimeo, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, December 2009.

Ministry of Finance of Kenya, "Ministry of Finance Audit Findings on M-Pesa Money Transfer
Services" 26 January, 2009, accessed at http://kenyapolitical.blogspot.com/2009/01/ministry-of-
finance-audit-findings-on-m.html
Morawczynski, Olga. 2009. “Exploring the usage and impact of “transformational” mobile
financial services: the case of M-PESA in Kenya.” Journal of Eastern African Studies.
3(3):509-525.

Morawczynski, Olga and Mark Pickens. 2009. “Poor People Using Mobile Financial Services:
Observations on Customer Usage and Impact from M-PESA” CGAP Brief Online
http://www.cgap.org/gm/document-
1.9.36723/BR_Poor_People_Using_Mobile_Financial_Services.pdf

Mwaura, Stephen, "Kenya's Payments System" powerpoint presentation from Mobile Banking
Conference 2009: Balancing Innovation and Regulation, 25-26 May, 2009, Kenya School of
Monetary Studies, Nairobi, Kenya, http://www.ksms.or.ke/index.php/conferences-and-
seminars/doc_download/49-kenya-payments-system

Njiraini, John and James Anyanzwa (2008). "Unmasking the Storm Behing M-Pesa" East
African Standard, December 2008

Pickens, Mark, David Porteous, and Sarah Rotman. 2009. “Scenarios for Branchless Banking in
2020.” Focus Note 57. Washington, D.C.: CGAP.

Plyler, Megan, Sherri Hass and Geetha Nagarajan. 2010 "Community-Level Economic Effects of
M-PESA in Kenya: Initial Findings" IRIS Center Report, University of Maryland.
http://www.fsassessment.umd.edu/publications/pdfs/Community-Effects-MPESA-Kenya.pdf

Republic     of    China,      "Monthly     Bulletin     of   Statistics"  August        2009,
http://eng.dgbas.gov.tw/public/data/dgbas03/bs7/bulletin_eng/PDF/eng-month9808.pdf

Safaricom, 2007. M-Pesa Update. Press Release. December 7, 2007

Safaricom. 2009. Industry Update. March 12, 2009.
http://www.safaricom.co.ke/fileadmin/template/main/downloads/investor_relations_pdf/Industry
%20Update%20120309.pdf

Schumpeter, Joseph A (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York. Harper and
Brothers

Slemrod, Joel, "Buenos Notches: Lines and Notches in Tax System Design," mimeo, University
of Michigan, 2010.

Spindt, Paul A. 1985. “Money Is What Money Does: Monetary Aggregation and the Equation of
Exchange,” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 93, No. 1, pp. 175-204.

U.S. Census Bureau , "Statistical Abstract, 1996, Section 16, Banking, Finance, and Insurance",
accessed at http://www.census.gov/prod/2/gen/96statab/finance.pdf
Vaughan, Pauline. 2007. “Early lessons from the deployment of M-PESA, Vodaphones’s own
mobile transactions service” In The Transformational Potential of M-transactions, Vodaphone
Policy Paper Series, No.6. Online http://www.vodaphone.com/m-transactions

Weil, David N., Isaac Mbiti, and Francis Mwega. 2012. “The Implications of Innovations in the
Financial Sector on the Conduct of Monetary Policy in East Africa.” Report submitted to the
International Growth Centre Tanzania Country Programme.
Data Appendix:


A.1 FinAccess surveys:


The FinAcess surveys, conducted in 2006 and 2009, are nationally representative household
surveys that were designed to measure financial access in Kenya. The surveys were collected by
Financial Sector Deepening Trust Kenya (FSD Kenya), with financial and technical support from
a variety of partners including the Central Bank of Kenya, donors and a number of commercial
banks in Kenya.The 2006 round consisted of approximately 4,400 individuals, while the 2009
round consisted of close to 6,600 individuals. A unique feature of this data is that it aimed to
capture access to a wide range of both formal and informal financial tools. Moreover, the
consistency of the surveys enable reliable comparisons across time of the changing nature of
financial access. Using sampling weights we can aggregate the data to the sublocation level.
Sublocations are the lowest administrative unit in Kenya and consist of 2 to 3 villages in rural
areas or a large neighborhood in a city. We combine the 2006 and 2009 FinAcess surveys and
create a balanced panel of the 190 sub-locations that were surveyed in both rounds.

        We constructed the measure of transfer frequency as follows. We converted the
categorical responses into annual numerical values as follows. Daily = 365 times a year, Weekly
- 52 times a year, Monthly = 12 times a year, Irregularly/once in a while= 1 times a year. We
then used these conversion factors to change categorical responses on transfer sent and received
frequencies as well as M-Pesa use frequencies into annualized numerical values.
Our wealth measure is constructed by using principal component analysis on the household
assets and durable goods such as televisions and refrigerators. We then create wealth quantile
dummies based on the principal component analysis.

A.2 Transfer Prices:

Kabbucho et al. (2003) document the prices of various money transfer methods. We use their
data from 2003 as the baseline and compare it to current (2010) prices of Moneygram and
Western Union. The Moneygram fee schedule is documented online, while the Western Union
rates were collected in person by research staff. These fees are converted into a database that
contains prices for a series of transfer amounts in 100 Ksh. intervals. This allows us to compare
the prices across comparable set of prices.


A.3 M-Pesa Transaction data:

We collect M-Pesa transaction data from an agent in Kisumu. These data contained transaction
type and transaction amount over a three month period in 2010 for three M-Pesa shops. The first
show Katito is in a rural area, while; Homa Bay is in a small town while Cyber is in an urban
environment. Further details of these stores can be obtained from Eijkman et al (2010).
Table 1: M-Pesa Fee Schedule




source: Safaricom 2010.
Table 2: Summary Statistics of Transactions at M-Pesa Agents

                                   Withdrawals                                   Deposits

               Cyber Center           Katito           Homa Bay   Cyber Center   Katito     Homa Bay
N                 3,477               6,401              2,787       3,544        2,524       3,716
Mean              2,757               1,402              5,762       3,773        3,425       5,240
Std. dev.         4,799               1,854              8,671       5,949        6,598       6,790
Skewness          4.03                5.27               2.17        3.07         3.21        2.29
10th               300                 250                390         300          200         500
25th               500                 475                700         578          390        1,000
Median            1,000                900               1,970       1,500        1,000       2,500
75th              2,850               1,680              6,500       4,000        3,000       6,475
90th              6,370               3,000             18,500      10,001       10,000      14,000
  Table 3: Distribution of Final Two Digits of Deposit Amounts

              Final Digits     Percentage

                  00               58.6
                  05                0.3
                  10                0.4
                  15                0.1
                  20                1.1
                  25                9.5
                  30                4.0
                  35                0.1
                  40                0.3
                  45                0.1
                  50               11.7
                  55                6.8
                  60                2.6
                  65                0.1
                  70                2.2
                  75                1.2
                  80                0.4
                  85                0.1
                  90                0.1
                  95                0.0
                 other              0.2

Note: M-Pesa Deposit data from an Agent in Kisumu. Deposits
smaller than Ksh. 2,600. N=6,036
             Table 4: Average Prices of Transfers as a Pct of Transfer Amount

                                         Transfer Amount
                 Less than or equal to 35000       Greater than 35,000           Difference
Pre -Mpesa                 0.1401                         0.0468                 -0.0934***
                          (0.0047)                       (0.0001)

Post-Mpesa                  0.0431                         0.0112                -0.0319***
                           (0.0023)                       (0.0002)

Difference                 -0.097***                     -0.0356***              -0.0703***

Notes: Standard Errors in Parentheses. P values of the T-Test for the difference of means
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * . Western Union and Moneygram prices only. Transactions where
fees exceed transfer amount are excluded.
Table 5: Impact of M-Pesa on Prices of Competitors


                                       Transfer Fees (as % of Transfer Amount)
                                   (1)                    (2)                  (3)
Transfer ≤ 35000                0.0863***              0.0715***
                                (0.0063)               (0.0062)
Post dummy                     -0.0356***             -0.0356***           -0.0356***
                                (0.0001)               (0.0001)             (0.0002)
(Transfer ≤ 35000) x Post      -0.0614***             -0.0615***           -0.0687***
                                (0.0057)               (0.0057)             (0.0071)
Constant                        0.0626***              0.0723***            0.0582***
                                (0.0005)               (0.0004)             (0.0008)
Additional Controls:
Company FE                        Yes                    Yes                  Yes
Control for Transfer Amount
& Transfer Amount Squared          No                    Yes                  No
Transfer Amount FE                 No                     No                 Yes
Observations                     18,694                 18,694              18,694
R-squared                         0.494                 0.533               0.818
Notes: Pre period is 2003 and post period is 2010.
The M-Pesa transfer limit is 35,000Kshs
Data from Kabuccho et al (2003), Western Union and Moneygram.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 6: Falsification Test on the Impact of M-Pesa on Prices of Competitors


                                    Transfer Fees (as % of Transfer Amount)
                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)

Post Dummy                  -0.0366***             -0.0379***             -0.0382***
                             (0.0002)               (0.0001)               (0.0001)
Fake Threshold x Post       0.00699***              0.0114***              0.0116***
                             (0.0006)               (0.0005)               (0.0004)
Constant                     0.0543***              0.0543***              0.0543***
                             (0.0003)               (0.0003)               (0.0003)
Fake Threshold                100,000                125,000                150,000
Additiona Controls:
Company FE                       Yes                   Yes                      Yes
Transfer Amount FE               Yes                   Yes                      Yes
Observations                   17,318                17,318                    17,318
R-squared                       0.912                 0.92                     0.922
Notes: Pre period is 2003 and post period is 2010.
The real M-Pesa transfer limit is 35,000Kshs
Data from Kabuccho et al (2003), Western Union and Moneygram.
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 7: M-Pesa Adoption

                                                          Send Money with Receive Money    M-Pesa
                                         Use M-Pesa           M-Pesa       with M-Pesa  Registered User
Gender
   Female                                   35.5%               24.7%               32.1%               24.1%
   Male                                     42.5%               35.3%               36.6%               32.7%
Financial Access
   Not banked                               27.5%               17.8%               23.9%               15.9%
   Banked                                   71.9%               64.0%               65.2%               64.0%
Residence
   Rural                                    28.8%               18.8%               25.9%               18.3%
   Urban                                    62.2%               54.8%               54.1%               51.0%
Wealth
   Not poor                                 52.4%               43.2%               46.0%               41.0%
   Poor                                     18.7%               9.4%                17.1%               9.0%
Age
   Under 55                                 42.4%               32.9%               37.4%               31.1%
   Over 55                                  20.2%               11.9%               18.4%               12.2%
Education
   At least primary school                  55.2%               44.3%               49.2%               42.4%
   Less than primary school                 16.4%               9.4%                14.1%               8.5%
Employment Status
   Unemployed                               35.0%               23.7%               31.1%               22.7%
   Employed                                 39.4%               30.8%               34.9%               29.2%
   Not employed in non-farm job             28.9%               18.6%               26.0%               18.5%
   Employed in non-farm job                 56.0%               48.7%               48.8%               44.9%
Access to Cell Phone
   Does not have a cell phone               14.2%               7.4%                12.0%               2.6%
   Has a cell phone                         66.0%               53.8%               59.0%               56.3%
Sample Size                                 6,598               6,598               6,598               6,598
Notes: Data are from the 2009 FinAccess Survey. Poor is defined as "Poor" is defined as individuals in the bottom two
wealth quintiles of an asset index
Table 8: M-Pesa Use by User Characteristics
                                                                                                              Use M-
                                                    Use M-      Use M-       Use M-    Use M-         Use M-  Pesa to                    Use M-       Use M-
                                       Use M-       Pesa to      Pesa        Pesa to   Pesa to        Pesa to   Buy          Use M-      Pesa to      Pesa to
                                       Pesa to       Save        When         Make     Receive      Withdraw Goods/Ser       Pesa to     Receive       Pay
                                      Buy Airtime   Money      Travelling   Donations Payments      from ATM   vices         Pay Bills   Wages        Wages
Gender
   Female                              36.6%      23.6%        16.7%         4.8%         4.7%         3.0%        2.1%       2.1%          1.2%         1.2%
   Male                                48.5%      30.0%        20.2%         8.4%         6.9%         4.7%        4.7%       3.4%          2.6%         2.5%
Financial Access
   Not banked                          26.8%      19.4%        10.9%         1.9%         2.6%         0.3%        1.2%       0.7%          1.5%         0.6%
   Banked                              60.2%      34.9%        27.1%        12.0%         9.4%         7.9%        5.7%       5.0%          2.2%         3.1%
Residence
   Rural                               30.4%      21.0%        14.1%         4.3%         4.4%         1.6%        2.3%       1.5%          1.8%         1.4%
   Urban                               55.4%      32.9%        23.1%         9.0%         7.2%         6.3%        4.4%       4.0%          1.9%         2.2%
Wealth
   Not poor                            48.2%      29.5%        20.7%         7.8%         6.6%         4.6%        3.6%       3.3%          2.0%         2.1%
   Poor                                17.6%      14.7%         8.9%         1.2%         2.3%         0.6%        1.7%       0.4%          1.2%         0.4%
Age
   Under 55                            44.4%      27.9%        18.8%         6.7%         5.9%         3.9%        3.3%       2.7%          1.8%         1.9%
   Over 55                             18.9%      13.5%        13.5%         4.5%         4.1%         2.9%        2.5%       2.0%          2.0%         0.8%
Education
   At least primary school             48.1%      29.2%        20.5%         7.7%         6.2%         4.5%        3.7%       3.0%          2.0%         2.0%
   Less than primary school            15.3%      14.5%         8.8%         1.1%        3.4%          0.6%        1.5%       1.1%          1.1%         0.8%
Employment Status
   Unemployed                          36.1%      21.9%        14.2%         5.4%        3.2%          3.2%        2.3%       2.0%          1.4%         0.9%
   Employed                            43.6%      27.8%        19.4%         6.8%         6.4%         3.9%        3.5%       2.9%          2.0%         2.0%
   Not employed in non-farm job        29.8%      20.1%        12.4%         4.1%        3.8%          2.1%        1.8%       1.7%          1.7%         1.0%
   Employed in non-farm job            53.8%      32.7%        24.0%         8.7%        7.5%          5.4%        4.6%       3.6%          2.0%         2.5%
Access to Cell Phone
   Does not have a cell phone          10.4%       7.1%         2.8%         0.8%        2.9%          0.4%        0.4%       0.4%          1.4%         0.8%
   Has a cell phone                    49.9%      31.3%        22.2%         7.9%        6.4%          4.6%        4.0%       3.2%          2.0%         2.0%
Sample Size                             6,598     6,598         6,598       6,598        6,598        6,598        6,598      6,598         6,598       6,598
Notes: Data are from the 2009 FinAccess Survey. Poor is defined as "Poor" is defined as individuals in the bottom two wealth quintiles of an asset index
Table 9: Cross Tabulations of Frequency of M-Pesa Use
                                    Frequency of     Use M-Pesa                            Use M-Pesa            Use M-Pesa            Use M-Pesa
                                    Use (Annual)        Daily                                Weekly                Monthly              Irregularly
Gender
   Female                                          15.7                  1.2%                 12.5%                  32.4%                 53.9%
   Male                                            21.4                  2.2%                 16.6%                  33.1%                 48.1%
Financial Access
   Not banked                                      10.4                  0.4%                 8.1%                   30.3%                 61.2%
   Banked                                          27.8                  3.1%                 21.9%                  35.6%                 39.3%
Residence
   Rural                                           13.5                  0.9%                 10.3%                  31.3%                 57.5%
   Urban                                           23.9                  2.5%                 19.1%                  34.4%                 44.0%
Wealth
   Not poor                                        20.4                  1.9%                 16.4%                  33.9%                 47.8%
   Poor                                            10.2                  0.6%                 6.6%                   28.2%                 64.7%
Age
   Under 55                                        18.8                  1.6%                 15.1%                  32.9%                 50.3%
   Over 55                                         13.4                  1.2%                 7.8%                   30.7%                 60.2%
Education
   At least primary school                         20.2                  1.9%                 16.0%                  33.3%                 48.8%
   Less than primary school                        10.3                  0.4%                 7.6%                   30.0%                 62.0%
Employment Status
   Unemployed                                      15.1                  1.1%                 11.7%                  33.4%                 53.9%
   Employed                                        19.2                  1.8%                 15.2%                  32.5%                 50.5%
   Not employed in non-farm job                    12.9                  0.8%                 9.8%                   31.5%                 57.9%
   Employed in non-farm job                        23.5                  2.4%                 18.9%                  34.0%                 44.8%
Access to Cell Phone
   Does not have a cell phone                      6.2                  0.0%                  2.9%                   26.9%                 70.1%
   Has a cell phone                                21.3                 2.0%                  17.3%                  34.2%                 46.5%
Sample Size                                       6,598                 6,598                 6,598                  6,598                 6,598
Notes: Data are from the 2009 FinAccess Survey. Poor is defined as "Poor" is defined as individuals in the bottom two wealth quintiles of an asset index
Table 10: Summary Statistics from Estimation Sample

                                                      2009                      2006
                                                 Mean       SD            Mean       SD
Frequency of Domestic Transfers Received         4.303    (3.544)         1.125    (1.580)
Frequency of Domestic Transfers Sent             2.547    (3.063)         1.079    (1.678)
Frequency of international Transfers Received 0.298       (0.840)          0.17    (0.565)
Frequency of International Transfers Sent       0.0762    (0.295)        0.0478    (0.225)
Banked                                           0.285    (0.233)         0.186    (0.200)
Uses Informal Saving Product                     0.729    (0.196)         0.518    (0.275)
Hides Money for Savings                          0.522    (0.239)         0.251    (0.256)
Uses Formal Saving Product                       0.342    (0.251)         0.271    (0.241)
Has a Formal Loan                                0.101    (0.120)        0.0903    (0.131)
Has an Informal Loan                             0.331    (0.211)         0.255    (0.262)
Employed                                         0.755    (0.153)         0.799    (0.157)
Employed in Non-Farm Sector                      0.366    (0.261)         0.364    (0.267)
% that feel sending money with a friend is slow 0.335     (0.208)         0.335    (0.208)
% that feel sending money with postal servive 0.245       (0.193)         0.245    (0.193)
% that own a cell phone                          0.294    (0.273)         0.294    (0.273)
Observations                                      190       190            190       190
Notes: Data from the Finaccess Survey aggregated to the Sublocation Level. Only Sublocations
that were in both rounds were included in the estimation sample
Table 11: Impact of M-Pesa on Transfers, Employment and Financial Access
                                                                                     M-Pesa Use
                                                                    (1)                                         (2)
                                                              Random Effects                               Fixed Effects
         Dependent Variable                             Coefficient Standard Error                 Coefficient Standard Error
   (1)   % Receive a Transfers                         0.286***         (0.064)                  0.176***            (0.061)
   (2)   % Sent a Transfer                             0.374***         (0.053)                  0.262***            (0.064)
   (3)   Frequency of Transfers Received               1.03             (1.069)                  0.956               (1.184)
   (4)   Frequency of Transfers Sent                   3.386***         (0.669)                  3.553***            (0.670)
   (5)   Banked                                        0.179***         (0.040)                  0.189***            (0.044)
   (6)   Belong to group                               0.209***         (0.069)                  0.161**             (0.080)
   (7)   Informal saving                               -0.0785          (0.080)                  -0.277***           (0.094)
   (8)   Hide Money For Savings+                       -0.187**         (0.083)                  -0.357***           (0.105)
   (9)   Formal Savings                                0.152***         (0.043)                  0.152***            (0.045)
  (10)   Formal Loan                                   -0.011           (0.033)                  0.00334             (0.035)
  (11)   Informal Loan                                 -0.00328         (0.069)                  -0.0892             (0.089)
  (12)   Employed                                      0.115**          (0.053)                  0.133**             (0.061)
  (13)   Employed in Non-Farm Job                      0.0841           (0.054)                  0.084               (0.062)

Notes: Each Row is the coefficient on M-Pesa use from seperate regressions. Data from the Finaccess Survey aggregated to the
Sublocation Level. Only Sublocations that were in both rounds were included in the estimation sample. Sublocation Fixed Effects
and Sublocation Random Effects estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at sublocation level in parentheses *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. + Hide Money For Savings is a subset of informal Savings, Frequency of Transfers only includes domestic
transfers. Additional Controls:Male, Married, Education, Age, Wealth, Year. There are 380 Observations in each regression
specification
Table 12: First Stage Relationship
                                                                    M-Pesa Adoption
                                                                             (1)

% that rate sending money with a friend is risky                             0.169**
                                                                            (0.0838)
% that rate sending money with post office is slow                          0.298***
                                                                            (0.0988)
% that rate sending money with MTC is costly                                0.589***
                                                                            (0.0873)
Constant                                                                    0.111***
                                                                            (0.0430)
Observations                                                                   190
R-squared                                                                     0.351
First stage F                                                                 26.09
Notes: Data from the Finaccess Surveys aggregated to the Sublocation Level. Only
Sublocations that were in both rounds were included in the estimation sample First
Difference/ Fixed Effect Estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at sublocation level
in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. There are 190 Observations rather than
380 as the data is first differenced. Additional Controls:Male, Married, Education, Age,
Wealth, Year. MTC is Money transfer company such as Western Union or MoneyGram
Table 13: Impact of M-Pesa on Transfers, Employment and Financial Access
                                                                 M-Pesa Use
     Dependent Variable                               Coefficient    Standard Error
 (1) % Receive a Transfers                                0.171            (0.109)
 (2) % Sent a Transfer                                  0.299***           (0.108)
 (3) Frequency of Transfers Received                      2.749            (2.442)
 (4) Frequency of Transfers Sent                        5.300***           (1.257)
 (5) Banked                                             0.279***           (0.082)
 (6) Belong to group                                    0.432***           (0.125)
 (7) Informal saving                                    -0.383**           (0.184)
 (8) Hide Money For Savings+                           -0.772***           (0.202)
 (9) Formal Savings                                     0.273***           (0.084)
(10) Formal Loan                                        0.00385            (0.080)
(11) Informal Loan                                       0.0456            (0.159)
(12) Employed                                           0.308***           (0.116)
(13) Employed in Non-Farm Job                             0.094            (0.112)

       Falsification Exercise:
     Frequency of International Transfers
(14) Received                                                  0.295               (0.661)

(15) Frequency of International Transfers Sent                -0.0861              (0.130)
Notes:Each Row is the coefficient on M-Pesa use from seperate regressions. Data from the
Finaccess Survey aggregated to the Sublocation Level. Only Sublocations that were in both
rounds were included in the estimation sample. First Difference/ Fixed Effect- Instrumental
Variable Estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at sublocation level in parentheses ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. ^ Denotes Endogenous Variables. Excluded instruments are %
rate transfers by post office are slowes , % rate transfers by friend are riskiest, % rate money
transfer company are most expensive..+ Hide Money For Savings is a subset of informal
Savings, Receipt and frequency of transfers in rows (1) to (4) only includes domestic
transfers. There are 190 Observations rather than 380 as the data is first
differenced.Additional Controls:Male, Married, Education, Age, Wealth, Year
                          Figure 1: Sending Methods: 2006 & 2009

60.00




50.00




40.00




30.00
                                                                                                2006

                                                                                                2009

20.00




10.00




 0.00
        M‐PESA   Friend      Post office   Bus   Direct into Bank   Western Union etc   other   Check
                          Figure 2: Receiving Methods: 2006 & 2009

80.00



70.00



60.00



50.00
                                                                                               2006 (%)
                                                                                               2009 (%)
40.00



30.00



20.00



10.00



 0.00
        M‐PESA   Friend       Post office   Bus   Direct into Bank Western Union etc   Check   other
                                               0.00%
                                                       5.00%
                                                               10.00%
                                                                        15.00%
                                                                                 20.00%
                                                                                          25.00%
                                                                                                   30.00%
                                                                                                            35.00%
                                                                                                                     40.00%
                                                                                                                              45.00%
                    Bu
                      yA
                                irt
                                   i   m
                                           e


                    Sa
                       v   e
                               m
                                   on
                                      ey

         W
          he
             n
                         tra
                               ve
                                 lli
                                    ng

         M
          ak
            e
                         do
                            n   at
                                   io
                                        ns
    Re
      ce
        iv
                    e
                         pa
                               ym
                                 en
                                   ts
     AT
       M
                  w
                      ith
                          dr
                             a     w
                                       al
                                         s
   Bu
     yg
              oo
                ds
                  /s
                     er
                        v
                                                                                                                                       Figure 3: Uses of M‐PESA




                                    ice
                                       s



                           Pa
                              y
                                   bi
Re                                    ll   s
  ce
    iv
         e
             sa
                  la
                     r   ie
                            s/
                               w
                                ag
                                        es
   Pa
      y
             sa
                l   ar
                         ie
                            s/
                              w
                                   ag
                                        es
Figure 4: Frequency of M‐Pesa Withdrawals by site
Panel A: Homa Bay
       200
       150
  Frequency
     100
       50
       0




                0   5000   10000   15000    20000   25000   30000   35000
                                       paidin


Panel B: Cyber
       300200
  Frequency
       100
       0




                0   5000   10000   15000    20000   25000   30000   35000
                                       paidin


Panel C: Katito
       800
       600
  Frequency
     400
       200
       0




                0   5000   10000   15000    20000   25000   30000   35000
                                       paidin
             Figure 5: Changes in Prices at Money Transfer Companies

                   Panel A: Moneygram Fees in 2003 and 2009
      9000
      8000
      7000
      6000
      5000
Fee




      4000                                                             2003
      3000                                                             2010
      2000
      1000
         0
              0      50000     100000   150000     200000   250000
                               Transfer Amount




                  Panel B: Western Union Fees in 2003 and 2009
      9000
      8000
      7000
      6000
      5000
Fee




      4000                                                             2003
      3000                                                             2010
      2000
      1000
         0
              0        50000       100000        150000     200000
                               Transfer Amount
     Figure 6: Change in Transfer Frequency Due to M‐PESA Usage

50


45



40



35
                                                                  Increased

                                                                  Decreased
30
                                                                  Stayed the same


25



20


15



10


5



0
       Sending                         Receiving
     Figure 7: Change in amount sent or received via M‐PESA

60




50




40



                                                              Increased

30
                                                              Decreased


                                                              Stayed the same
20




10




0
     Sent                         Received
           0
               1
                             2
                                                       3
                                                             4
                                                                 5
                                                                     6
  Jul‐07
Sep‐07
Nov‐07
 Jan‐08
Mar‐08
May‐08
  Jul‐08
Sep‐08
Nov‐08
 Jan‐09
Mar‐09
May‐09
  Jul‐09
Sep‐09
Nov‐09
 Jan‐10
Mar‐10
                                                                         Figure 8: Transfer Velocity of E‐Cash




                   Adjusted Velocity
                                       Unadjusted Velocity
                           Ksh.




               200
                     400
                           600
                                  800




           0
                                        1,000
                                                1,200
  Jul‐07
Sep‐07
Nov‐07
 Jan‐08
Mar‐08
May‐08
  Jul‐08
Sep‐08
Nov‐08
 Jan‐09
Mar‐09
May‐09
  Jul‐09
Sep‐09
Nov‐09
 Jan‐10
Mar‐10
May‐10
  Jul‐10
Sep‐10
                                                        Figure 9: Average Balance per Customer




Nov‐10
 Jan‐11
Mar‐11
           Ksh.




             0
           500
         1,000
         1,500
         2,000
         2,500
         3,000
         3,500
Apr‐07
Jun‐07
Aug‐07
Oct‐07
Dec‐07
Feb‐08
Apr‐08
Jun‐08
Aug‐08
Oct‐08
Dec‐08
                              per Customer




Feb‐09
Apr‐09
Jun‐09
Aug‐09
Oct‐09
                  Figure 10: Value of Monthly Transfers




Dec‐09
Feb‐10
Apr‐10
                                                   Figure ϭϭ: Length of the E‐Money Loop

 1.1




1.05




  1




0.95




 0.9




0.85




 0.8
       Jul‐   Aug‐   Sep‐   Oct‐   Nov‐   Dec‐   Jan‐   Feb‐   Mar‐   Apr‐   May‐   Jun‐   Jul‐   Aug‐   Sep‐   Oct‐   Nov‐   Dec‐   Jan‐   Feb‐   Mar‐   Apr‐   May‐   Jun‐   Jul‐
        07     07     07     07     07     07     08     08     08     08     08     08     08     08     08     08     08     08     09     09     09     09     09     09     09
