                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL CRISES AND EQUITY MARKET CONTAGION

                                            Geert Bekaert
                                           Michael Ehrmann
                                           Marcel Fratzscher
                                            Arnaud J. Mehl

                                         Working Paper 17121
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17121


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We would like to thank Mardi Dungey, Andy Rose and Shang-Jin Wei for discussions and suggestions
as well as participants at seminars or conferences at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, National
Bank of Serbia, Bank of England, Banco Central do Brasil, CESifo, Tsinghua-Columbia Workshop
in International Economics, Banque de France-CEPR workshop on macroeconomics of global interdependence
(Paris, 2012), Q-Group, (Tampa, 2012), EMG-ESRC Workshop on Global Linkages and Financial
Crises (Cass Business School, London, 2012) for comments on earlier versions of the paper, as well
as Assaf Shtauber and Tadios Tewolde for helpful research assistance. The views expressed in this
paper are solely our own and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central Bank or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Geert Bekaert, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud J. Mehl. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Crises and Equity Market Contagion
Geert Bekaert, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud J. Mehl
NBER Working Paper No. 17121
June 2011, Revised June 2012
JEL No. G01,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Using the 2007-09 financial crisis as a laboratory, we analyze the transmission of crises to country-industry
equity portfolios in 55 countries. We use a factor model to predict crisis returns, defining unexplained
increases in factor loadings and residual correlations as indicative of contagion. We find statistically
significant evidence of contagion from US markets and from the global financial sector, but the effects
are economically small. By contrast, there has been substantial contagion from domestic equity markets
to individual domestic equity portfolios, with its severity inversely related to the quality of countries’
economic fundamentals and policies. This confirms the old “wake-up call” hypothesis, with markets
and investors focusing substantially more on country-specific characteristics during the crisis.


Geert Bekaert                                         Marcel Fratzscher
Graduate School of Business                           European Central Bank
Columbia University                                   Kaiserstrasse 29
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall                          D-60311 Frankfurt/Main GERMANY
New York, NY 10027                                    marcel.fratzscher@ecb.int
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu                                    Arnaud J. Mehl
                                                      European Central Bank
Michael Ehrmann                                       Kaiserstrasse 29
European Central Bank                                 60311 Frankfurt
Postfach 16 03 19                                     Germany
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main                             Arnaud.Mehl@ecb.int
GERMANY
michael.ehrmann@ecb.int
Ever since the seminal work of King and Wadhwani (1990) following the global October 1987 stock

market crash, the international finance literature has studied how shocks are transmitted across borders.

Words with negative connotations such as “volatility spillovers” (e.g. Engle, Ito and Lin (1990);

Masulis, Hamao and Ng (1990)) and “contagion” have been coined to indicate shock transmission that

cannot be explained by fundamentals or co-movements that are viewed as “excessive.” Countless

papers have been written proposing quantitative measures of contagion (see Karolyi (2003), Dungey et

al. (2004) for surveys) or developing theories to explain it (e.g. Allen and Gale, 2000).

        The financial crisis of 2007-09 has arguably been the first truly major global crisis since the

Great Depression of 1929-32. While the crisis initially had its origin in the United States in a relatively

small segment of the lending market, the sub-prime mortgage market, it rapidly spread across virtually

all economies, both advanced and emerging, as well as across economic sectors. It also affected equity

markets worldwide, with many countries experiencing even sharper equity market crashes than the

United States, making it an ideal laboratory to revisit the debate about the presence and sources of

“contagion” in equity markets.

        This article studies how and why the crisis spread so violently across countries and economic

sectors. We develop a three-factor model to set a benchmark for what global equity market co-

movements should expected to be, based on existing fundamentals. This model distinguishes between a

US-specific factor, a global financial factor and a domestic factor for the pricing of 415 country-sector

equity portfolios across 55 countries worldwide. We define contagion as the co-movement in excess of

that implied by the factor model. This contrasts with many contagion articles simply comparing co-

movements before and during the crisis. Obviously, our benchmark factor model, which we term the

interdependence model, implies transmission of shocks proportional to the factor exposures, as

measured pre-crisis. Excess comovements relative to the model can arise in four different ways leading

to four distinct types of contagion. 1 The first three involve factor exposures increasing unexpectedly in

the crisis. Contagion stemming from the US or from the global financial sector, which we label “US

contagion” and “global contagion”, implies a rise in the co-movement of domestic sector portfolios

with the US or global factors, respectively. Alternatively, the exposures relative to the domestic factor

may increase, raising the co-movement of portfolios within a country during the crisis, relative to the


                                                    1
factor model predictions. We call this phenomenom “domestic contagion”. Finally, returns unrelated to

the factors may still be correlated across stocks during the crisis, which we call residual contagion.

        We indeed find significant evidence of contagion during the 2007-09 financial crisis. Yet, while

the interdependence model is strongly rejected in a statistical sense, it nonetheless explains a substantial

fraction of return variation during the crisis. Second, we find on average statistically significant but

economically small evidence of contagion from US markets and the global financial sector. By contrast,

we find strong evidence of domestic contagion, with factor loadings with respect to the domestic factor

portfolio increasing on average by 50%. Interestingly, there is no evidence that domestic contagion

played a role in past crises, such as the 1998 LTCM crisis or the 2000-02 bust of the TMT bubble.

Importantly, we observe a high degree of heterogeneity in contagion across country-sector equity

portfolios, with the contagion parameters and pre-crisis U.S. and global banking sector factor exposures

being negatively correlated.

        We further use our framework to disentangle the channels of contagion and to explain the

heterogeneity in contagion across portfolios by testing whether and how the dependence of factor

exposures on various instruments changes during the crisis. We examine 6 different categories of

channels. First, as the crisis originated in the banking sector, we examine international banking sector

links at the country level, and firm-specific characteristics measuring the degree of financing constraints

and interest rate exposure. We also study the role of various financial policies introduced during the

crisis to protect the domestic financial sector, and in particular domestic banks (through debt and

deposit guarantees and capital injections) which, in essence, transferred risk on a massive scale from

individual firms to governments.

        Second, we examine the “globalization hypothesis” which implies that crises hit hardest those

economies that are highly integrated globally, such as through trade and financial linkages. The

globalization process may have gradually increased the US and global banking sector factor exposures

over time (see Bekaert and Harvey,1997; Baele, 2005) but may also have led to decoupling during the

crisis, as globalization reversed.

        Third, information asymmetries may decrease during crises, as investors focus on easily

available public information, which may in turn increase correlations. Fourth, the “wake-up call


                                                     2
hypothesis” states that a crisis initially restricted to one market segment or country provides new

information that may prompt investors to reassess the vulnerability of other market segments or

countries, which spreads the crisis across markets and borders (Goldstein, 1998; Masson, 1999;

Goldstein, Kaminsky and Reinhart, 2000). 2 Under this hypothesis, domestic fundamentals are likely to

play a dominant role in the transmission of the crisis.          Finally, contagion may occur without

discrimination at all, driven by herding behavior or investors’ risk appetite beyond the effect of

fundamentals, prompting us to examine the role of global risk and liquidity indicators.

        We strongly reject the globalization hypothesis. Only an overall measure of financial

integration explains an economically important part of the contagion evidence, but more financially

integrated countries experienced less contagion, not more contagion, from the US market. Banking

sector links and information flow variables also do not explain the variation in contagion across

portfolios. Instead, we find that countries with high political risk, large current account deficits, large

unemployment and high government budget deficits, experienced a high degree of contagion. We also

find that the introduction of debt and deposit guarantees during the crisis helped insulate domestic

equity markets to an economically and statistically significant extent from the impact of the crisis

through reducing the exposures to global, US and domestic factors. Hence, the wake–up call hypothesis

and domestic banking policies are the main sources of the domestic contagion phenomenon that we

document.

        Our work contributes mainly to two literatures. First, there is the vast literature on international

market integration, shock transmission and contagion. Our approach does not suffer from the volatility

bias described in the seminal work of Forbes and Rigobon (2002), and owes most to the factor model

approach in Bekaert, Harvey and Ng (2005), who also define contagion as excessive co-movement over

and above the predictions of a factor model. What we add is a detailed analysis of the sources of

contagion, allowing us to differentiate several economic hypotheses regarding contagion.


        Second, our work relates to the growing literature on the 2007-09 global financial crisis. This

includes articles focusing on the drivers of transmission of the crisis across firms and markets within the

US, such as Tong and Wei (2010), Almeida et al. (2009) and Diebold and Yilmaz (2010), or articles



                                                     3
taking a more macroeconomic perspective such as Eichengreen et al. (2009), Frankel and Saravelos

(2010) and Rose and Spiegel (2010, 2011). There are a few contemporaneous articles also focusing on

equity market contagion. For instance, Tong and Wei (2011) find that the average decline in stock

prices during the crisis in a sample of 4000 firms in 24 emerging countries was more severe for those

firms intrinsically more dependent on external finance (in particular on bank lending and portfolio

flows). Hau and Lai (2011) show that stocks with a high share of equity funds ownership performed

relatively well during the crisis, whereas stocks with ownership links to funds that were heavily affected

by portfolio losses in financial stocks severely underperform. In a related vein, Stulz and Beltratti

(2009) investigate whether the variation in the cross-section of stock returns of large banks across the

world during the crisis is related to bank-level governance, country-level governance, country-level

regulation, as well as to bank balance sheet and profitability characteristics before the crisis. Finally,

Calomiris, Love and Martinez Peria (2010) show that credit supply stocks, global demand shocks and

selling pressures in the equity market had a significant negative effect on individual stock returns

during the 2007-2008 crisis but had no such effects during an earlier placebo period.

        The paper is organized as follows. The first section presents the empirical framework, defining

and distinguishing between interdependence and contagion. Section II contains the empirical findings,

first contrasting how a pure interdependence model fares relative to a model accommodating contagion

before analyzing the channels of contagion. Section III summarizes the findings and concludes.



I. Empirical framework


This section outlines the model we estimate, contrasts the concepts of interdependence and contagion

and discusses estimation issues.


A. The factor model

We formulate an international factor model with three factors, a US factor, a global financial factor, and

a domestic market factor, Ft '  [ Rt , Rt , Rt ] . The three factors are value-weighted market indices, so
                                    U     G    D



that the model potentially embeds different CAPMs as special cases: when the betas on the first two




                                                    4
factors are zero, the model becomes a domestic CAPM; when the beta of the domestic factor is set to

zero, the model can act as a World CAPM. As in any factor model, the correlation between portfolios is

increasing in the factor exposures of the portfolios and the magnitude of the factor volatilities. The use

of these three factors, including a domestic factor, ensures that the model satisfactorily fits

comovements across our portfolios in normal times. 3 The model then allows studying whether the

2007-09 global crisis mainly reflected a global financial shock, a shock specific to the US economy that

subsequently spread globally, or to what extent there was an element of increased vulnerability at the

country or firm level that spread the crisis.

The full model looks as follows:

                                      Ri ,t  Et 1[ Ri ,t ]  i ,t ' Ft  i ,t CRt  ei ,t            (1)

                                       i ,t   i ,0  1 ' Z i ,t  k   i ,t CRt                     (2)

                                       i ,t   i ,0   1 ' Z i ,t  k                                 (3)

                                      i ,t  i ,0  1 ' Z i ,t  k                                    (4)

where Ri,t is the excess return of portfolio i during week t (i.e., the return less the three month US T-bill

rate in weekly units), Et-1[Ri,t] is the expected excess return, measured as a linear function of the lagged

excess return and the local dividend yield, Ft is the vector of the three observable factors, CRt a crisis

dummy, and Zi,t a vector of control variables, designed to capture time and cross-sectional variation in

factor exposures. These variables may be portfolio or country–specific, and are typically lagged by two

quarters. If the dimension of Z is K, the matrices β1, γ1 and η1 are K × 3. The sample period is 1 January

1995 to 15 March 2009, i.e. it ends with the trough of the global equity market during the crisis. The

sample contains about 725 weekly observations for our 415 country-sector equity portfolios. We define

the financial crisis to begin on 7 August 2007, but later report a robustness analysis using the collapse

of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008 as an alternative starting point.

        Each portfolio i reflects a country-sector portfolio, measured as the value-weighted returns of

all stocks in a particular sector of a particular country at time t. To avoid adding-up constraints and

spurious correlations, the R Dt factor is value-weighted across country-sector portfolios located in the




                                                               5
same country as portfolio i, but excludes returns of portfolio i itself. Strictly speaking, we would

therefore need to denote domestic returns by R D\i
                                               t , but use the shortcut for notational ease. All returns


are measured in US dollars. 4 In order to obtain an intuitive interpretation of the estimates of the factor

loadings, we orthogonalize the three factors. The global factor is orthogonalized by regressing global

financial sector returns on US returns over the full sample period (including the crisis period) and then

using the residuals of this regression as the global factor. 5 Similarly, following Bekaert, Hodrick and

Zhang (2009), we extract a domestic return component which is orthogonal to those of both the US

factor and the global factor by regressing each domestic market return on US returns and global

financial sector returns, and then using the residual of this regression as the domestic factor. 6



     A. 1. Interdependence versus contagion

When CRt is eliminated from the model for all t, we refer to it as the “interdependence model”. Each

portfolio’s risk exposure is then captured by three (potentially time-varying) factor loadings. Under the

null of this model, the co-movement (“interdependence”) between the various portfolios is determined

by the factor exposures (the betas) and the variance covariance matrix of the factors. With orthogonal

factors, such a model can potentially fit the observed increase in correlations during the crisis through

an increase in factor volatilities. This is true because the correlation between a portfolio and a factor is

then the beta with respect to that factor, times the ratio of factor to portfolio volatility, which can be

shown to be increasing in the factor’s volatility. As volatilities tend to dramatically increase during

crises, increased correlations are thus not necessarily indicative of “contagion,” an intuition formalized

by Forbes and Rigobon (2002). To explain the crisis incidence across portfolios, portfolios with high

betas according to the model should decrease the most during the crisis. If this model fails to explain

the crisis incidence and under-predicts portfolio correlations, we uncover contagion. By focusing on

deviations from a reduced-form factor model, we avoid the volatility bias described in Forbes and

Rigobon (2002) and contagion only reflects “unexpected” comovements relative to a factor model,

consistent with the contagion definition in Bekaert, Harvey and Ng (2005). The introduction of the




                                                      6
crisis dummy to Equations (1) and (2) allows us to uncover the sources of contagion through the

various γ or η coefficients.


        First,  in equation (1) captures contagion unrelated to the observable factors Ft of the model. If

η is substantially negative for a sub-set of stocks, these stocks show excess comovement during the

crisis. Our η coefficients potentially capture “non-fundamental” contagion, such as herd behavior where

investors stop discriminating across firms and countries based on economic fundamentals. However,

there are also rational stories of “investor contagion.” During a financial crisis, investors may face

margin calls and/or may need to raise liquidity, which may transmit shocks from one country to

another. Kodres and Pritsker (2002) develop a model where portfolio rebalancing creates “rational

contagion,” the severity of which depends on shared macro-risk factors and the information asymmetry

in each market. Kyle and Xiong (2001) focus on losses by arbitragers which may lead to liquidations in

several markets, thus inducing contagion. While we do not provide a formal test of these models, we

consider some instruments related to risk aversion that may be informative about these channels.

        Second,  in equation (2) measures contagion via the factors Ft, i.e. changes in interdependence

during the crisis. Positive γ’s imply increased correlations of portfolios with the factors and across

portfolios in the crisis relative to tranquil periods. Such contagion may be induced either by an

unconditional increase in the factor loadings (i,0) or an increase in the factor loadings conditional on a

number of possible determinants Zi,t (1). The strength and novelty of this approach is that it allows us to

identify the origin of contagion (US, global, or domestic) and the transmission channels, which we now

discuss in detail.

A.2. Instruments to model time variation in exposures

Equations (2) to (4) contain a set of lagged instruments, Zi,t-k, which are used to model the time variation

in the exposures (β, γ, η). This practice has a long tradition in finance; see, for example, Ferson and

Harvey (1991). 7 We entertain a large number of potential instruments, which are listed in Table I, and

divide them into six different categories in order to distinguish between different channels and

hypotheses. Along the way, we surmise various sources of domestic contagion.




                                                     7
        The first category uses various proxies to investigate the importance of the banking sector as a

transmission channel across equity markets. For that purpose, we investigate consolidated foreign

claims of the domestic banking sector, either vis-à-vis banks in the US or in all other countries, the

growth of credit to the private sector and various measures for the dependence of firms on external

financing, in particular through banks (interest rate exposure, size and financial constraints).

        Allen and Gale (2000) construct a bank run model where liquidity shocks cause the default of a

leveraged lender, which in turn leads to losses for banks lending to this institution, causing a potential

domino effect. In the contagion literature, a number of authors have stressed the “common creditor

problem” where countries linked to banks (through claims or liabilities) that have claims on countries in

crisis may suffer contagion that extends to their equity markets (see Van Rijckeghem and Weder, 2001,

Kaminsky and Reinhart, 2000, Tong and Wei (2010, 2011); Caramazza et al., 2004). In the context of

the global crisis, the liquidity and solvency problems of the US banks were rapidly transmitted to other

international financial institutions, either because of money market links, direct exposure, or the

exposure to toxic assets. The data of the BIS measure the extent of claims local banks have to,

respectively, US banks or any international banks through deposits, loans or other assets. Such exposure

has a direct effect on the local banking sector and indirect effects on other stocks. It is conceivable that

the extent of the exposure is also commensurate to the extent to which local banks have (over) extended

credit to the private sector, as deleveraging during the crisis may adversely affectdomestic borrowers’

ability to obtain funding. Finally, we would expect the effect of banking problems to be particularly

severe for firms with financing constraints and for firms with more interest rate exposure, as they may

have shorter maturity debt and thus face steeper refinancing costs. For instance, Almeida et al. (2009)

find that firms with large portions of long-term debt maturing at the time of the crisis reduced

investment significantly more than similar firms that did not need to refinance their debt during the

crisis. We use the financial constraints measured purposed in Whited and Whu (2006) and compute

interest rate exposure using a regression procedure. We refer to the appendix for more details on the

computation of these variables. Small firms tend to rely more on bank financing than large firms

prompting us to also use the log of total assets as an instrument. Banking sector links are a potential but

perhaps unlikely source of domestic contagion. For example, it is possible that exposures to the


                                                     8
domestic factor return are increasing in international bank linkages if most firms in the economy are

indeed dependent on bank financing and banks in the economy have international links. If we control

for such linkages, we should not find contagion in the crisis. Yet, it is possible that for countries with

banks that are disproportionally affected by the crisis, and where local bank dependence is large, we

may pick up some domestic contagion through a banking sector effect.

        As a second category of instruments, we collected data on three country-specific policy

responses to the crises (listed under “banking policy”), namely capital injections in both financial and

non-financial firms (though these are primarily banks), as well as new or extended deposit guarantees

and debt guarantees for banks. 8 A key feature that we exploit for this analysis is that not all countries

implemented such policies, that there are differences in the precise measures that were implemented,

and in the timing of their announcement. We define dummy variables that take the value of one for the

period after the announcements of the various policies, and for the full period of their existence. 9 This

raises three caveats. First, official announcements of such financial policies may have been preceded by

rumors or concrete indications that a government considers such policy measures, thus having a market

effect even before an announcement is made. A second issue is that such policies may in part be

endogenous to the crisis itself, i.e. they were implemented in response to the crisis hitting a particular

country particularly hard. While we cannot resolve this potential endogeneity bias, we note that it

should make it harder to prove in the data that such policies are associated with a smaller decline in

equity markets. Third, it could be the case that the introduction of these policies might have had longer-

lasting (and potentially adverse) effects on stock market performance beyond the time span analyzed in

this paper, in particular during the European sovereign debt crisis. Such an analysis is beyond the scope

of the current paper. Our hypothesis is that these policy responses have helped countries and individual

firms within a country to be more insulated and overall less affected by the crisis, thereby reducing the

magnitude of contagion, both from foreign markets and across sectors within a country.

        The third set of variables measures external exposure through trade and financial openness. A

great many researchers have pointed out the increased vulnerability to crises that comes with financial

and economic integration (see Mendoza and Quadrini (2010) for a theoretical analysis, and Fratzscher

(2012) for empirical evidence during the 2007-09 crisis). The trade channel in particular has often been


                                                    9
associated with international spillovers and contagion (see Forbes (2004), Kaminsky and Reinhart

(2000), Caramazza et al. (2004)). As discussed in Baele and Inghelbrecht (2009), trends in market

integration make it necessary to let interdependence coefficients depend on openness indicators to

properly test for contagion in a crisis, as average beta coefficients may underestimate the global

exposures just before the crisis. We use exports plus imports to measure trade openness. Financial

integration with the rest of the world is measured using the stock of international portfolio assets and

liabilities; or financial depth (measured as the size of the domestic equity market capitalization), which

has been shown to correlate with financial openness (see, e.g. Bekaert and Harvey, 1995). Broner,

Gelos and Reinhart (2006), and Boyer, Kumagai, and Yuan (2006) stress how portfolio holdings of

international investors in various countries and their capital reallocations following negative returns,

can affect the transmission of shocks. In the recent global crisis, US international funds may have

retrenched from global markets, causing spillovers to be particularly severe for countries with

substantial bilateral portfolio flows with the US. We therefore also use bilateral portfolio investment

flows, i.e. net flows of bilateral portfolio assets and liabilities with the US, as is common in the

literature (e.g. Kaminsky, Lyons and Schmukler, 2004). All the above measures are scaled by GDP. We

also include exchange rate exposure, which may constitute an alternative, firm-specific source for

equity market co-movements (e.g. Dumas and Solnik 1995). The methodology for measuring exchange

rate exposure is outlined in Appendix B.

        Trade and financial integration channels may indirectly also contribute to domestic contagion if

they break down during the crisis. Suppose international factor exposures are increasing in external

integration measures and domestic factor exposures are decreasing in such measures. This could arise in

a partial segmentation model where international firms are priced differently from purely domestic

firms, and the latter are still an important part of the domestic market portfolio. If trade and capital

flows collapse in the crisis, this could cause a pattern where firms now are more correlated with the

domestic factor and less with the international factors. If we do not control for this time –variation in

betas, our contagion estimates may show a reduction in global and an increase in domestic betas. With

the factor exposure and contagion channels depending on trade and financial integration directly, we

can examine this story explicitly.


                                                   10
                                                  Table I

        A fourth category of instruments relates to information asymmetries which may reduce cross-

border capital flows and induce home bias (e.g. Albuquerque, Bauer and Schneider, 2009, Brennan and

Cao, 1997). Apart from measures of information flow, such as the amount of telephone traffic and the

ratio of the value of net imports of newspapers from the US (in US dollars) to domestic GDP, we also

include the most commonly used proxy of information asymmetry in the literature on capital flows,

namely the geographic distance of a country to the US (Portes and Rey, 2005; Daude and Fratzscher,

2008). Dumas, Lewis and Osambela (2011) generate implications similar to those of information

asymmetry models by positing that domestic and foreign investors may have differences of opinion on

public signals. In particular, local investors are better equipped to “interpret” (local) public news than

foreign investors are. As shown by Dumas, Lewis and Osambela (2011), in such a model returns and

international capital flows co-move positively (as foreign investors view increases in the stock market,

erroneously, as a signal of future increases). Following this approach, we proxy for differences in

opinion using the pre-crisis (2006) correlation coefficients between the bilateral capital flows from the

US to a particular destination country (as captured by the net sales of long-term US securities by

domestic residents and of foreign securities to US residents), on the one hand, and the destination

country’s local equity returns, on the other hand, with a higher correlation indicating a higher difference

in opinion.

        The fifth set of variables intends to provide a broad view of domestic macroeconomic

fundamentals. With these variables, we can test what Goldstein (1998) has coined the “wake-up call”

hypothesis, following the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis. During that crisis, potential risk determinants

at the country level –such as the quality of economic policies and institutions– suddenly became

important for investors’ decisions while they were considered relatively unimportant before the crisis.

This hypothesis is easily testable in our framework, as it implies that macroeconomic fundamentals that

do not matter in normal times suddenly matter in crisis times, as reflected in the γit coefficients for our

set of macro-economic indicators. The wake-up call hypothesis provides an obvious explanation of

“domestic contagion.” This set of variables includes a measure of political risk from ICRG, the

sovereign rating and the level of foreign exchange reserves. It also contains several macroeconomic


                                                    11
indicators, namely the current account balance, the government budget balance, and the unemployment

rate.

        The final set of variables consists of global measures of risk aversion and liquidity which may

cause “investor contagion”. Evidence is mounting that international asset prices are quite sensitive to

such measures (see e.g. Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad and Siegel, 2011; Baker, Wurgler and Yuan, 2009).

The risk aversion of investors may substantially increase during the crisis, making them shun risky

assets and flee into safer assets; in particular, government bonds in the US and other advanced

economies. We proxy for risk aversion through the VIX index of the S&P500. Moreover, a central

element of the crisis was a freezing of credit and inter-bank markets and a liquidity squeeze that made it

difficult for financial and non-financial institutions to obtain capital. Indeed, a literature is emerging

that stresses the role of (il)liquidity in causing or exacerbating crises (e.g. Adrian and Shin 2010,

Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2009). We use the TED spread as an indicator of illiquidity, but it of course

also reflects the credit risk of banks. Note that all these risk and liquidity variables are common to all

equity portfolios in the sample.



B. Estimation, Specification Tests and Diagnostics

    B.1. Model Estimation

We estimate our model for all portfolios jointly by means of pooled OLS. Standard errors account for

heteroskedasticity. Note that the instruments Zi,t – with the exception of the financial policies, as

outlined above – are lagged by 2 quarters in order to prevent that an unobserved factor may influence

simultaneously both returns and the fundamental Z in a given period, thus generating a spurious

relationship between both.

        Because we have 25 instruments, an estimation of the full model will generate a large amount

of insignificant regressors that needlessly inject noise into the estimated model. When estimating the

full model (1)-(4) with instruments, we therefore estimate different model specifications. In a first step,

we include each of the 25 instruments individually in the model. As a second step, we build on the work

of David Hendry (see, for instance, Hendry and Krolzig 2005) to pare down the regression to a more

manageable number of independent variables. We start out with the full model including all 25


                                                    12
instruments simultaneously, and then step-by-step reduce the model by excluding the variable with the

least statistically significant contagion parameter. This procedure is continued until only those

instruments are left in the model that have significant contagion parameters at the 10% significance

level. The aim of this “encompassing” approach is to reduce the dimensionality of the model and to

arrive at a model that can be interpreted in an economically meaningful way. 10



B.2. Specification Tests and Diagnostics

We now focus our attention on the fit of the model. A well-specified factor model should render all

correlations between the residuals of the 415 portfolio regressions negligible. Given the dimensionality

of our estimation, a formal test of such a hypothesis is rather meaningless. Instead, we test and/or

diagnose excess co-movements of the residuals at the country level, the most important dimension for

contagion tests.

        To measure excess co-movements within countries, i we now add an indicator subscript c,

denoting country, to each portfolio. There are Nc portfolios within country c and recall that there are 55

countries in total; so that c runs from 1 to 55. Excess co-movement within a country can occur when the

factor model either systematically over or under predicts exposure to the factors for portfolios within a

given country. Formally, consider:

                                                           Nc         Nc
                                             2
                         EXCOVc ,t 
                                       N c ( N c  1)
                                                             (e
                                                           i 1       j i
                                                                             i , c ,t    e j , c ,t )   (5)


This average covariance (across portfolios within a country) should be on average zero for all countries.

To derive a formal test, we simply investigate the average across the countries:

                                            55
                                      1
                          EXCOVt 
                                      55
                                             EXCOV
                                            c 1
                                                               c ,t                                      (6)


To create a test statistic, we must divide EXCOV by its sample variance. We use 26 Newey-West

(1987) lags in computing this variance. The excess co-movement test then becomes:

                                                   T
                                       [(1/ T ) EXCOVt ]2
                         ECTEST                   t 1
                                                                                                         (7)
                                           VAR ( EXCOVt )



                                                          13
which is    2 (1)   under the null.

        We also compute two diagnostic statistics that are easily comparable across different models, or

across different time periods (crisis versus non-crisis). First, let ρi,j,c be the correlation between the

residuals of portfolios i and j within country c. Thus we compute:

                                                              Nc         Nc
                                       1 55          2
                             EXCOR                          
                                       55 c 1 N c ( N c  1) i 1
                                                                         
                                                                         j i
                                                                                i , j ,c                         (8)


Second, the ECTEST averages the country-specific co-movements of residuals across all countries. It is

conceivable that strong rejections in a few countries may not result in a rejection of the null. To better

diagnose the performance of various models, we also compute the following country-level excess co-

movement diagnostic:

                                                      T

                                         55
                                               [(1/ T ) EXCOVc ,t ]2
                             ECDIAG                 t 1
                                                                                                                 (9)
                                        c 1     VAR( EXCOVc ,t )

where the time series variance is again computed with 26 Newey-West lags. If the country-specific test

statistics are independent, ECDIAG would have a               2 (55)   distribution. However, we use the statistic to

compare alternative models and alternative periods.

        To further analyze the performance of the model(s), we conduct three additional diagnostic

exercises, which are described in more detail below.                    First, we compare actual returns with the

predicted returns under various versions of the factor model during the crisis. Second, we compare the

average actual increase in correlations with the factor returns during the crisis with the increase

generated by the factor model. Recall that in the factor model, such an increase occurs when the

volatility of the factors increases or factor exposures increase. Third, we perform a variance

decomposition of returns to contrast the relative economic importance of interdependence versus

contagion during the crisis and their various components



II. Empirical Results

Our modeling strategy is to first investigate the presence of interdependence versus contagion in sub-

sections A and B, before turning to the channels of interdependence and contagion in sub-section C. It


                                                             14
turns out that allowing for time-variation in the betas does not affect our inference about contagion, but

the cross-sectional variation in the instruments does help explain the cross-country incidence of the

crisis.



A. Interdependence

Our extended factor model (1)-(4) with crisis interactions and contagion may not be necessary to

explain the transmission of the financial crisis in 2007-09. If the original factor model without

contagion parameters correctly anticipates the systematic risks of the various portfolios, portfolios with

larger (smaller) exposures to the US and global financial sector portfolios should witness the steepest

(smallest) valuation declines during the crisis. To explore this possibility, we estimate the following

simple variant of our three-factor model:

                                    Ri , t  Et 1[ Ri ,t ]   i ,0 ' Ft  ei ,t                      (10)

with all variables defined as before, and including the same three factors – a US factor, a global

financial factor, and a domestic market factor. Table II reports the betas and displays the specification

tests. The specification test ECTEST should be χ2(1) under the null, and rejects very strongly the null of

no excess country-specific residual comovements, both across the full sample and in the crisis. Note

that it is conceivable that the test has much less power during the shorter crisis period than over the full

sample; yet the average within-country residual correlation is also similar across the two periods.

Including the crisis period in the estimation tends to slightly increase the betas, which helps improve the

fit within the crisis period and worsens it outside the crisis period. The ECDIAG test statistic is a

whopping 618 over the full sample period and 482 over the crisis period. The 1% critical value for a

χ2(55) is 94.42, but of course the various country statistics are not independent and are likely positively

correlated.

                                                  Tables II – III

          The betas reported are equally weighted averages across all 415 portfolios, with the standard

error also reflecting the covariance between the individual estimates. Economically, the exposure to the

three factors is not very different on average. It may be surprising that the exposure to the global




                                                          15
banking sector is so large. However, if country factors dominate industry factors, this factor may proxy

for the world market return, ex US.

        In Table III, we explore the variation of the interdependence coefficients across portfolios,

aggregating over regional groups and different industries. With the exception of Western Europe, the

exposures to the domestic factor still dominate the exposures to the US or global financial factors.

Emerging markets generally have low exposures to the U.S. and global financial factors with the

exception of a relatively high Latin American exposure to the U.S. factor. The variation of the different

exposures across different industries is much smaller than across regions. Striking is the low exposure

of the technology sector to the global, and its large exposure to the US factor. The highest exposure to

the global factor is found for the financial sector, with a beta estimate of 0.58. In addition, the financial

sector has a relatively high exposure vis-à-vis the US factor.

        What would the model predict for the crisis? If the model is correctly specified, the factor

exposures are sufficient to predict the relative vulnerability across the different portfolios during the

crisis. The first columns of Table IV and Figure 1 represent the performance of the “interdependence

model” to predict the relative stock return performances across countries. In Figure 1, we graph the

actual cumulative returns across the crisis period on the vertical axis against their predicted values from

the interdependence model (10) on the horizontal axis. The computation is straightforward. From

estimating (10), we obtain Rˆ i ,t for each portfolio i and each week t, and then obtain from these the total


predicted return R̂i and compare this to the total actual return Ri over the crisis period. 11

                                            Figure 1, Table IV

        If the model predicts the relative crisis severity perfectly, the regression line through the scatter

plot should be identical to the 45 degree line. However, it is clear this is not the case. Running a

regression of actual on predicted returns for all 415 portfolios, we find:

                           Ri   7.037  0.489 Rˆi   i , adj. R 2  0.301
                                  (2.444)      (0.046)




                                                     16
with the joint test that the intercept is zero and the slope coefficient is unity being rejected. This

relationship between actual and predicted returns is graphically shown through the line in Panel A of

Figure 1.

        Panel B of Figure 1 shows the distribution aggregated across countries, where actual and

predicted returns for countries are equally weighted averages across the portfolios of a particular

country. On average the model under-predicts the severity of the crisis for nearly all countries and the

prediction errors for some countries are quite large. To make the performance of the model more

concrete, the first set of columns 1 in Table IV lists the various countries, ranked from worst to best

actual crisis performance, then contrasts these returns with the predicted returns based on the three-

factor interdependence model in the second set of columns (the table also shows the estimates for the

contagion model, to which we turn in the next section).

        What is striking from the table is that most of the worst performing countries are in Eastern

Europe. This makes sense intuitively as these countries were affected not only the strongest in terms of

equity market performance, but also in terms of economic growth and activity. However, the

interdependence model would predict some of the Eastern European countries to be only moderately

affected. The Spearman rank correlation between actual and predicted returns is a relatively modest

0.68. It would be much smaller if the model did not include a domestic factor. The presence of a

domestic factor allows Eastern European countries to be affected by the severe country-specific crises

in their countries. Even so, the model still fails to predict the absolute and relative severity of the crisis.

Many commentators have expressed surprise about the relatively good performance of many emerging

markets, such as Thailand and Indonesia in South-East Asia, or Mexico and Brazil in Latin America,

which were at the heart of previous crises. However, from the perspective of our benchmark model, the

performance in three of these countries was actually worse than expected (Mexico being an exception).

                                                   Table V

        Table V provides an analogous ranking for each of the 10 sectors, where all returns of

portfolios within a particular sector are equally weighted averages across countries. Expected returns

and realized returns are much more similar and highly correlated, especially in their ranking (with a

Spearman rank correlation of 0.89), thus not exhibiting the same mismatch as across countries. For


                                                      17
instance, equity returns in utilities, non-cyclical consumer goods or in the energy sector were indeed

relatively less affected as predicted by the factor model, and the financial sector was most affected in

the data and in the model.

                                                     Figure 2

         The three-factor interdependence model fails to fully explain the crisis severity, but the fit

shown in Figure 1 still suggests that the interdependence model explains a non-negligible fraction of the

cross-sectional variation in crisis returns. To benchmark this model, we compare the predictive power

of this model with that of a more standard World CAPM model. We do so by re-estimating (10)

including only the two common world factors, the US factor and the global factor. Figure 2 shows the

fit of the model, again at the country and at the portfolio levels. A regression of actual on predicted

returns for all 415 portfolios for this two-factor model yields:


                           Ri   13.036  0.256 Rˆ i   i , adj. R 2  0.094
                                   (3.439)      (0.058)

         The R-squared decreases from 0.301 in the three-factor model with the domestic factor to only

0.094 for the two-factor model without the domestic factor. Moreover, the slope coefficient of the two-

factor model is substantially smaller as it drops by about one half. Overall, this suggests that the

domestic factor is indeed highly important in improving the predictive power of the model for the 2007-

09 financial crisis, even without yet allowing for contagion in the model specification.

         In summary, the exploratory analysis of this sub-section shows that a simple constant beta

model fails to fully explain the transmission of the 2007-09 financial crisis to equity markets globally.



     B. Contagion

     B.1. Estimation Results

Was there contagion in global equity markets during the 2007-09 financial crisis? If so, what type of

contagion – did contagion primarily emanate from the global financial sector, from the US or from the

domestic market? To address these questions, Table VI reports estimation results of model (1)-(4), but

still restricting the coefficients on Zi,t to be zero:



                                                         18
                                   Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,t ' Ft   i , 0 CRt  ei ,t          (11)

                                   i ,t   i ,0   i ,0 CRt                                          (12)

        Compared to Table II, the R2 increases by 4% and all statistics improve, suggesting that the

imposition of constant betas across the two periods was a mis-specification. Still the model remains

rejected at the 1% level. The crisis-specific exposures suffice for the model to eliminate within-country

residual correlation and the model fails to reject at the 5% level for that period. The average residual

correlation is also negligible and the diagnostic test is now 336 instead of 482.

                                                      Table VI

        We report the average  i ,0 ,  i ,0 , and i ,0 coefficients, revealing several interesting patterns.

First, the η coefficients are, at least on average, small and insignificant. If there is contagion, it must be

captured by changing exposures to the factors. Second, the interdependence coefficients have decreased

slightly, already suggesting that “dummying out” the crisis period overall leads to decreased co-

movement between the portfolios before the crisis. Third, there is statistically strong evidence for the

presence of contagion from all three sources: from the U.S. market, from the global financial sector, as

well as from the domestic market. Finally, and most strikingly, contagion during the 2007-09 crisis

seems to have been primarily domestic in nature. The domestic contagion estimate of 0.249 is much

larger than the analogous estimates for US contagion of 0.133 and global contagion of 0.056. It

constitutes an economically large 50% increase of domestic factor betas.



   B.2. Heterogeneity

        The evidence on the average contagion and interdependence parameters of Table VI potentially

masks a considerable degree of heterogeneity across equity portfolios. Figure 3 documents that such

heterogeneity is indeed substantial. Despite positive contagion on average, there are also a number of

portfolios that managed to some extent to decouple from global, U.S. or domestic equity market

movements. Given the parameter estimates reported before, it is no surprise that the positive mean is

visually most apparent for domestic contagion.




                                                           19
                                                 Figure 3,

                                                Table VII

        To provide further insights into this heterogeneity, Table VII provides the parameter estimates

of Equations (11)-(12) averaged at the regional (Panel A) and sectoral (Panel B) levels. Panel A

confirms that domestic contagion dominates US or global contagion, as the estimates for the former are

positive, significant and sizeable for all regions. Only in Latin America is US contagion slightly larger

than domestic contagion. Domestic contagion is most important in Emerging Europe and the Middle

East/Africa, but Emerging Europe shows significant global and US contagion parameters as well.

Moreover, the η parameter – measuring equity movements during the crisis which are not accounted for

by the three factors – is only negative in a statistically significant fashion for Emerging Europe.

        As to the sector analysis in Panel B, there are only three sectors that have significant contagion

coefficients for the global factor, namely the energy, financial and technology portfolios. The non-

cyclical consumer goods sector shows a negative coefficient, suggesting some form of decoupling

during the crisis, but the economic effect is certainly not large. Most sectors show positive contagion

from the US market, with the strongest effects mostly in the production/manufacturing sectors

(industrial, energy, basic materials and utilities). Technology shows a negative coefficient, but this

sector was ex-ante heavily exposed to the US factor, and thus partially decoupled during the crisis.

There is significantly positive and mostly sizeable domestic contagion for portfolios in 9 out of the 10

sectors (the technology sector is the exception), broadly confirming that domestic contagion is not

simply driven by the large response of a few portfolios in a few sectors. Finally, the decline in financial

sector equities cannot be fully accounted for by the three factors in the model, i.e. η is negative and

large at -0.217. Taken together with the regional results, we conclude that the bulk of the contagion

effects can be captured by increases in factor exposures with respect to the three factors.

                                                Table VIII

        A final perspective on the nature of contagion we have uncovered is in Table VIII, which

reports the cross-sectional correlations between the various contagion and interdependence coefficients

across the 415 portfolios. The interdependence coefficients are substantially positively correlated,

suggesting a positive association between domestic and international systematic risk. There is also


                                                    20
significant but mostly more moderate positive correlation across different types of contagion – those

portfolios experiencing more domestic contagion were also more exposed to global and US sources of

risk during the crisis.

        Most striking is the mostly substantial negative correlation between the interdependence and

contagion coefficients, indicating that portfolios that were less exposed to the three factors before the

crisis experienced the strongest contagion during the crisis. This is true both for international and

domestic exposure. Together with the average evidence on strong domestic and weak US or global

financial sector contagion, this evidence seems inconsistent with the “globalization hypothesis.” Highly

globalized portfolios were not particularly hard hit during the crisis and often experienced declines

lower than anticipated from their pre-crisis exposures. Instead, the fate of equity portfolios during the

crisis became substantially more linked to that of other domestic portfolios.



      B.3. Diagnostics

        Going back to Table IV, the contagion model matches quite well the severity of the equity

market collapse during the 2007-09 crisis. First, the third set of columns of Table IV shows much less

systematic downward bias than the interdependence model, almost perfectly matching the equity

market collapse for a number of countries. Second, the contagion model also fits the cross-country

differences in severity across countries; in fact, the Spearman rank correlation is 0.91 for the contagion

model, substantially higher than the 0.68 rank correlation recorded for the interdependence model.



                                           Figure 4 , Table IX

        The goodness of fit of the contagion model is illustrated graphically in Figure 4. Unlike the

interdependence model (Figure 1), the predicted overall crisis returns from the contagion model are

very similar to the actual overall returns, both at the portfolio level and at the country level. A

regression of actual on predicted returns from the contagion model at the portfolio level yields:

                          Ri  1.910  0.971 Rˆ i   i , adj. R 2  0.843
                               (2.322)    (0.033)




                                                    21
        The slope coefficient is close to unity, and the R-squared is 84%, confirming the good fit. The

joint hypothesis that the intercept is zero and the slope coefficient unity is not rejected.

        Table IX reports two final diagnostics. Panel A shows the average increase in correlation with

the factor returns during the crisis period in the actual data, and compares it to that produced by the

interdependence model and the contagion model, respectively. To implement these computations, we

computed fitted returns from the interdependence model and from the contagion model, and then

calculate correlations for each country-sector portfolio with the returns of a benchmark portfolio (the

US market, the global market, and the domestic market – reflecting the three factors in the model), for

the pre-crisis and the crisis period separately. These correlations essentially reflect the product of the

portfolio’s beta with respect to a volatility ratio (factor over portfolio) and thus increases in correlations

are produced by increases in this volatility ratio or increases in the betas. We find that correlations with

the US and global factors increase by about 0.2, whereas correlations with the domestic factor increase

by about 0.1.     The interdependence model does reasonably well fitting the average increase in

correlations with the US and global factors (because volatility ratios increase), but does not generate

any increase in correlation with the domestic factor. The contagion model produces realistic increases

with respect to all three factors although it still under-predicts the average increase in the correlation

with the domestic factor.

        Implicitly, these results show that the interdependence model may explain a non-trivial part of

the predictable variation in returns during the crisis. This is confirmed more directly by the variance

ratio analysis in Panel B of Table IX. For each factor k (US factor, global factor and domestic factor)

we calculate the variance ratio for the fitted returns in the contagion model as:


                                                cov[ Rˆi ,t ,  k Fi ,kt ]
                                          VR 
                                              k

                                                   var[Rˆ ]        i ,t




for the interdependence parameters and


                                                    cov[ Rˆi ,t ,  k Fi ,kt ]
                                          VRk 
                                                       var[Rˆ ]    i ,t




                                                        22
for the contagion parameters. 12 By definition, these variance ratios will add to 1 (except for the fact that

expected returns also explain a minuscule part of return variation). Panel B of Table IX presents the

averages of the variance ratios across portfolios, for each of the factors, during the crisis period. Two

points stand out. First, the interdependence model explains 75% of the movements in returns, and the

shift in exposures accommodated in the contagion model, 25%. Residual contagion, as captured by the

η-coefficients, explains a negligible part of return variation and is not reported. In other words, once

we control for the non-linearities in factor returns, a linear model explains a relatively large portion of

return variation in the crisis even when factor exposures are kept constant. Second, the main type of

contagion that matters is domestic contagion. This again underscores our overall finding that global

contagion and US contagion were less important during the crisis, but that domestic contagion was

economically important.


     B. 4. Robustness and other crises

           As a check of the robustness of the definition of the three factors Ft, we have also estimated an

alternative factor model with the world market return as the global factor, the US financial sector as the

US factor and the domestic market return as domestic factor. Such a model delivers qualitatively similar

results.

                                                    Table X

           Table X reports a robustness test for the definition of the financial crisis, where the crisis starts

only with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008 (rather than in early August 2007 as

in the benchmark). As shown in the second set of columns, this makes no meaningful difference to the

findings. In fact, the domestic contagion parameter becomes somewhat larger, while there is little

change in the coefficients for US and global contagion. We do observe now a significantly negative η

coefficient.

           An intriguing question is whether the 2007-09 crisis differs with regard to the transmission

mechanism and contagion from other past crises. Since our sample starts only in 1995, and going back

further would substantially reduce the sample size (in particular with regard to emerging economies),

the two equity market collapses we focus on are the 1998 LTCM crisis and the strong decline of equity



                                                       23
markets between 2000 and 2002 (the TMT bust). Table X shows the estimates for these two events,

based on an estimation of the contagion model, but excluding the 2007-09 financial crisis from the

sample. The findings indicate that there was little if any contagion during those two episodes. For the

LTCM crisis, the global and US contagion parameters are significant and negative, suggesting a slight

de-coupling of equity markets with the US market or the global financial sector during those episodes.

There appears to be significant residual contagion, the η-coefficient indicates a statistically significant

18 basis point underperformance during that crisis, not related to any of the factors. For the TMT bust,

not a single contagion coefficient is significant at even the 5% level. This essentially means that an

interdependence model would have correctly described the incidence and transmission of the crisis.

Importantly, there is no evidence for domestic contagion during either of these early equity market

crises. Hence the importance and even dominance of domestic contagion appears to be a truly defining

feature of the 2007-09 crisis.



C. Channels of contagion and interdependence

The analysis so far has revealed substantial heterogeneity in the contagion and interdependence

coefficients across individual country-sector equity portfolios. What explains this heterogeneity? Is it

related to the external exposure of portfolios (the “globalization hypothesis”) to country-specific factors

and risks (the “wake-up call hypothesis”), or to other common factors? We now turn to formally

examining the channels of contagion and interdependence.

                                                Table XI

        Table XI reports estimates of the full contagion model (1) – (4) with each instrument Zi,t

included individually in the model. This table provides a general idea of potentially important

relationships. Of course, many of these instruments, such as banking and external exposures, are highly

temporally and cross-sectionally correlated, so it will be important to conduct a multivariate analysis to

determine the instruments that really matter.

        The banking channel results show that in normal times factor exposures are increasing in

international banking links and credit growth. Portfolios with large interest rate exposure are less

exposed to the international factors and more exposed to the domestic factor, perhaps because they


                                                    24
comprise bank-dependent smaller firms. In terms of contagion, large banking exposures to the US and

to the rest of the world, as well as high credit growth and financial constraints of domestic firms all

raised the intensity of domestic contagion during the crisis. Moreover, higher banking sector exposure

generally lowers contagion from the U.S. factor. This increased relative importance of the domestic

factor as a function of banking exposure during the crisis appears inconsistent with the globalization

hypothesis, but it does not mean banking exposure did not transmit to local markets. It is conceivable

that in countries with more international banking exposure, bank financing became particularly

difficult, increasing comovements of stocks within the country. There are potential correlations here

with other fundamentals and global exposure that must be taken into account and we do so shortly.

        We find that government policies to protect the domestic banking sector, such as through debt

and deposit guarantees and through capital injections into domestic banks, have reduced contagion

during the crisis, and foremost domestic contagion. Thus, government policies have helped de-link the

domestic economy, to some extent, from problems in the domestic banking system.

        Larger external exposure via trade and financial linkages increases the interdependence

coefficients, in particular interdependence with the US and global factors. For instance, trade

integration during non-crisis times has, not surprisingly, strong effects on the exposures of the

portfolios with respect to global and US factors, confirming results in the literature (see e.g. Baele,

2005). During the crisis, the dependence of the factor loadings on external exposure (through trade

integration, capital flows and financial integration) decreased substantially. For example, the overall

effect of trade integration on the US, global and domestic factor betas remains positive, as the sum of

the (positive) interdependence and (negative) contagion coefficients remains positive, but it is

statistically insignificant. In other words, the important message from these estimates is that the

globalization hypothesis is strongly rejected by the data as the behavior of portfolios decoupled from

their pre-crisis external dependence. The effect is exacerbated by the temporary collapse in trade and

capital flows observed during the crisis, which decreased the instrument values as well. Exchange rate

exposure decreases betas in normal times, and even more so during the crisis. While the decoupling

during the crisis is consistent with our early results, the negative beta dependence on exchange rate

exposure in normal times is somewhat puzzling.


                                                  25
        The information asymmetry proxies yield weak results. It is intuitive that “distance” increases

domestic factor betas, but not that it increases the dependence on the US and global financial sector

factors in normal times. The US and global financial sector betas depend significantly and positively

on newspaper imports in normal times, as expected. There are, however, no real significant contagion

effects, with the exception that countries further away from the US overall performed worse (negative η

coefficient). Differences in opinion are not related to contagion of either the global, US or domestic

factors. Of course this does not mean that such differences in opinion may not be relevant, but they may

just be hard to capture, in particular in a model such as ours, with data covering a very large and

heterogeneous cross-section of countries.


        For the fundamental variables, the beta dependence is mostly positive (and negative for

unemployment) in normal times. This indicates that well-performing countries tend to be more

integrated with global capital markets but also show higher comovements within the country. During

the crisis, we find evidence in favor of the wake-up call hypothesis as many domestic macroeconomic

fundamentals are significant drivers of contagion. A higher current account deficit and lower foreign

exchange reserves very significantly increase the exposure to the domestic factor, whereas poor

sovereign ratings and low political stability substantially increase the exposure to the US factor. Equally

importantly, the budget position of a country mattered for contagion during the 2007-09 crisis, with a

weaker budget balance raising both US and domestic contagion. For each variable, at least one of the

contagion parameters is highly statistically significant. Increases in the VIX and Ted spread decrease

comovements in normal times. This is potentially consistent with evidence in Bekaert et al (2011)

finding more “segmentation” in international portfolios in times of heightened risk aversion. It is

surprising that the domestic exposures also decrease at such times, which could indicate that the extent

of idiosyncratic risk increases. The contagion parameters are all significant as well and of very similar

magnitude than the interdependent coefficients, suggesting the dependence on the VIX and Ted spread

was minimal during the crisis. It is quite likely that this result reflects an econometric problem given

the highly unusual time series behavior of the two series, being highly co-linear with the crisis dummy

itself. Both the VIX and the Ted spread show little variation and are at eventually low levels up and till



                                                    26
the crisis at which time they increase rapidly and show more substantial variation. This makes them

look like a stochastic version of the crisis dummy. We do not feel there is a substantive economic result

here, and exclude these time series from our subsequent analysis. The significantly η coefficients do

make economic sense, indicating that at times of high VIX and TED spread levels, markets generally

under-performed.


                                                 Tables XII – XIII

          Of course, many of the instruments are highly collinear, such that it is impossible to understand

from Table XI which of them are ultimately important. Table XII reports the results of the model

selection procedure described earlier. Table XIII gauges the economic significance of the various

instruments by reporting the change in the interdependence and contagion coefficients that would result

when comparing a portfolio with the determinant at its 75th percentile to a portfolio with the

determinant at its 25th percentile (i.e. varying the determinant by the interquartile range over the cross-

section and time dimensions). For dummy variables (such as the banking policy variables), we report

the difference that results when the variable changes from 0 to 1.

          Table XII shows that simultaneous inclusion of instruments renders the coefficient estimates for

many instruments statistically insignificant, with only 11 of 25 instruments surviving the selection

procedure. None of the asymmetric information proxies survive. Perhaps surprisingly, most of the

proxies for the banking and external exposure channels disappear as well. We find that the coefficients

are in line with banking or external links increasing US factor exposures in normal times and

decoupling from the US factor during the crisis. Again, we confirm that there is no evidence for the

globalization hypothesis. Table XIII shows that these effects are mostly economically small, with the

exception that financial integration explains a substantial part of the US factor contagion during the

crisis.

          By contrast, the results of Table XII further strengthen the conclusion that it has been in

particular banking policies and the strength of domestic fundamentals that explain contagion during the

2007-09 financial crisis. Not fewer than 5 out of the 6 macro-fundamental variables survive the model

selection procedure. In fact, for several proxies in these categories, the size of the coefficients increases



                                                     27
substantially in the encompassing approach relative to the univariate approach. The economic

importance of these channels for explaining contagion in the crisis is substantial. For instance, recall

that the (unconditional) average estimate for domestic contagion in Table VI was 0.249. Looking at the

interquartile ranges (during the crisis) in Tables XII and XIII indicates that e.g. the introduction of debt

guarantees, a good government budget position, or strong political stability would each by itself have

eliminated about half of the domestic contagion effect during the crisis. Comparing a “basket case

country” with its fundamentals all at the 25% of the distribution to a country with strong fundamentals

at the 75% of the distribution, the US factor exposure would be 0.31 larger, the global financial sector

exposure 0.23 larger, and the domestic factor exposure 0.33 larger. This again underlines that the wake

up hypothesis was the main driver of contagion in the recent crisis.




III. Conclusions

The 2007-09 financial crisis has been truly remarkable in its severity and global reach. This paper seeks

to understand the global transmission channels of the crisis in equity markets, studying the cross-

sectional heterogeneity of the crisis incidence across 55 equity markets and 10 sectors. A first key result

is that from the perspective of a factor model with global and domestic factors, we find evidence of

contagion. The comovements of our portfolios cannot be fully explained with the factor model without

allowing for shifts in factor exposures. Yet, the model explains 75% of total return variation. Second,

despite its origination in the US, we find weak evidence of contagion from US markets to equity

markets globally during the crisis. Instead, there was contagion from domestic equity markets to

individual domestic equity portfolios. Third, the financial crisis did not spread indiscriminately across

countries and sectors. The exposure to external factors, such as via banking, trade or financial linkages,

played no meaningful role for the global equity market transmission of the 2007-09 financial crisis.

However, portfolios in countries with weak economic fundamentals, poor sovereign ratings, and high

fiscal and current account deficits experienced more contagion, both from US and domestic markets,

and were overall more severely affected by the global financial crisis. This provides strong support for

the validity of the “wake-up call” hypothesis as a transmission device of the 2007-09 financial crisis.



                                                    28
Moreover, the presence of policies to protect domestic banks during the crisis, in the form of debt and

deposit guarantees, was instrumental in shielding domestic equity portfolios to some extent from the

2007-09 financial crisis.

        The irony of this perhaps most global crisis ever is that a market’s external exposure played

such a small role in determining its equity market performance. Instead, investors focused primarily on

country-specific characteristics and punished markets with poor macroeconomic fundamentals, policies

and institutions. Our findings support the recent efforts by policymakers and international organizations

to better understand macroprudential risks and perhaps institute a closer surveillance of such risks both

at a country level and at a global level.




                                                   29
                                             References

Adler, M. and B. Dumas, 1984, Exposure to Currency Risk, Definition and Measurement, Financial
    Management, 13 (2), 41-50.
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19(3),
    418-437.
Albuquerque, R., G. H. Bauer and M. Schneider, 2009, Global private information in international
    equity markets, Journal of Financial Economics, 94(1), 18-46.
Allen, F. and D. Gale, 2000, Financial contagion, Journal of Political Economy, 108(1), 1-33.
Almeida, H., M. Campello and M. Weisbach, 2004, The cash flow sensitivity of cash, Journal of
    Finance, Vol. LIX, No. 4, August 2004, 1777-1804.
Almeida, H., M. Campello, B. Laranjeira and S. Weisbenner, 2009, Corporate debt maturity and the
    real effects of the 2007 credit crisis, NBER working paper, No. 14990.
Ammer, J., C. Vega and J. Wongswan, 2008, Do fundamentals explain the international impact of U.S.
    interest rates? Evidence at the firm level, International Finance Discussion Papers, 952, Board of
    Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Baele, L., 2005, Volatility spillover effects in European equity markets, Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis, 40(2), 373-401.
Baele, L. and K. Inghelbrecht, 2009, Time-varying integration and international diversification
    strategies, Journal of Empirical Finance, 16(3), 368-387.
Baker, M., J. Wurgler and Y. Yuan, 2009, Global, local, and contagious investor sentiment, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 37.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer and J. Wurgler, 2005, Comovement, Journal of Financial Economics, 75(2),
    283-317.
Bekaert, G., and C.R. Harvey, 1995, Time-varying world market integration, Journal of Finance, 50
    (2), 403-444.
Bekaert, G. and C.R. Harvey, 1997, Emerging equity market volatility, Journal of Financial
    Economics, 43, 29-77.
Bekaert G., C.R. Harvey and A. Ng., 2005, Market integration and contagion, Journal of Business,
    78(1), 39-70.
Bekaert G., C.R. Harvey, C. Lundblad and S. Siegel, 2011, What segments equity markets?, Review of
    Financial Studies, 24, 3841-3890.
Bekaert, G., R. Hodrick and X. Zhang, 2009, International stock return comovements, Journal of
    Finance, 64(6), 2591-2626.
Bodnar, G.M., B. Dumas and R.D. Marston, 2003, Cross-border valuation, The international cost of
    equity capital, NBER working paper, No. 10115.
Brennan, M. and H. Cao, 1997, International Portfolio Investment Flows, Journal of Finance, 52(5),
    1851-1880.
Broner, F. A., R. G. Gelos, C. M. Reinhart, 2006, When in peril, retrench: Testing the portfolio channel
    of contagion, Journal of International Economics, 69(1), 203-230.
Boyer, BH., T. Kumagai, and K. Yuan, 2006, How do crises spread? Evidence from accessible and
    inaccessible stock indices, Journal of Finance, 61(2), 957-1003.
Brooks, R. and M. Del Negro, 2006, Firm-Level Evidence on International Stock Market Comovement,
    Review of Finance, 10, 69-98.
Brunnermeier, M. & L.H. Pedersen, 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of Financial
    Studies, 22(6), 2201-2238.
Calomiris, C., I. Love and M. S. Martinez Peria, 2012, Stock returns’ sensitivities to crisis shocks:
    Evidence from developed and emerging markets, Journal of International Money and Finance,
    (29)7, 743–765.
Caramazza, F. L. Ricci and R. Salgano 2004, International financial contagion in currency crises,
    Journal of International Money and Finance, 23, 51–70.


                                                  30
Carrieri, F., V. Errunza and K. Hogan, 2007, Characterizing world market integration through time,
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 42(4), 915-940.
Daude, C., and M. Fratzscher, 2008, The pecking order of cross-border investment, Journal of
    International Economics 74(1), 94-119, January 2008.
Diebold, F. and K. Yilmaz, 2010, Better to give than to receive, predictive directional measurement of
    volatility spillovers, International Journal of Forecasting, (28)1, 57-66.
Dominguez, K. and L. Tesar, 2001, A re-examination of exchange rate exposure, American Economic
    Review (Papers and Proceedings), 91(2), 396-399.
Dominguez, K. and L. Tesar, 2006, Exchange rate exposure, Journal of International Economics, 68,
    188-218.
Dumas, B., K.Lewis and E. Osambela, 2011, Differences of opinion and international equity markets,
    NBER Working Paper No. 16726.
Dumas, B. and B. Solnik, 1995, The world price of foreign exchange risk, Journal of Finance, 50, 445–
    479.
Dungey, M., R. Fry, B. Gonzalez-Hermosillo and V.L. Martin, 2004, Empirical modeling of contagion,
    a review of methodologies, Quantitative Finance, 5(1), 9-24.
Eichengreen, B., A. Mody, M. Nedeljkovic, and L. Sarno, 2009, How the subprime crisis went global,
    evidence from bank credit default swap spreads, NBER Working Paper, No. 14904.
Engle, R., T. Ito and W.L. Lin, 1990, Meteor showers or heat waves? Heteroskedastic intra-daily
    volatility in the foreign exchange market, Econometrica, 58(3), 525-542.
Ferson, W., and C. Harvey, 1991, The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums, Journal of Political
    Economy, 99, 385-415.
Forbes, K, 2004, The Asian flue and Russian virus, the international transmission of crisis in firm-level
    data, Journal of International Economics, 63, 59-92.
Forbes, K. and R. Rigobon, 2002, No contagion, only interdependence, measuring stock market
    comovements, Journal of Finance, 57(5), 2223-2261.
Frankel, J. A. and G. Saravelos, 2010, Are Leading Indicators of Financial Crises Useful for Assessing
    Country Vulnerability? Evidence from the 2008-09 Global Crisis, NBER Working Papers, No.
    16047.
Fratzscher, M., 2009, What explains global exchange rate movements during the financial crisis?
    Journal of International Money and Finance, 28(8), 1390-1407.
Fratzscher, M., 2012, Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,
    forthcoming Journal of International Economics 88(2), November 2012.
Goldstein, M., 1998, The Asian financial crisis causes, cures, and systematic implications, Institute for
    International Economics, June 1998, Washington D.C.
Goldstein, M., G.L. Kaminsky, and C.M. Reinhart, 2000, Assessing financial vulnerability, Developing
    an early warning system for emerging markets, Washington D.C., Institute for International
    Economies.
Hau, H and S. Lai, 2011, The role of equity funds in the financial crisis propagation, Swiss Finance
    Institute Research Paper, No. 11-35.
Hendry, D.F. and H.M. Krolzig, 2005, The properties of automatic "GETS" modelling, Economic
    Journal, 115(502), C32-C61, 03.
Kaminsky, G.L., R. Lyons and S. Schmukler, 2004, Managers, Investors, and Crises: Investment
    Strategies of Mutual Funds, Journal of International Economics 64(1), 113-134.
Kaminsky, G.L. and C.M. Reinhart, 2000, On crises, contagion, and confusion, Journal of International
    Economics, 51(1), 145-168.
Karolyi, A., 2003, Does international finance contagion really exist? International Finance, 6, 179-199.
King, M.A. and S. Wadhwani, 1990. Transmission of volatility between stock markets, Review of
    Financial Studies, 3, 5-33.
King, M.R. 2009. Time to buy or just buying time? The market reaction to bank rescue packages BIS
    working paper No 288.


                                                   31
Kodres, L.E. and M. Pritsker, 2002, A rational expectations model of financial contagion, Journal of
    Finance, 57(2),769-799.
Kyle, A.S. and W. Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance, 56(4), 1401-1440.
Masson, R., 1999, Multiple equilibria, contagion, and the emerging market crises, Proceedings, Federal
    Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Sept. 1999.
Masulis, R., Y. Hamao and V. Ng, 1990, Correlations in price changes and volatility across
    international stock markets, Review of Financial Studies, 3(2), 281-308.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2010, Financial globalization, financial crisis and contagion,
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(1), 24-39.
Newey, W.K. and K.D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
    Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55(3), 703-08.
Portes, R. and H. Rey, 2005, The determinants of cross-border equity flows, Journal of International
    Economics, 65(2), 269-296.
Pukthuanthong, K. and R. Roll, 2009, Global market integration: An alternative measure and its
    application, Journal of Financial Economics, 94(2), 214-232.
Rose, A. and M. Spiegel, 2010, Cross-country causes and consequences of the 2008 crisis, international
    linkages and American exposure, Pacific Economic Review, 15(3), 340-363.
Rose, A. and M. Spiegel, 2011, Cross-country causes and consequences of the crisis, an update,
    European Economic Review, 55(3), 309-324.
Stulz, R. and A. Beltratti, 2009, Why did some banks perform better during the credit crisis? A cross-
    country study of the impact of governance and regulation, Fisher College of Business Working
    Paper, 2009-12, Ohio State University.
Tong, H. and S.-J. Wei, 2010, The misfortune of non-financial firms in a financial crisis, disentangling
    finance and demand shocks, in Wealth, Financial Intermediation and the Real Economy, National
    Bureau of Economic Research.
Tong, H. and S.-J. Wei, 2011, The composition matters, capital inflows and liquidity crunch during a
    global economic crisis, Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 2023-2052.
Van Rijckeghem, C. and B. Weder, 2001, Sources of contagion, is it finance or trade? Journal of
    International Economics, 54(2), 293-308.
Whited, T. and G. Wu, 2006, Financial constraints risk, Review of Financial Studies, 19(2), 531-559.




                                                  32
                                                       A. All Portfolios



                  40
                  20
                  0
           actual returns
           -40     -20
                  -60
                  -80




                               -80   -60     -40           -20           0          20        40
                                                                 fitted returns


                                                           B. Countries
                     0




                                                                                                         Tun
                                                                                                          Mal
                     -20




                                                                                                                Can
                                                                                                   Isr
                                                                                               Lux
                                                                                            Swi Jap
                                                                                           Aus                  Qat
              actual returns




                                                                                 Aut
                                                                                Mex                     HK
                                                                                  Tai Bel           Chl
                                                                                                      UAE
                                                                                Ger
                     -40




                                                                                Col NetIno Sin
                                                                                             Den SpaIni
                                                                          Chn                                    Arg
                                                                                        UK
                                                                                Fra
                                                                                                Tha
                                                                               SwePor Fin
                                                                             Bra
                                                                         Kor                         Egy
                                                                            Ita
                     -60




                                                       Hun NZ                        Nor
                                                                               Lit Ire
                                       Tur             Est                Lat Cro
                                                                         Rus
                                                                 Ice
                                                     Pol
                                                                 Slo
                                                                   Bul
                                                                                   Rom
                                                                                  Ukr
                     -80




                                               Ser

                               -80           -60                       -40                 -20                   0
                                                                 fitted returns


Figure 1: Goodness of fit – Interdependence model. The figures show the total actual equity market
returns over the entire crisis period (August 2007 – March 2009) against the fitted total returns from the
interdependence model (10), by portfolio (Panel A) and by country (Panel B). Country returns in Panel B are
unweighted averages of portfolios within countries. The dashed line shows the 45 degree line.




                                                                  33
                                                       A. All Portfolios



                     40
                     20
                     0
             actual returns
             -40     -20
                     -60
                     -80




                               -80   -60         -40             -20          0              20              40
                                                               fitted returns


                                                        B. Countries
                     20
                     0




                                                                                                 Tun
                                                                                                           Mal
                         -20




                                                                                            Can
             actual returns




                                                                                              Isr
                                                                        Lux
                                                          Swi             Jap
                                                                        Aus                Qat
                                                                     AutMex
                                                                        HKChlTai
                                                                Bel                              UAE
                                                      Ger
              -40




                                                     Net          Den Sin
                                                                 Spa      ColIno     Ini
                                                         UK           Arg                                              Chn
                                                   Fra                         Tha
                                                           Bra Fin
                                                          Swe     Por
                                                                   Kor
                                                     Ita                     Egy
                     -60




                                                               Hun
                                                              Nor
                                                              Ire     NZ                         Lit
                                                   Tur           Est         Cro
                                                                            Rus Ice Lat
                                                              Pol
                                                                               Slo
                                                                               Bul
                                                                            Ukr    Rom
                     -80




                                                                     Ser

                               -80         -60           -40                -20                        0          20
                                                               fitted returns


Figure 2: Goodness of fit – Interdependence model – World CAPM (no domestic factor). The figure
is based on the two-factor model without the domestic factor (i.e. only the global and US factors). It shows the
cumulated actual equity market returns over the entire crisis period (August 2007 – March 2009) against the fitted
cumulated returns from the interdependence model, by portfolio (Panel A) and by country (Panel B). Country
returns in Panel B are unweighted averages of portfolios within countries. The dashed line shows the 45 degree
line.




                                                                34
                                                A. Contagion from US market




                             80
                             60
                        Frequency
                          40 20
                             0




                                        -1           -.5        0        .5         1


                                        B. Contagion from the global financial sector
                              80
                              60
                         Frequency
                            4020
                              0




                                        -1         -.5     0        .5        1         1.5


                                              C. Contagion from domestic market
                               100
                               80  60
                            Frequency
                          40   20
                               0




                                         -1        -.5     0        .5        1         1.5




Figure 3: Distribution of Contagion Coefficients. The figures show the distribution of the contagion
coefficients  from the estimation of (11)-(12) across all 415 equity portfolios from the factor model.




                                                               35
                                                                  A. All Portfolios


                   40
                   20     0
           actual returns
          -40     -20
                   -60
                   -80




                                     -80          -60          -40            -20        0            20             40
                                                                          fitted returns


                                                                     B. Countries
                      20
                      0




                                                                                                           Tun
                                                                                                Mal
                         -20




                                                                                               Can
             actual returns




                                                                                                                      Isr
                                                                                         Lux
                                                                                 SwiAus Qat  Jap
                                                                           Aut     HK Mex       Tai
                                                                         Bel   Chl             UAE
                                                                           Ger
              -40




                                                                       NetSpaCol SinIniIno
                                                                  Den Arg                      Chn
                                                                      UK
                                                                    Fra
                                                                    Tha
                                                               FinSwe Bra
                                                                   Por
                                                                    Kor
                                                            Ita                   Egy
                      -60




                                                     NZN
                                                       Ire
                                                      Lit Hun
                                                         or
                                                    CroLat
                                                    Est  Tur
                                                 Ice Pol        Rus
                                             Slo
                                                Bul
                                           Rom
                                           Ukr
                      -80




                               Ser

                               -80                   -60                -40             -20                      0          20
                                                                         fitted returns


Figure 4: Goodness of fit –Contagion model. The figures show the cumulated actual equity market returns
over the entire crisis period (August 2007 – March 2009) against the fitted cumulated returns from the contagion
model (11) and (12), by portfolio (Panel A) and by country (Panel B). Country returns in Panel B are unweighted
averages of portfolios within countries. The dashed line shows the 45 degree line.




                                                                            36
                                                                           Table I: Factor Exposure Instruments
                         The summary statistics shown in the table are calculated across the 415 portfolios for the entire sample period.
Variables                       Units                    Frequency   Definition                                                                     Unit of observation Source                                   mean      s.d.    min.     max.


Banking exposure
Banking exposures to the US     % of GDP                 Annual      Foreign claims (assets incl. deposits, loans, debt securities) of domestic     Country            BIS Consolidated statistics                1.71     1.11    0.01     11.81
                                                                     banks vis-à-vis US banks, scaled by GDP

Banking exposures to the rest   % of GDP                 Annual      Foreign claims (assets incl. deposits, loans, debt securities) of domestic     Country            BIS Consolidated statistics               16.36    11.68    0.12     90.49
of the world                                                         banks vis-à-vis rest-of-the-world banks, scaled by GDP

Credit growth                   in %                     Constant    Annual growth rate of credit to private sector (av. 2003-07)                   Country            IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     15.41    15.82    -55.70   98.80
Interest rate exposure          % of GDP                 Constant    Estimated exposure coefficient, see Appendix B                                 Country - Sector   IMF, Bloomberg, authors' estimates         3.99    126.88   -833.5   577.24

Size                            log USD values           Quarterly   Total assets                                                                   Country - Sector   Bloomberg                                  9.42     3.11    0.68     18.10
Financial constraints           index from 0-100         Quarterly   Estimate based on Whited and Wu (2006), see Appendix B                         Country - Sector   Bloomberg, authors' estimates             60.83    43.22    0.09     99.57
Banking policy
Debt guarantees                 0-1 dummy                Weekly      Dummy=1 after announcement of policy measure                                   Country            BIS, CGFS database, Bloomberg              0.32     0.47      0        1
Deposit guarantees              0-1 dummy                Weekly      Dummy=1 after announcement of policy measure                                   Country            BIS, CGFS database, Bloomberg              0.44     0.50      0        1
Capital injections              0-1 dummy                Weekly      Dummy=1 after announcement of policy measure                                   Country            BIS, CGFS database, Bloomberg              0.26     0.44      0        1

External exposure / segmentation
Capital flows                 % of GDP                   Monthly     Net sales of long-term US securities by domestic residents and of foreign      Country            US Treasury International Capital (TIC)   -1.19     9.87    -24.42   64.41
                                                                     securities to US residents, scaled by country GDP; a positive number                              data
                                                                     means a net inflow of capital into country X from the US


Financial integration           % of GDP                 Annual      Stock of portfolio assets & liabilities with the US, scaled by GDP             Country            IMF, CPIS data                            36.75    67.61    0.07     778.01

Financial depth                 % of GDP                 Quarterly   Equity market capitalization, scaled by GDP                                    Country            Bloomberg                                  71.86   90.59      4.60   593.90
Trade integration               % of GDP                 Annual      Sum of exports and imports with the US, scaled by GDP                          Country            IMF, Haver, Bloomberg                     108.39   76.43     28.17   455.40
Exchange rate exposure          % of GDP                 Constant    Estimated exposure coefficient, see Appendix B                                 Country - Sector   IMF, Bloomberg, authors' estimates         -8.42   93.56    -690.8   808.82

Difference in opinion           correlation between -1               Correlation of (a) bilateral capital flows from the US to destination country Country             US Treasury International Capital (TIC)    0.20     0.17    -0.17     0.76
                                and +1                               (as defined above) and (b) destination country's local equity returns before                      data, Bloomberg
                                                                     the crisis (in 2006)
Information asymmetries
Distance                        in km, logs              Constant    Log distance between country X 's capital city and the US                      Country            A. Rose website, Daude-Fratzscher          8.56     0.39    6.98      9.15
                                                                                                                                                                       (2008)
Telephone traffic               in 1000                  Constant    Volume of telephone calls traffic with the US (av. 2003-7)                     Country            ITU Directions of Trade                    555     1178      0.00    7068
Newspaper imports               in USD million           Constant    Net imports of newspapers and periodicals from US (av. 2003-07)                Country            UN Comtrade database, Exports of item     13.15    4.08     -2.16    20.15
                                                                                                                                                                       8922 SITC Rev.2
Domestic macroeconomic fundamentals
Political stability/institutions index from 0-50         Constant    Political risk index; higher number = less risk / better institutions (av. 2003- Country          International Country Risk Guide          12.89     4.39      1       28
                                                                     07)                                                                                               (ICRG)
Sovereign rating                continuous variable, 6- Weekly       Rating of sovereign debt, linear transformation (from highest rating             Country          Bloomberg                                 16.29     4.75      6       22
                                22                                   AAA=22 decreasing)
FX reserves                     % of GDP                Annual       Foreign exchange reserves, scaled by GDP                                         Country          IMF WEO                                   18.35     4.69     4.80    100.70
Current account                 % of GDP                Annual       Current account balance, scaled by GDP                                           Country          IMF WEO                                   0.68      7.59    -17.11   27.98
Unemployment rate               in %                     Annual      Unemployment rate                                                              Country            IMF WEO                                    7.81     6.18     2.10    38.71
Government budget               % of GDP                 Annual      Fiscal balance, scaled by GDP                                                  Country            IMF WEO                                   -0.18     4.24    -7.80    19.61
Global/common risk and liquidity
Risk - VIX                   in basis points             Weekly      VIX index based on S&P500 call options                                         Global             Bloomberg                                 22.00     8.92    9.89      80.86
Credit risk - TED spread     in basis points             Weekly      US TED spread                                                                  Global             Bloomberg                                 52.18    44.97    0.11     463.08




                                                                                                                       37
                                         Table II: Interdependence
The table shows the estimates of the following model:
                                                   Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,0 ' Ft  ei ,t                   (10)
The table reports the unweighted average degree of interdependence across all portfolios in the sample, where G
denotes the global factor, U the US factor, and D the domestic factor. The test statistics are described in section I.B.
The critical value of a χ2 (1)-distributed variable is 3.84 (6.63) at the 5% (1%) level. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                                  Benchmark
                                                                   coef       st.err.


                           Interdependence
                                   U                            0.437 *** 0.015
                                   G                            0.406 *** 0.012
                                   D                            0.540 *** 0.013


                           Test statistics
                           Full Sample
                            ECTEST                              53.35
                            EXCOR                                0.11
                            ECDIAG                             618.31
                           Crisis Period
                            ECTEST                              12.09
                            EXCOR                                0.11
                            ECDIAG                             481.56
                           Observations                              322216
                           R-squared                                  0.274




                                                           38
                    Table III: Interdependence across Regions and Sectors
The table shows the estimates of the following model:
                                                 Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,0 ' Ft  ei ,t                 (10)
The table provides estimates of the average degrees of interdependence across portfolios within a particular region
(Panel A), and those within a particular sector (Panel B), where G denotes the global factor, U the US factor, and D
the domestic factor. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                  A. By region

                                                            Interdependence
                        Region                      U                  G                 D
                        Latin America              0.594    ***       0.360    ***        0.604   ***
                        Western Europe             0.633    ***       0.539    ***        0.512   ***
                        Emerging Europe            0.273    ***       0.347    ***        0.473   ***
                        Middle East/Africa         0.084    ***       0.163    ***        0.467   ***
                        Developed Asia             0.494    ***       0.531    ***        0.655   ***
                        Emerging Asia              0.267    ***       0.350    ***        0.679   ***



                                                  B. By sector


                                                            Interdependence
                        Sector                      U                 G                  D
                        Basic Materials           0.460    ***        0.446    ***       0.586    ***
                        Communications            0.448    ***        0.303    ***       0.562    ***
                        Consumer, Cyclical        0.416    ***        0.410    ***       0.568    ***
                        Consumer, Non-cycl        0.360    ***        0.358    ***       0.492    ***
                        Diversified               0.522    ***        0.471    ***       0.762    ***
                        Energy                    0.393    ***        0.402    ***       0.499    ***
                        Financial                 0.492    ***        0.583    ***       0.476    ***
                        Industrial                0.440    ***        0.421    ***       0.561    ***
                        Technology                0.679    ***        0.249    ***       0.575    ***
                        Utilities                 0.291    ***        0.336    ***       0.448    ***




                                                         39
                                   Table IV: Predicting Crisis Returns
The table shows total actual equity market returns over the entire crisis period (Aug. 2007 – March 2009) against the
fitted total returns from the interdependence model (see Table II for explanations) and against the fitted total returns
from the contagion model (see Table VI). Portfolio returns in the table are averaged within countries. Countries are
ranked according to actual equity market returns during the crisis. The model parameters shown are from the
contagion model.


                                    Interdepend.       Contagion                         Model parameters
                                        Model           Model                            (contagion model)

                 Actual returns     Fitted returns    Fitted returns
Country          returns    rank   returns   rank    returns    rank    U       G      D        U       G       D      
Serbia              -85.6    1       -59.8   2         -83.9     1      0.080    0.148   0.632    0.210   -0.097    0.005   -0.777
Ukraine             -77.9    2       -33.2   25        -73.8     3      0.180    0.217   0.227    0.074    0.178    0.612   -0.496
Romania             -77.3    3       -32.2   28        -74.4     2      0.231    0.287   0.302    0.119    0.032    0.410   -0.878
Bulgaria            -74.2    4       -44.9   10        -68.8     5      0.029    0.245   0.191    0.271    0.195    0.541   -0.075
Slovenia            -71.9    5       -47.0   7         -71.8     4      0.111    0.315   0.726    0.067   -0.051    0.102   -0.364
Poland              -69.5    6       -56.4   3         -62.5    10      0.598    0.555   0.587    0.215    0.159    0.258   -0.150
Iceland             -67.7    7       -46.5   8         -67.0     6      0.174    0.325   0.472    0.014   -0.126    0.014   -0.396
Russia              -66.2    8       -40.6   11        -53.3    19      0.304    0.186   0.291    0.239    0.328    0.355   -0.076
Latvia              -64.3    9       -39.5   13        -60.7    13      0.098    0.233   0.344    0.099    0.044    0.125   -0.508
Estonia             -64.3   10       -54.1   5         -63.9     7      0.254    0.383   0.380    0.200    0.027    0.424   -0.199
Turkey              -64.1   11       -70.5   1         -58.8    15      0.721    0.662   0.824    0.039    0.372    0.017    0.083
Croatia             -63.9   12       -35.2   18        -63.8     8      0.100    0.280   0.322    0.245   -0.003    0.502   -0.034
Lithuania           -61.4   13       -33.9   23        -61.2    11      0.129    0.266   0.407   -0.001    0.019    0.310   -0.356
Ireland             -61.3   14       -31.4   29        -60.6    14      0.439    0.559   0.357    0.122   -0.169    0.035   -0.659
New Zealand         -60.2   15       -50.6   6         -62.6     9      0.362    0.326   0.641    0.168    0.124    0.164   -0.345
Norway              -60.1   16       -30.6   31        -60.9    12      0.487    0.454   0.620    0.330    0.021    0.127   -0.311
Hungary             -59.6   17       -54.4   4         -58.3    16      0.584    0.560   0.638    0.106   -0.062    0.147    0.056
Italy               -55.5   18       -37.2   15        -56.4    17      0.760    0.485   0.626    0.086    0.083    0.156   -0.137
Egypt               -54.2   19       -15.1   47        -33.1    39      0.085    0.164   0.372   -0.168    0.258    0.484    0.257
Korea               -52.9   20       -40.0   12        -48.1    26      0.610    0.510   0.610    0.199    0.042    0.213   -0.007
Portugal            -52.1   21       -32.6   27        -49.8    22      0.388    0.459   0.610    0.132    0.013    0.182   -0.092
Czech Republic      -52.1   22       -45.7   9         -49.4    23      0.291    0.557   0.534    0.129    0.017    0.136   -0.094
Brazil              -51.2   23       -36.6   16        -45.1    30      0.948    0.463   0.686    0.297    0.032    0.092   -0.153
Sweden              -51.0   24       -35.6   17        -51.1    20      0.781    0.669   0.385    0.245   -0.122    0.437   -0.052
Finland             -49.7   25       -27.5   35        -54.0    18      0.593    0.534   0.380    0.260   -0.143    0.439   -0.161
Thailand            -48.8   26       -20.3   42        -48.4    25      0.306    0.420   0.530    0.129    0.148    0.241   -0.400
France              -47.1   27       -34.2   22        -48.7    24      0.872    0.736   0.532    0.139   -0.152    0.331   -0.003
UK                  -43.9   28       -28.1   34        -46.5    27      0.669    0.595   0.543    0.125   -0.022    0.342    0.010
Argentina           -42.2   29        -2.2   54        -46.0    28      0.394    0.245   0.436    0.133    0.189    0.208   -0.273
China               -42.2   30       -38.5   14        -21.4    48     -0.012    0.087   0.701   -0.279    0.002    0.125    0.050
Spain               -41.6   31       -18.7   43        -42.1    32      0.646    0.568   0.542    0.152    0.017    0.301   -0.060
Netherlands         -40.5   32       -30.6   30        -45.5    29      0.959    0.515   0.427   -0.030    0.047    0.231    0.124
Denmark             -40.5   33       -22.9   39        -50.9    21      0.511    0.673   0.307    0.181   -0.044    0.380   -0.119
India               -40.4   34       -15.5   46        -31.3    41      0.442    0.295   0.630   -0.031    0.192    0.262   -0.097
Colombia            -39.8   35       -34.8   19        -38.3    35      0.358    0.241   0.618    0.190    0.129    0.227    0.439
Singapore           -39.7   36       -23.5   38        -34.1    37      0.560    0.602   0.570    0.058   -0.153    0.313    0.008
Indonesia           -39.2   37       -28.7   33        -28.9    44      0.429    0.704   0.716   -0.082   -0.066    0.176    0.038
Germany             -37.8   38       -34.7   20        -40.3    34      1.006    0.733   0.601   -0.143   -0.177    0.115    0.042
Belgium             -35.7   39       -29.6   32        -42.6    31      0.495    0.581   0.512    0.149   -0.028   -0.033    0.000
UAE                 -35.6   40       -14.4   48        -21.3    49      0.002   -0.027   0.143   -0.177    0.214    0.422    0.441
Chile               -35.1   41       -15.6   45        -35.1    36      0.501    0.282   0.680    0.130    0.035    0.256   -0.130
Taiwan              -34.9   42       -32.9   26        -19.8    50      0.334    0.388   0.686    0.143   -0.053    0.116    0.120
Hong Kong           -33.7   43       -12.3   49        -32.0    40      0.565    0.530   0.546    0.172    0.131    0.382   -0.233
Mexico              -33.2   44       -34.6   21        -29.4    43      0.785    0.361   0.591    0.058   -0.014    0.105    0.054
Austria             -33.1   45       -33.9   24        -40.4    33      0.478    0.596   0.638    0.119    0.001    0.077    0.244
Qatar               -32.1   46        -3.1   53        -23.5    46     -0.029    0.044   0.352   -0.030    0.012    0.362    0.145
Australia           -31.8   47       -25.1   36        -31.1    42      0.455    0.462   0.624    0.124   -0.058   -0.005    0.069
Switzerland         -30.8   48       -24.1   37        -34.1    38      0.775    0.682   0.532    0.016   -0.059   -0.087    0.146
Japan               -30.6   49       -20.7   41        -23.4    47      0.296    0.567   0.771    0.058   -0.004    0.036    0.041
Luxembourg          -27.4   50       -21.0   40        -27.4    45      0.276    0.509   0.152    0.199    0.002    0.324    0.268
Israel              -21.7   51       -17.1   44          5.3    54      0.363    0.217   0.584    0.052   -0.067    0.282    0.106
Canada              -19.1   52        -3.6   52        -19.6    51      0.221    0.127   0.206   -0.030    0.013    0.145   -0.140
Malta               -13.8   53        -9.0   51        -17.2    52      0.002   -0.141   0.324   -0.035    0.029    0.179    0.056
Tunisia              -9.7   54       -10.5   50         -6.4    53      0.069    0.314   0.554    0.006   -0.051    0.083   -0.111




                                                           40
           Table V: Predicting Crisis Returns – Distribution at the Sector Level

The table shows at the sector level the total actual equity market returns over the entire crisis period (August 2007 –
March 2009) against the fitted total returns from the interdependence model (see Table II for explanations) and
against the fitted total returns from the contagion model (see Table VI). Portfolio returns in the table are unweighted
averages within sectors. Sectors are ranked according to actual equity market returns during the crisis. The model
parameters are from the contagion model specification (see Table VI).


                                    Interdepend.       Contagion                       Model parameters
                                        Model            Model                         (contagion model)

                  Actual returns    Fitted returns    Fitted returns
Sector            returns   rank   returns   rank    returns    rank    U     G      D        U       G      D      
Financial           -55.0   1        -30.6   1         -41.6    1      0.441   0.495   0.439    0.106    0.203   0.194   -0.217
Basic Materials     -53.5   2        -29.1   3         -39.6    2      0.379   0.391   0.494    0.324    0.009   0.469   -0.103
Diversified         -52.4   3        -29.3   2         -35.9    3      0.477   0.433   0.709    0.157    0.037   0.163   -0.045
Consumer, Cycli     -45.7    4       -28.4    4        -34.2     4     0.386   0.379   0.519    0.096    0.039   0.232   -0.068
Industrial          -44.6    5       -24.4    8        -32.5     5     0.383   0.379   0.498    0.196    0.033   0.335   -0.148
Technology          -43.0    6       -27.8    5        -29.2     6     0.704   0.217   0.574   -0.157    0.192   0.083   -0.105
Energy              -40.6    7       -27.0    7        -26.8     7     0.320   0.336   0.433    0.286    0.103   0.401    0.172
Communications      -39.7    8       -27.7    6        -25.6     8     0.455   0.305   0.539   -0.037    0.015   0.096    0.036
Utilities           -35.0    9       -18.6   10        -18.8    10     0.236   0.286   0.394    0.179    0.068   0.310    0.172
Consumer, Non-      -34.0   10       -22.4    9        -22.2     9     0.341   0.366   0.462    0.091   -0.075   0.137    0.000




                                                           41
                             Table VI: Contagion and Interdependence
The table shows the estimates of the following model:
                                          Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,t ' Ft   i , 0 CRt  ei ,t            (11)
                                                      i ,t   i ,0   i ,0 CRt                                (12)
The table reports estimates of the unweighted average degree of contagion and interdependence across all portfolios
in the sample. The critical value of a χ2 (1)-distributed variable is 3.84 (6.63) at the 5% (1%) level. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                     Benchmark
                                                                      coef       st.err.

                          Contagion
                                   U                               0.133 *** 0.015
                                   G                               0.056 *** 0.013
                                   D                               0.249 *** 0.016
                          Interdependence
                                  U                                0.397 *** 0.016
                                  G                                0.368 *** 0.012
                                  D                                0.491 *** 0.014
                          Other
                                                                  -0.038        0.025


                          Test statistics
                          Full Sample
                           ECTEST                                   27.78
                           EXCOR                                     0.06
                           ECDIAG                                  459.73
                          Crisis Period
                           ECTEST                                    0.00
                           EXCOR                                     0.01
                           ECDIAG                                  335.94
                          Observations                                  322216
                          R-squared                                      0.310




                                                              42
         Table VII: Contagion and Interdependence across Regions and Sectors
The table shows the estimates of the following model:
                                           Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,t ' Ft   i , 0 CRt  ei ,t                               (11)
                                                         i ,t   i ,0   i ,0 CRt                                                 (12)
The table reports the average contagion and interdependence coefficients across portfolios within a particular region
(Panel A), and those within a particular sector (Panel B). ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                        A. By region


                                       Contagion                                       Interdependence                           Other
Region                     U               G                D              U               G                 D                 
Latin America            0.223   ***     0.090    ***       0.212    ***     0.537     ***    0.305      ***     0.575   ***      0.091
Western Europe           0.173   ***     0.015              0.241    ***     0.588     ***    0.509      ***     0.468   ***     -0.049
Emerging Europe          0.167   ***     0.109    ***       0.318    ***     0.209     ***    0.281      ***     0.405   ***     -0.160 ***
Middle East/Africa      -0.038           0.082    *         0.337    ***     0.092     ***    0.127      ***     0.406   ***      0.171 *
Developed Asia           0.156   ***     0.016              0.194    ***     0.455     ***    0.507      ***     0.617   ***      0.005
Emerging Asia           -0.004           0.089    **        0.197    ***     0.261     ***    0.324      ***     0.639   ***     -0.036




                                                         B. By sector

                                       Contagion                                   Interdependence                             Other
Sector                     U              G                               U                G                D               
Basic Materials         0.324    ***     0.009            0.469    ***     0.379   ***       0.391   ***       0.494   ***     -0.103
Communications         -0.037            0.015            0.096    ***     0.455   ***       0.305   ***       0.539   ***      0.036
Consumer, Cyclical      0.096    ***     0.039            0.232    ***     0.386   ***       0.379   ***       0.519   ***     -0.068
Consumer, Non-cycl      0.091    ***    -0.075   ***      0.137    ***     0.341   ***       0.366   ***       0.462   ***      0.000
Diversified             0.157    *       0.037            0.163    ***     0.477   ***       0.433   ***       0.709   ***     -0.045
Energy                  0.286    ***     0.103   **       0.401    ***     0.320   ***       0.336   ***       0.433   ***      0.172    ***
Financial               0.106    ***     0.203   ***      0.194    ***     0.441   ***       0.495   ***       0.439   ***     -0.217    ***
Industrial              0.196    ***     0.033            0.335    ***     0.383   ***       0.379   ***       0.498   ***     -0.148    *
Technology             -0.157    **      0.192   ***      0.083            0.704   ***       0.217   ***       0.574   ***     -0.105
Utilities               0.179    ***     0.068            0.310    ***     0.236   ***       0.286   ***       0.394   ***      0.172    ***




                                                                43
        Table VIII: Correlation Patterns across Contagion and Interdependence
                                      Parameters
The table shows the correlation coefficients across the estimates of the various contagion and interdependence
coefficients for the 415 portfolios in the sample, based on the following model:
                                         Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,t ' Ft   i , 0 CRt  ei ,t                    (11)
                                                     i ,t   i ,0   i ,0 CRt                                        (12)
P-values are shown below the correlation coefficients in smaller figures and italics. Standard errors are based on the
cross-sectional distribution of the coefficients.


                                    Contagion                                      Interdependence              Other
                            U          G             D               U             G               D       
        Contagion
                U           1


              G           0.121         1
                           0.013
              D           0.495       0.219            1
                           0.000       0.000
        Interdependence
               U
                      2.000          -0.153         -0.306              1
                           0.000       0.002         0.000
                G        -0.027      -0.273         -0.213           0.620             1
                           0.590       0.000         0.000            0.000
              D          -0.276      -0.077         -0.515           0.389           0.319              1
                           0.000       0.119         0.000            0.000           0.000
        Other
                          0.099       0.092         0.084            0.012          -0.018            -0.038     1
                           0.045       0.061         0.063            0.813           0.713            0.438




                                                             44
                                         Table IX: Diagnostic Tests
Panel A of the table shows the average increase in correlation with the factor returns during the crisis period in the
actual data, and compares it to that produced by the interdependence model and the contagion model, respectively.
This is achieved by computing fitted returns from the interdependence model and from the contagion model, and
then calculating correlations for each country-sector portfolio with the returns of a benchmark portfolio (the US
market, the global market, and the domestic market), for the pre-crisis and the crisis period separately.

Panel B shows a variance ratio analysis. For each factor k (US factor, global factor and domestic factor) we calculate
the variance ratio for the fitted returns in the contagion model as
                                                      cov[ Rˆi ,t ,  k Fi ,kt ]
                                             VRk 
                                                         var[Rˆ ]    i ,t
for the interdependence parameters and
                                                      cov[Rˆi ,t ,  k Fi ,kt ]
                                             VRk 
                                                         var[Rˆ ]    i ,t
for the contagion parameters. Panel B of Table IX presents the averages of the variance ratios across portfolios, for
each of the factors, during the crisis period.

                    A. INCREASE IN CORRELATIONS DURING THE CRISIS


                                                                      US           Global   Domestic

                    Actual                                          0.171          0.197      0.082
                    Predicted (interdependence model)               0.159          0.228     -0.001
                    Predicted (contagion model)                     0.170          0.220      0.049


                    B. VARIANCE RATIO ANALYSIS


                                                                      US           Global   Domestic

                                                                   7.787          2.565     14.692
                                                                   23.85          12.80      38.25




                                                          45
                    Table X: Contagion and Interdependence – Robustness
The table reports the estimates of the following model:
                                           Ri ,t  Et 1 [ Ri ,t ]   i ,t ' Ft   i , 0 CRt  ei ,t                    (11)
                                                       i ,t   i ,0   i ,0 CRt                                        (12)
The table reports the average contagion and interdependence coefficients across all portfolios in the sample. Results
for “Post-Lehman” are based on a definition of the crisis (CR t= 1) for the period after the Lehman Brothers
collapse, i.e. 15 September 2008 – 15 March 2009. “LTCM” crisis takes the period after the collapse of LTCM,
from October through December 1998 as the crisis definition, while “TMT bust” defines the decline of global equity
markets from October 2000 through December 2002. For these last two estimations, the current crisis observations
are excluded. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                          Benchmark                     Post-Lehman                       LTCM crisis             TMT bust
                           coef    st.err.               coef        st.err.               coef      st.err.     coef     st.err.

Contagion
        U               0.133 *** 0.015               0.142 *** 0.018                  -0.026 *** 0.002       -0.004 *   0.002
        G               0.056 *** 0.013               0.047 *** 0.014                  -0.089 *** 0.019        0.010     0.013
        D               0.249 *** 0.016               0.283 *** 0.021                  -0.030     0.030       -0.013     0.026

Interdependence
        U               0.397 *** 0.016               0.405 *** 0.016                   0.403 *** 0.016       0.398 *** 0.016
        G               0.368 *** 0.012               0.375 *** 0.012                   0.381 *** 0.012       0.365 *** 0.012
        D               0.491 *** 0.014               0.517 *** 0.014                   0.495 *** 0.014       0.498 *** 0.014
Other
                       -0.038     0.025              -0.148 *** 0.048                  -0.179 *** 0.042       -0.032 *   0.018


Observations                322216                          322216                           185223                 185223
R-squared                    0.310                           0.348                            0.310                  0.310




                                                                46
                   Table XI: Channels of Contagion – Individual instruments

The table shows the estimates for the contagion parameters  and the interdependence parameters  from the full
model (1)-(4), with each variable included individually in each model estimation. ***, **, and *, indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are not shown for brevity..


                                                   Contagion                                 Interdependence
                                    US          Global   Domestic         Other         US         Global  Domestic

Banking exposure
Bank exposure to US             -0.0579***    0.0172       0.0877***    0.0162       0.0191***    0.0104       0.0071
Bank exposure to ROW            -0.0094***    0.0011       0.0068***    0.0046       0.0038***    0.0029***    0.0029***
Credit growth                   -0.0058***    -0.0005      0.0017*      0.0227***    0.0029***    0.0019***    0.0015***
Interest rate exposure (firm)   -0.0339**     0.0174       -0.0600*     0.0438       -0.0808***   -0.0668***   0.1838***
Size                            -0.0654       -0.1246      0.1183       0.2791       0.0392       0.0077       -0.0156
Financial constraint            -0.0138**     -0.0212**    0.0141**     -0.0068      0.0024       0.0001       -0.0006
Banking policy
Debt guarantees                 0.0147        -0.0144      -0.0401* -0.0820
Deposit guarantees              0.0141        -0.2029*     -0.0389* -0.0831
Capital injections              0.0239        0.0127       -0.1296*** -0.0663
External exposure / segmentation:
Portfolio investment flows     -0.0010***     0.0001       -0.0009***   0.0007**     0.0008***    0.0005*      0.0007***
Financial integration          -0.0193***     -0.0086*     -0.0040**    0.0225***    0.0108***    0.0111***    0.0013***
Financial depth                -0.0013***     -0.0020***   -0.0012***   0.0002       0.0012***    0.0018***    0.0011***
Trade integration              -0.0038***     -0.0028      -0.0014*     -0.0061*     0.0047***    0.0047***    0.0032***
Exchange rate exposure (firm) -0.0604***      -0.0478**    -0.1389***   0.1390***    -0.0899***   -0.0764***   -0.0871***
Information asymmetries
Distance                        0.0135        -0.0295      -0.0000      -0.1501***   0.0243***    0.0506***    0.1132***
Telephone traffic               -0.0000       0.0001**     -0.0000      -0.0002*     0.0000***    -0.0000**    0.0001***
Newspaper imports               0.0041        0.0153       0.0000       -0.0139      0.0658***    0.0352***    0.0079
Difference in opinion           -0.0003       0.0001       -0.0003      -0.0023*     0.0003       0.0003       0.0006**
Domestic macroeconomic fundamentals:
Political stability/institutions 0.0078***    -0.0023      0.0022       0.0667***    0.0047***    0.0030**     0.0108***
Sovereign rating                 0.0327***    -0.0097      -0.0078      0.1132***    0.0130***    0.0125**     0.0385***
FX reserves                      -0.0055***   -0.0131***   -0.0130***   0.0021       0.0064***    0.0105***    0.0152***
Current account position         0.0036       0.0054       -0.0056***   0.0001       -0.0030**    0.0018       0.0000
Unemployment rate                0.0264*      -0.0287      0.0560***    0.0982*      -0.0182***   -0.0166***   -0.0125***
Government budget                -0.0200***   -0.0049      -0.0154***   0.0218       0.0122***    0.0056**     0.0047***
Global/common risk and liquidity:
Risk - VIX                    0.0084***       0.0074***    0.0087***    -0.0050* -0.0084*** -0.0074*** -0.0069***
Credit risk - TED spread      0.0010***       0.0017***    0.0010***    -0.0017*** -0.0008*** -0.0016*** -0.0010***




                                                           47
                     Table XII: Channels of Contagion – Encompassing model

The table shows the estimates for the contagion parameters  and the interdependence parameters  from the full
model (1)-(4), following the encompassing approach of variable selection described in the text. The approach starts
from the full model including all 25 instruments simultaneously, and then step-by-step reducing the model by
excluding the variable with the least statistically significant contagion parameter. This procedure is continued until
only those instrument variables are left in the model that have significant contagion parameters for a particular
factor, at the 10% significance level.
***, **, and *, indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are not
shown for brevity reasons.




                                                 Contagion                                Interdependence


                                US          Global   Domestic       Other            US         Global       Domestic


Banking exposure
Bank exposure to ROW           -0.003 ***                           -0.004 **       0.006 ***

Banking policy
Deposit guarantees                                   -0.118 **
Debt guarantees                           -0.145 *** -0.163 ***      0.216 *
Capital injections             -0.138 ***            -0.071 **

External exposure / segmentation:
Portfolio investment flows    -0.008 ***                0.007 ***                   0.027 ***                  0.007
Financial integration         -0.005 ***                                            0.003 ***

Domestic macroeconomic fundamentals:
Political stability/institutions            -0.015 *** -0.029 *** -0.055 ***                     0.001        -0.013 ***
Sovereign rating                            -0.017 *                                             0.011 ***
Current account position         -0.006 ***                        0.041 ***        0.014 **
Unemployment rate                 0.044 ***             0.018 **                   -0.014 ***                  0.002
Government budget                -0.002 **             -0.017 ***                   0.028 ***                   0.04 ***




                                                         48
Table XIII: Channels of Contagion – Economic significance in encompassing model

Based on the encompassing approach of the previous table, this table shows the interquartile ranges, i.e. the
difference in the respective interdependence and contagion coefficients for a portfolio with the determinant at its 75th
percentile compared with a portfolio at its 25th percentile. The columns labeled “interquartile in crisis” measure this
range based on the distribution across portfolios only during the 2007-09 financial crisis, while the columns labeled
“interquartile all” use the distribution over the entire (crisis and pre-crisis) sample period.


                                                         Contagion                                     Interdependence

                                   Interquartile in crisis                Interquartile all             Interquartile all

                                US      Global Dom. Other         US      Global Dom. Other           US      Global Dom.

 Banking exposure
 Bank exposure to ROW           0.00                    -0.02     0.00                        -0.02   0.00

 Banking policy
 Deposit guarantees                             -0.12                              -0.12
 Debt guarantees                        -0.14   -0.16   0.22               -0.14   -0.16      0.22
 Capital injections            -0.14            -0.07             -0.14            -0.07

 External exposure / segmentation:
 Portfolio investment flows     -0.03           0.02              -0.02             0.02              0.06            0.02
 Financial integration          -0.17                             -0.08                               0.06

 Domestic macroeconomic fundamentals:
 Political stability/institutions       -0.06   -0.11   -0.22              -0.07   -0.14      -0.28            0.01   -0.06
 Sovereign rating                       -0.17                              -0.17                               0.11
 Current account position         -0.12                 0.43      -0.06                       0.37     0.15
 Unemployment rate                 0.17         0.07              0.21             0.09               -0.07           0.01
 Government budget                -0.02         -0.15             -0.02            -0.11               0.18           0.26




                                                             49
Appendices



Appendix A. Equity market data and a few stylized facts

This Appendix outlines the equity market data coverage and definitions and presents a few stylized facts.

As the objective is to test for the global transmission of the financial crisis, we use a broad set of 55

countries (other than the United States, which are not included in our analysis of cross-country

transmission patterns) that includes not only most of the advanced economies, but also emerging market

economies (EMEs) and a few developing countries. Table A.1 lists the country coverage by region. The

objective of analyzing the global transmission of the crisis implies that we would like to include stocks of

firms that are traded frequently and for which also data on firm-specific characteristics are available.

Hence we include only those firms in the analysis that are part of the main equity market index in the

respective country, as shown in Table A.1. This comprises about 2,000 firms in total, for which we have

extracted daily equity returns in US dollars. 13

                                                   Table A.1

        From the firm-level data we construct country-sector portfolios, using the Bloomberg

classification that allocates firms into 10 broad industry sectors. This yields in total 415 country-industry

or country-sector portfolios. Not every of the 55 countries in the sample has therefore 10 country-sector

portfolios as not all countries have firms in each of the 10 sectors in their main stock market index. These

portfolios are value-weighted, so that each firm is weighted according to its relative market capitalization

in its respective portfolio. While the number of firms included in a portfolio can be small (and indeed, for

some of the smallest countries with a low number of listed firms, a single firm may represent an entire

sector), our procedure restricts attention to relatively large firms in each country for which we have

reliable data.

        As to the current financial crisis, we define the starting point of the crisis as August 7, 2007,

when equity markets initially fell and central banks started intervening for the first time to provide

liquidity to financial markets. The last observation in our dataset is 15 March 2009. An alternative crisis

definition is to start with the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, which we



                                                      50
investigate as a robustness check. Using our data to compute world market returns, the crisis meant an

equity market decline of about 50% from peak to trough, occurring in about 18 months (from mid-2007 to

early 2009).




Appendix B. Portfolio-specific determinants

In addition to the country-specific and common/global instruments outlined in section I, we control for a

number of portfolio-specific determinants of crisis vulnerability. Specifically, we are interested in

capturing two potential channels: financial constraints and external exposures at the firm level. There is a

large literature in monetary economics and in finance on how to measure the degree of financial

constraints faced by firms (see e.g. Almeida et al. 2004; Whited and Wu 2006). We follow the approach

used by Whited and Wu (2006) and define financial constraints of a particular firm in the following way:

        FC i ,t  0.09 CFi ,t  0.062 DDi ,t  0.02 DAi ,t  0.044 ln Ai ,t  0.10 IGi ,t  0.035FGi ,t (A.1)

        with CF as the cash flow-net asset ratio, DD a firm’s dividend payments, DA the debt-net assets

ratio, A total net assets, IG industry growth rate, and FG as the firm’s growth rate in net assets. A related

exposure is a firm’s exposure to changes in the cost of financing. Similar to the estimation proposed by

Ammer, Vega and Wongswan (2008), we measure this channel as the interest rate exposure of individual

portfolios to changes in domestic three-month interest rates, ri,t, in the following way:

                                  Ri ,t   0   i ri ,t   i RtUS  ei ,t                       (A.3)

using weekly data, in order to obtain portfolio-specific interest rate exposures i. Unfortunately, short-

term interest rates at weekly frequencies are not available for all countries so that the sample size is more

limited for this interest rate exposure variable, and a few portfolios drop out from the sample.



        Turning to proxies of firm-level external exposure, the exchange rate exposure of firms has been

stressed in the literature as an important reason for why firms’ equity valuations are affected by foreign

shocks (e.g. Adler and Dumas 1984, Dominguez and Tesar 2001 and 2006). The rationale is as follows: a

firm is likely to be more strongly affected by a particular US shock and the resulting exchange rate

change if it has a high external exposure, e.g. via trade or via external financial linkages. Following the


                                                          51
methodology proposed by Dominguez and Tesar (2001), we proxy the exchange rate exposure of each

portfolio to the United States by the sensitivity of its excess equity return at time t, Ri,t, to bilateral

exchange rate changes vis-à-vis the US dollar, si,t, controlling in the estimation also for US equity

returns RtUS :

                                 Ri ,t   0   i si ,t   i RtUS  ei ,t                     (A.2)

where the exchange rate exposure for each portfolio, estimated over the whole pre-crisis sample period 1

January 1995 to 6 August 2007, is measured as i. For the estimation we use weekly data.




                                                          52
                            Table A.1: Country sample and equity indices

The 10 broad industry sectors taken from Bloomberg’s classification used to create the market-weighted country-
sector equity portfolios are: (i) basic materials, (ii) communications, (iii) consumer cyclical goods, (iv) consumer
non-cyclical goods, (v) diversified, (vi) energy, (vii) financials, (viii) industrial, (ix) technology and (x) utilities. For
the US, the stock index used is the S&P 500.


           Country         Name of stock      No. listed              Country          Name of stock        No. listed
                              index            firms                                      index              firms

                        Industrialised                                            Emerging Europe

     Australia           S&P ASX                  30             Bulgaria           SOFIX                      20
     Austria             ATX                     20              Croatia            CROBEX                     28
     Belgium             BEL20                    20             Czech Republic     PSE                        14
     Canada              S&P TSE 60               60             Estonia            OMX                        18
     Denmark             OMX20                   20              Hungary            BSE                        14
     Finland             OMX25                   25              Latvia             OMX                        35
     France              CAC 40                   40             Malta              MSE                        19
     Germany             DAX                      30             Lithuania          OMX                        32
     Iceland             OMX ICEX                11              Poland             WIG 20                     20
     Ireland             ISEQ                     60             Romania            BET                        10
     Italy               MIB 30                  30              Russia             MICEX                      30
     Japan               Topix 70                70              Serbia             Belex 15                   15
     Luxembourg          LuxX                     9              Slovenia           SBI                        15
     Netherlands         AEX                      25             Turkey             ISE National 30            30
     Norway              OBX                     24              Ukraine            PFTS                       19
     Portugal            PSI 20                   20
     Slovenia            SBI                      15                            Middle-East and Africa
     Spain               IBEX 35                 35
     Sweden              OMX 30                  30              Egypt              CASE                       30
     Switzerland         SMI                     20              Israel             Tel Aviv-25                25
     UK                  Footsie 100             100             Qatar              QE                         20
                                                                 Tunisia            SE BVMT                    32
                         Asia-Pacific                            UAE                DFM                        29

     China               Shanghai SE 50           50
     Hong Kong           Hang Seng                42                                Latin America
     India               BSE Sensex 30            30
     Indonesia           Jakarta LQ-45            45             Argentina          Merval                     22
     Korea               Kospi 50                 50             Brazil             Bovespa                    66
     New Zealand         NZX 15                   15             Chile              IPSA                       40
     Singapore           Strait Times             30             Colombia           IGBC General               28
     Taiwan              TSEC Taiwan 50           50             Mexico             Bolsa                      36
     Thailand            SET 50                   50

Source: Bloomberg.




                                                            53
Endnotes

1
     Pukthuanthong and Roll (2009) stress that decreases in idiosyncratic volatility can also induce excess

comovements.
2
    This term was coined by Goldstein (1998) in the wake of the Asian financial crisis, with the Thai currency crisis of

1997 acting as a “wake-up call” for international investors who eventually recognised that the so-called “Asian

miracle” of the time was rather an “Asian mirage”, which ultimately led to a reassessment of the creditworthiness of

Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia and Singapore.
3
    Whereas the imperfect integration of emerging markets into global capital markets is well-known (see for instance

Bekaert and Harvey (1997), or Carrieri, Errunza and Hogan (2007)), the analysis in Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang

(2009), Bodnar, Dumas and Marston (2003) and Brooks and Del Negro (2006) motivates the use of both

global/international and domestic factors from a statistical perspective, even for developed markets.
4
    We have also estimated the model in local currency excess returns with qualitatively similar results.
5
    Note that this orthogonalization is quite independent relative to the precise time period over which it is done. For

instance, orthogonalizing separately for the crisis and non-crisis periods yields very similar factors as the

orthogonalization over the entire sample period.
6
    More specifically, the orthogonalized domestic factor is estimated for each country-sector portfolio i individually

as portfolio i itself is excluded from the domestic market portfolio.
7
    Note that we do not mean to suggest that these “instruments” are ‘exogenous” in the strict sense of econometric

identification. In the asset pricing literature, as for instance discussed in Ferson and Harvey (1991), this term is

simply used for variables that are not returns and are pre-determined (in a temporal sense) and used to model time-

variation in factor exposures or prices of risk.
8
    King (2009) uses these data in an event study to investigate the effect of such policies on the pricing of bonds and

equities of domestic financial and non-financial institutions.
9
    In almost all cases such policies were still in existence at the end of our sample. We prefer to use the policy

announcement, rather than the actual implementation – which in many cases took several weeks after the

announcement – in order to capture the expectations effect of such policies on financial markets. Moreover, we

prefer to use dummies rather than measures of the magnitude of deposit and debt guarantees and capital injections,

primarily in order to obtain measures that are comparable across countries, as it is otherwise difficult to normalize

and compare magnitudes of such measures in a meaningful way.




                                                            54
10
     We also pursued another direction, namely by extracting principal components for each of the six categories of

instruments outlined above. We then use the first principal components in the model estimation which mostly

capture more than 60% of the variation of the underlying variables, in the model estimation. One crucial drawback

of the principal component analysis is that some principal components themselves are hard to interpret

economically, which means that not only the sign of the relationship but also the economic relevance of the different

channels are hard to gauge. Nevertheless, the findings are consistent with those of the encompassing model. Results

for the principal component analysis are available upon request.
11
     More specifically, the series of weekly predicted returns is used to create a fitted price index, from which in turn

the total return over the entire sample period is calculated.
12
     We also compute a variance ratio for the η-part of the model, but find this to be unimportant, hence do not report
it in Table IX.
13
     The analysis is therefore from the perspective of a US investor. Note that equity returns in US dollar terms have

been even more negative during the crisis given that almost all currencies (bar the Japanese yen, and a few pegged

currencies) depreciated against the US dollar; see Fratzscher (2009).




                                                            55
