                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LIFECYCLE IMPACTS OF THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC CRISIS ON HOUSEHOLD
      OPTIMAL CONSUMPTION, PORTFOLIO CHOICE, AND LABOR SUPPLY

                                            Jingjing Chai
                                          Raimond Maurer
                                          Olivia S. Mitchell
                                           Ralph Rogalla

                                        Working Paper 17134
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17134


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the US Social Security Administration
(SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC) as part of the Retirement Research Consortium.
Additional research support was provided by Netspar, the German Investment and Asset Management
Association (BVI), and the Pension Research Council at The Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. Helpful comments were provided by Peter Brady, Susann Rohwedder, Mark Warshawsky,
and participants at the 2011 Pension Research Council Conference. This research is part of the NBER
programs on Aging, Public Economics, and Labor Studies. Opinions and errors are solely those of
the authors and not of the institutions with whom the authors are affiliated, nor of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jingjing Chai, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ralph Rogalla. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lifecycle Impacts of the Financial and Economic Crisis on Household Optimal Consumption,
Portfolio Choice, and Labor Supply
Jingjing Chai, Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ralph Rogalla
NBER Working Paper No. 17134
June 2011
JEL No. D1,G11,G23,G35,J14,J26,J32

                                              ABSTRACT

The direct financial impact of the financial crisis has been to deal a heavy blow to investment-based
pensions; many workers lost a substantial portion of their retirement saving. The financial sector implosion
produced an economic crisis for the rest of the economy via high unemployment and reduced labor
earnings, which reduced household contributions to Social Security and some private pensions. Our
research asks which types of individuals were most affected by these dual financial and economic
shocks, and it also explores how people may react by changing their consumption, saving and investment,
work and retirement, and annuitization decisions. We do so with a realistically calibrated lifecycle
framework allowing for time-varying investment opportunities and countercyclical risky labor income
dynamics. We show that households near retirement will reduce both short- and long-term consumption,
boost work effort, and defer retirement. Younger cohorts will initially reduce their work hours, consumption,
saving, and equity exposure; later in life, they will work more, retire later, consume less, invest more
in stocks, save more, and reduce their demand for private annuities.


Jingjing Chai                                         Olivia S. Mitchell
Finance Department                                    University of Pennsylvania
Goethe University                                     Wharton School
Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23)                       3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Frankfurt am Main                                     Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
Germany                                               and NBER
chai@finance.uni-frankfurt.de                         mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Raimond Maurer                                        Ralph Rogalla
Finance Department                                    Finance Department
Goethe University                                     Goethe University
Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23)                       Grüneburgplatz 1 (Uni-PF. H 23)
Frankfurt am Main                                     Frankfurt am Main
Germany                                               Germany
rmaurer@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de                         rogalla@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
                                                                                              1

        Lifecycle Impacts of the Financial and Economic Crisis on
    Household Optimal Consumption, Portfolio Choice, and Labor Supply

       Workers are increasingly required to invest in investment-based defined contribution

accounts, and then during their golden years, draw down the pension assets in an orderly fashion.

Such accounts can help augment and partially replace public pension benefits, as aging

economies move toward a better-funded old-age system. Yet the recent financial crisis has raised

fresh concerns regarding the risks to which workers are exposed to capital market shocks in these

pension systems: for instance, in 2008, U.S. private pension fund assets declined by one-fourth

or about US$ 2.7 trillion (OECD 2009; Whitehouse 2010). Moreover, the subsequent economic

crisis generated rising unemployment and falling labor earnings, with the unfortunate effect of

reducing worker contributions to both Social Security and many private pension schemes.

Indeed, the US unemployment rate of 10 percent in 2009 was double that in 2007, with similar

high jobless rates in Europe (US BLS, 2010). These combined capital and labor market shocks

have made it much more difficult for retirement systems to deliver anticipated old-age benefits.

This paper examines how households may be affected by the dual financial and economic crisis

such as the one recently experienced.

       In particular, we explore how people might react to these shocks, by adjusting their

consumption/saving patterns, investment/annuitization paths, work hours, and retirement

patterns. Because actual responses are both short- and long-term in nature, some of these will not

be observable for several decades to come; furthermore, responses are likely to be

heterogeneous. That is, some younger workers may not react much since they have several

decades to adjust before they retire, whereas workers on the verge of retirement have little time

to adjust their saving, work, and portfolios to offset potential capital and labor market losses.

Furthermore, Baby Boomers’ reactions are likely to differ according to individuals’ financial

wealth and human capital levels. To investigate possible outcomes, we develop a lifecycle model

with optimal investment, work hours, retirement, and annuitization decisions, allowing for shifts

in the investment opportunity set and labor income dynamics.
                                                                                               2

       We build on two strands of literature in our analysis. One strand studies how financial

market downturns influence older workers’ consumption decisions and retirement behavior.

Hurd and Rohwedder (2010) as well as Shapiro (2010) point out that the recent financial and

economic crisis significantly affected near-retirement households, which seem to have reacted by

reducing consumption and working longer. Yet Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai (2010)

estimate that retirement will only be postponed by 1.5 months on average, given their

simulations of a structural retirement model. Nevertheless due to lack of data, these studies have

focused primarily on older persons near retirement and their short-run responses to the recent

crises. Thus they do not explore the long-term impact of the crisis on younger age groups, nor do

they evaluate consequent changes in asset allocation behavior. Our paper examines these points

as we seek to understand how different age groups may adapt along several dimensions, as they

react to stock market downturns and unemployment risk.

       A second relevant literature has explored household portfolio choice in a discrete time

life cycle model with risky capital market returns and uninsurable labor income risk, asking how

such uncertainty influences saving, consumption, and asset allocation (Cocco, Gomes, and

Maenhout, 2005). This literature was extended by Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2008) to

include flexible hours; subsequent work by Chai et al. (2011) also incorporated flexible

retirement and Social Security, as well as the option to annuitize one’s wealth. A key lesson from

this research is that wellbeing is greatly enhanced when labor effort is adjustable. Nevertheless,

these papers assumed that permanent labor income shocks and risky asset returns were

independently and identically distributed over time, while there is now clear empirical evidence

refuting this assumption. For instance, Guidolin and Timmerman (2008) show that expected

stock market returns and volatility vary both over time and across bull/bear states. That is, in

some periods equity returns are characterized by persistently low volatility/high expected returns,

whereas in other periods, they are characterized by persistently high volatility/low expected

returns. Instead of focusing on stock returns, Caroll and Dunn (1997) and Storesletten, Telmer,
                                                                                                 3

and Yaron (2004) estimate a regime-switching model of labor market earnings; they find that the

volatility of labor income increases in recessions and falls in expansions.

       In what follows, we combine the labor and stock market strands by modeling both time-

varying and persistent stock market/labor income processes governed by a Markov chain for the

business cycle. Here, some of the time, asset returns are characterized by persistent regimes with

an expansive capital market having low volatility/high expected return; in other periods, a

contractionary market is characterized by high volatility/low expected returns. In addition, we

model the countercyclical dynamics of risky labor income using time-varying shocks on wage

rates dynamics and unemployment probabilities driven by the same regime-switching process.

Such a setting allows us to explore the situation where a financial sector crisis may also produce

an economic crisis (with a time lag), driving high unemployment and lower earnings. In this

way, we seek to show how these simultaneous shocks alter retirement, work hours, and

consumption trajectories; asset allocation patterns; and annuity purchases of younger and elder

households. In addition, we can cleanly illustrate the long-term impact of the financial and

economic crisis on behavior well into the future. While it is too soon to actually observe how the

crisis will alter long-term behaviors, our model provides a useful set of predictions for policy

purposes.

       Our results indicate that some will be able to hedge adverse capital market developments

they face in the crisis, not only by altering their asset allocations, but also by altering their work

hours and retirement ages. In particular, we find that when hit by a financial and economic crisis,

households near-retirement must cut their consumption both in the short-term and also over the

long-term. Moreover, they will have to increase their work effort and postpone retirement. These

short-term results correspond to the recent empirical findings noted above. For young cohorts,

short-term effects differ from those in the long-run. During the first five years after the onset of

the crisis, young households will reduce work hours, savings, and equity exposure and suffer

from a drop in consumption. In the long run, however, they will work more, retire later, invest
                                                                                                                        4

more in stocks, consume less, save more, and spend less on private annuities. These predictions

illustrate the key dimensions along which economic adjustment are likely to occur, in response to

the most severe recession since the Great Depression.



The Framework

Labor and Capital Markets: We take as a starting point the presence of dual regimes in capital

and labor market dynamics driven by the business cycle. Accordingly, stock returns and labor

earnings are modeled as subject to a business cycle governed by a Markov chain process that,

following the NBER classification, has two states: expansion and contraction. The variable st

indicates whether at time t the economy is in a state of expansion (st = 0) or contraction (st = 1).

Transition probabilities between the two business cycle (BC) states are constant over time and

defined as  iBC
              , j : P(st 1  j | st  i ) , i.e.,  i, j denotes the probability that at time t+1 the economy
                                                       BC




will be in state j, given that the economy is in state i at time t. Hence,  0BC
                                                                               ,1 represents the


probability that state 0 (expansion) will be followed by state 1 (contraction). The unconditional

probability for state expansion (st = 0) is given by 1   0BC
                                                             ,0              2     BC
                                                                                        0, 0        
                                                                                                1BC
                                                                                                   ,1 and for contraction (st

         
= 1) by 1  1BC
              ,1    2     BC
                              0, 0        
                                      1BC
                                         ,1 , respectively. In what follows, we assume that investors can



observe st and know the state transition probabilities  i,BCj at time t.

        Next, we characterize what we mean by regime shifts in the labor income process,

allowing for unemployment risk and state-dependent wage rate dynamics. The worker faces a

risk of being unemployed in the period [t, t + 1], where the probability of unemployment  sU is

state-dependent and specified as:

                                                                     iU               iBC
                           : (
                                U         U
                                          [ t ,t 1]   | st  i )   U with probability BC,i

                                                                      j               i, j
                                s




The unemployment probability is lower in expansionary than in contractionary times (i.e.
                                                                                                                               5

 0U   1U ). At time t, the worker must decide what fraction of time (1-Lt) to devote to

employment. Lt stands for leisure and is measured as a percentage of available time. In each

period, if the individual is not unemployed, he receives an after-tax disposable labor income of

                                                                  
                                   YsE,t 1  (1  qt 1 )  1  t l WRs,t 1  1  Lt                               (1)

at time t + 1, where qt+1 is the age-dependent deterministic tax-deductible fraction of labor

income spent on housing and other durable goods, t l is a proportional tax rate on labor income,

and WRst ,t 1 is the state-dependent wage rate at time t+1, i.e., the income per hour of work effort.

The wage rate dynamic process consists of three components as follows:

                                            WRs ,t 1  expwt 1   E s ,t 1  U t 1 .                               (2)

Here wt 1 is a deterministic age-dependent function of wage rates that allows us to capture the

shape of various empirically-observed earnings profiles, 1 and Ut+1 is a state-independent

transitory income shock whose logarithm is i.i.d. normally distributed with mean zero and

standard deviation U . In addition, E s ,t 1  E s ,t ns ,t 1 is a permanent labor earnings component.

The logarithm of the permanent income shock n s ,t 1 is drawn from a Gaussian mixture

distribution with mean zero and standard deviation  n, s changing across the two phases of the

business cycle. Formally:

                                                                 N (0,  n,i )                   iBC
                       ln(ns ,t 1 ) : (ln(nt 1 ) | st  i) ~                 with probability BC,i

                                                                 N (0,  n, j )                  i, j
                                                                                                        .

To capture countercyclical labor income risk, we set                              ,   <      ,   , such that the volatility in an

expansion (st = 0) is lower than in a contractionary period (st = 1). 2 We also allow for

unemployment compensation payments at time t + 1 worth a specific fraction   ( 0 ;1) of labor

income, i.e., YsU,t 1    YsE,t 1 .

1
  Bosworth, Burtless and Steuerle (2000) report that middle class workers are likely to have hump-shaped
earnings profiles.
2
  Caroll and Dunn (1997) and Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) show that permanent labor income risk is
strongly countercyclical.
                                                                                                               6

        In later life, we take the US Social Security system into account and allow for a flexible

retirement age. According to Social Security rules, the worker may elect to claim Social Security

benefit in the window [62, 70] bounded by the ‘early’ retirement age (ERA) and the late

retirement age (LRA). The actual normal retirement age (NRA) is set for this paper at age 65. If

the worker claims prior to the NRA, he receives a permanently reduced benefit. Otherwise, the

Social Security benefit is increased by the delayed retirement credit. To capture this feature, we

calculate the after-tax Social Security benefits as in Chai et al. (2009):

                              K                      
                              
                                      
      Yt  (1  qt ) 1  t r   (1  L) expwt  K  E K  F , NRA ,                                 (3)
                              t 1                   

where F , NRA  exp g 1  NRA   I   NRA   exp g 2  NRA   I   NRA  . Here, we assume that

when people claim retirement benefits they also consume full leisure simultaneously (as in Chai

et al., 2011). 3 In this way, τ is the endogenous retirement age and ζ is the Social Security

                                                                           
replacement rate based on lifetime average earnings, and 1  L stands for the average fraction of

available time worked during the work life. The worker’s average lifetime earnings level is

                        K          
approximated by       (1  L) expwt 
                        t 1
                                             K EK , where K denotes when the individual attains her


normal retirement age under the Social Security rules (NRA). Retirement benefits are taxed at a

rate t r . I is an indicator function identifying whether the individual retires at/prior to the NRA, or

later. F , NRA is a factor which depends on the NRA and the endogenous retirement age  .

g 1 and g 2 are positive constants.

        Capital markets include two liquid assets, riskless bonds and risky stocks, and illiquid

deferred and immediate fixed payout life annuities. The real bond gross return Rf is state-

independent and constant over time, while there is a time-varying investment opportunity set in


3
 Coile et al. (2001) show that a vast majority of workers claim and also stop working at the same juncture. In
what follows we abstract from other Social Security rules such as the earnings test for a retiree who returns to
work before the normal retirement age, but after claiming benefits.
                                                                                                                   7

the stock market. Given a specific state st = i at time t, the risky real log-return on stocks

ln( R s ,t 1 ) over the period [t, t+1] is drawn from Gaussian mixture distribution with state-

dependent mean µs and standard deviation σs, formally:

                                                                N (i ,  i )                    BC
                 ln(Rs ,t 1 ) : (ln(R[t ,t 1] ) | st  i) ~                  with probability iBC
                                                                                                    ,i
                                                                                                        .    (4)
                                                                N (  j ,  j )                  i, j



Each period, investors can observe the state of the economy at time t, but the actual probability

distribution of returns on stock investments in each period depends on the (unknown) state of the

economy at time t + 1. The (state-dependent) correlation between shocks to permanent earnings

and stock market returns is denoted by s.

       In addition to stocks and bonds, the investor can, prior to the NRA, purchase fixed payout

deferred annuities that provide life-long payments commencing at the NRA. From that point

onward, she can purchase additional immediate life annuities. Annuity prices are calculated

based on actuarial principles. For a deferred life annuity paying yearly benefits of one from NRA

on, the premium is calculated as

                        NRA 2                             
                                                      T  NRA NRA 1 m
                                                                        
      ht  1       pua   R f  NRA1t      pua   R f m     t < NRA                   (5)
                        u t                          m 1  u  K 1 

where pua are the survival probabilities based on the insurer’s annuitant mortality table and δ is

the expense loading factor. Accordingly, the premium for an additional immediate life annuity

purchased after the NRA is given by

                                                     
                                                T 1 t  m
                                                             
                                ht  1        pua   R f m      t ≥ NRA                          (6)
                                                m 1  u  t 

To account for adverse selection, the survival probabilities pua used in pricing the annuities are

typically higher than those of the overall population.

The Consumer’s Life Cycle Problem: To explore how households might respond to these

financial/economic and individual crises, we integrate the decisions to optimally select

consumption and saving, asset allocation, work effort and retirement age, and annuitization
                                                                                                                         8

paths over the lifecycle. We posit that our individual faces an uncertain lifespan and can live

for a maximum of T years. Her preferences are characterized by a time additive CRRA utility

                            1
function u (Ct , Lt )     1 
                                  (Ct Lt )1  defined over the level of non-durable consumption Ct and


leisure Lt at time t. After retirement, work hours are equal to zero and leisure is equal to one.

The value function is given by:


                                         Vt   
                                                C   tLt
                                                         1 

                                                                        
                                                                  E t p tpV t  1   
                                                     1                                                           (7)

with terminal utility VT  C T LT 
                                             1 
                                                                                p
                                                     . The parameter pt               denotes the subjective probability of
                                       1 

surviving to time t + 1, given the consumer is alive at t. The parameter is the coefficient of

relative risk aversion, and  < 1 is the time preference. Leisure preferences are governed by the

parameter α.

        Each period, the consumer decides how to allocate her cash on hand Wt to bonds Bt,

stocks St, annuity purchases At, and consumption Ct. Her budget constraint is therefore:

                                               Wt  St  Bt  At  Ct ,                                            (8)

and next period’s wealth Wt+1 is given by

                 ( S t Rs ,t 1  Bt R f )(1  t c )  t c ( Bt  S t )  Yt 1             t  NRA
         Wt 1                                                                                                  (9)
                  ( S t Rs ,t 1  Bt R f )(1  t )  t ( Bt  S t )  Pt 1  Yt 1
                                                   c       c
                                                                                              t  NRA .

Here, Pt+1 is the sum of annuity income received from any previously purchased annuities.

Before retirement, Yt+1 represents labor income, and afterwards, it represents Social Security

benefits. The recursive evolution equation for the sum of after-tax payout claims at time t from

all previous annuities purchased can be written as:4




4
 We assume that the annuities are held in non-tax qualified accounts and interest earnings are taxed as capital
gains. Chai et al. (2011) show that this is a reasonable approximation to the exclusion ratio approach
implemented by the US tax authority, and we adopt it here for greater computational tractability (also following
Brown et al. 1999).
                                                                                                            9

                                                At  R f  1(1  t )  1
                                                                     c
                                   NRA
                              P t 1       Pt  
                                                ht           Rf

where At/ht refers to the additional annuity payment purchased in t. 5 We prevent households

from borrowing against human capital and from selling annuities. These restrictions are binding,

because otherwise households would engage in highly leveraged stock positions financed by

short positions in bonds and/or annuities in order to compensate for their over-investment in

human capital when young. Thus, in every year the optimal policy has to satisfy Ct, St, Bt, At ≥ 0.

Moreover, we posit that in order to participate in the stock market, the household has to be

willing and able to invest a minimum amount in stocks (as in Smetters and Chen, 2010). This

amount is set to 10 percent of the permanent labor income after taxes and housing expenditures.

        The individual’s optimization problem is now to maximize utility as in (7) with respect to

her asset allocation between liquid bonds and stocks, illiquid annuities, consumption, work

hours, and the retirement decision:

                                                         max
                                           Ct , Lt , S t , Bt , At , [ 62, 63,..., 70]
                                                                                           Vt
                                                                                                     (10)

Assuming that the consumer knows about the regimes governing the business cycle, there are six

state variables: cash on hand Wt, annuity payouts from previously purchased annuities Pt, the

permanent labor earnings level Et, retirement age τ, the business cycle state s, and age t. To

reduce the problem by one state variable we normalize the continuous state variables cash on

hand with the permanent labor earnings component. Next we discretize the (normalized)

continuous state variables and solve the optimization problem by backward induction.6

Model Calibration: For the base case, preference parameters are set to standard values in the life

cycle literature: the coefficient of relative risk aversion is ρ=5 and the discount factor β=0.97.



5
   Prior to the retirement period, this state variable records the amount of payouts starting from the normal
retirement age (NRA), from all previously-purchased deferred annuities. After the NRA, this state variable
denotes the sum of payouts from previously purchased immediate and deferred annuities.
6
  For computations, we use a grid of dimension 40(W) × 30(P) × 2(s) × 42(t) before and 40(W) × 30(P) × 2(s) ×
39(t) × 9() after the ERA. For each grid point we evaluate the policy and value functions using Gaussian
quadrature integration and cubic-splines interpolation.
                                                                                                           10

The leisure preference value  is set to 1.3. As shown in Chai et al. (2011), this set of preference

parameters is able to reproduce central empirical facts, including the hump-shaped pattern of

work hours, the two peaks in retirement rates, the sizeable decline in consumption at retirement,

and low annuity take-ups of older households. The one-period survival rates ptp entering the

utility function are taken from the US 1996 RP-2000 population tables for females; the lifespan

is modeled from age 20 to 100 (T=81). To estimate the business cycle transition matrix, we take

US Gross National Product (GNP) growth from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) for

1929-2006 with Datastream data for the years 2007-2008.7 A contraction (expansion) state

occurs when the GNP growth rate was less than (greater than) its sample period mean (as in

Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron 2004). In this way, we estimate the transition matrix to be of the

following form: 0.68 0.32 . 8 A process with such a transition matrix is more likely to stay in
                    0.32 0.68

the same state rather than to move to the other state, since probabilities p1,1 and p0,0 are greater

than 0.5. The deterministic component of the wage rate process follows Fehr, Jokisch, and

Kotlikoff (2006), reflecting middle-income households, and it is scaled to generate an average

gross labor income of 20,000 dollars at age 20. In what follows, we assume an available time of

100 waking hours per week and set the minimum leisure time to Lmin=1/3, in other words, the

                                                                                        
maximal labor supply is 2/3 of available time. The average labor supply 1  L used to calculate

Social Security benefits is equal to 0.4, which corresponds with an average lifetime work effort

of 40 hours per week.

        We follow Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) and set the cyclical dynamic labor

market risk  n, 0 ( n ,1 ) to 8.4 percent (15.9 percent) and the corresponding volatility of the

transitory shock  u to 32.9 percent.9 The unemployment probability in expansion (contraction)


7
  See http://www.bea.gov/national/index.htm.
8
  Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) use the same transition matrix.
9
  The volatility of the transitory shock is estimated by averaging the fixed effect and measurement error from
Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004).
                                                                                                               11

periods  0U ( 1U ) is set to five percent (10 percent). The parameter for unemployment

compensation payments is set to υ=60 percent. The Social Security benefit structure is similar to

that in effect in the United States. The benefit replacement rate ζ is set to 0.52 (as per Mitchell

and Phillips, 2006); the actuarial reduction rate for early retirement benefits is g1=0.0713, the

delayed retirement crediting rate is g2=0.077, and the normal retirement age is 65, as in

Buchinsky, Rust, and Benitez-Silva (2000) and Chai et al. (2011). Social Security benefits are

taxed at a rate of 15 percent as in Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2008). 10 Housing-related

expenditures qt are modeled as in Gomes and Michaelides (2005).

         The annual real value-weighted market index portfolio returns on the NYSE, AMEX, and

NASDAQ (from CRSP) from 1950 to 200811 are classified into two states which are identified

by the GNP growth rate. Then the regime dependent parameters specifying the normal

distribution of log gross return are given as follows: µ0=6.84 percent, σ0=11.21 percent, µ1=2.12

percent, and σ1=20.77 percent, 12,13 equivalent to a yearly expected gross real return of 1.0775

and standard deviation of 12.12 percent in the expansion period, and 1.0437 and 21.91 percent in

the contraction phase. Here, the expansion/contraction economy tends to coincide with a

low/high-volatility, high/low-mean regime in the stock market. This evidence is also be found in

Ang and Bekaert (2002), Gordon and St-Amour (2000), Guidolin and Timmermann (2008), and

Kim and Lee (2007). The correlation between stock returns and permanent and transitory

earnings shocks  for both cases is set to zero, consistent with empirical evidence provided by

Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005). The real riskless gross return for bond investments is Rf

=1.02. To price the life annuities, future benefits are discounted with the riskless return. The


10
   Future work can explore alternative tax structures in more detail; see also Smetters and Chen (2010).
11
   The US Consumer Price Index (CPI) from Datastream for the years 1950-2008 is used to get the real number.
12
   Over our sample period, the average realized equity premium was 5.73%. As this is perceived to be too high (a
result known as the equity premium puzzle), we reduce the historical mean return estimate by 1.73% and
calculate with an equity premium of 4%, which is a standard value in the literature on life-cycle line portfolio
choice.
13
   A Jarque-Bera test is applied to test the normal distribution at each observable regime. The null hypothesis of
normal distribution cannot be rejected at a 5% significance level. The critical values are computed using Monte-
Carlo simulation for small sample sizes.
                                                                                                12

                                    a
conditional survival probabilities pt are taken from the US 1996 female annuitant RP-2000

mortality table to account for potential adverse selection in the voluntary annuity market. The

expense loading factor δ is set to 2.38 percent, a number in line with industry leaders such as

Vanguard. Returns on assets are assumed to be taxed at 20 percent; labor earnings are taxed at 30

percent following Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2008).

       For the average household age 55, we estimate a wealth to income ratio of 9, which

approximately represents the median of the wealth distribution. To this end, we draw on wealth

data from Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai (2010) and income data from the SSA.

Specifically, we employed the distribution of assets by wealth deciles in 2006 for households

with at least one member born from 1948 to 1953, defining wealth as total wealth net of Social

Security and defined benefit pension wealth. To estimate median labor income for households

aged 55, we use SSA data on the median income of non-married persons aged 65-69 in the year

2006. We match labor income profiles estimated by Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) to

this income data and calculate the income at age 55 based on those profiles. Moreover, we

assume that households aged 55 have not yet purchased any annuities.



Results

       Having solved the life-cycle problem for the optimal policies (consumption, asset

allocation, work hours, saving, and retirement behavior), next we evaluate the distribution of

decision variables based on a Monte Carlo simulation of 100,000 life-cycle trajectories,

differentiating between two general economic and financial scenarios: crisis and normalcy.

Identifying the Tails of the Financial/Economic Distribution. Here we characterize a

financial/economic crisis as one where the economy is in the contraction state for four years

in a row, and in addition, in the first year the stock return is a minus 30 percent. By contrast, a

normal financial and economic environment, which we treat as the baseline scenario, is

defined as one in which no additional exogenous restrictions are imposed on the state of the
                                                                                             13

business cycle or the stock market performance. Hence, the initial state of the business cycle

is determined by the (unconditional) long-run state probabilities and the states in subsequent

periods by the conditional state transition probabilities, while stock market returns are

governed by the business cycle state-specific distributions as described above.

       In addition to this general analysis using the whole simulation sample, we are also keenly

interested in the distributional tails. We examine these by analyzing subsamples of those 100,000

life-cycles, as not all households may be affected similarly by the business cycle; some perform

exceptionally well, while others who experience unemployment and persistent wage shocks fare

far worse. Accordingly, we stipulate that an individual suffers from a ‘triple whammy’ if he

experiences a financial/economic crisis at the beginning of the analysis, is unemployed in at least

two of the first four years thereafter, and also suffers from below-first quartile cumulated stock

market returns until age 62 when he becomes eligible for Social Security benefits. By contrast,

we define a doubly fortunate individual as someone that never experiences a financial/economic

crisis, is never unemployed to age 62, and experiences above-average capital market returns to

age 62 with cumulated stock returns in the top 25 percentile.

       In what follows, we differentiate between the short- and long-term effects of the

financial/economic crisis on households’ behavior and wellbeing. While short-term effects can

be studied using already available empirical data, sample data on the crisis’ long-term effects

will obviously not be available for several decades. For this reason, model simulations are the

only way to make predictions about what future outcomes might be. Of particular interest in this

context is how different cohorts are influenced by, and react to, the economic/financial crisis.

While over the short run both younger and elder cohorts could be substantially affected by the

crisis, due to their longer remaining period of economic activity, younger people might suffer

less in the long run than do elder generations. To explore this outcome, we conduct our analyses

for households that are hit by a financial/economic crisis at ages 20 and 55. For the cohort aged

20 (55), out of the 100,000 sample paths, we identify 933 (979) that qualify for the double
                                                                                             14

fortune scenario and 1321 (1355) that comply with the triple whammy scenario.

Short-term Effects: We next turn our attention to the impacts of and the reaction to an

economic/financial crisis over the short run, which in this study we define to cover a period of a

decade. Figures 1 and 2 depict the effects for households initially age 20 or 55 on key decision

variables: expected work hours (Panel A), consumption (Panel B), saving/withdrawal (i.e., labor

income/Social Security benefits after taxes and housing expenditures minus consumption, Panel

C), and stock investment (Panel D). Here, the solid black line presents absolute values for the

normal scenario (left axis), while the bars show relative deviations from the base case results for

three alternative scenarios: crisis (light grey), double fortune (black), and triple whammy (dark

grey) on the right axis.

Figures 1 and 2 here

Short-term Effects for the Younger Cohort. In the base case scenario, the work effort of a

young individual exceeds 40-hours per week, with average work effort starting at 47 hours per

week at age 20 and then rising further to above 51 hours in the mid-20s (Figure 1, Panel A).

Long and rising work hours, combined with a wage rate increasing with age and experience,

generate high and rising labor income. This allows the individual to increase consumption

from $9,000 at age 20 to about $14,000 in the mid-20s (Figure 1, Panel B). At the same time,

periodic savings more than double from $1,600 to about $3,700 (Figure 1, Panel C). At age

20, the household will on average invest about 65 percent of liquid funds accumulated in

stocks and increase this fraction over the following six years to almost 100 percent (Figure 1,

Panel D). The young household seeks high stock fractions due to the rather bond-like nature

of labor income. Yet the minimum required investment amount for participating in the stock

market results in stock fractions falling short of 100 percent early in the life-cycle, as

sufficient funds must first be accumulated. Once a sufficient amount of liquid assets has been

saved, the investor then maximizes equity exposure. With wage rates increasing even further

and invested funds starting to generate measurable returns, the individual can afford to enjoy
                                                                                               15

more leisure by already slightly reducing work hours in his late 20s, initiating the oft-cited

hump-shape in work effort. Both consumption and periodic saving increase further to about

$17,400 and $4,100 by age 30.

       When we compare this baseline to a young household experiencing a financial and

economic crisis at age 20, work effort proves to be virtually identical as a result of two offsetting

effects. The crisis lowers wage rates resulting from higher unemployment probabilities, leaving

the individual less inclined to work and more likely to consume leisure (by the substitution

effect). Yet lower income provides less consumption opportunity which induces greater work

effort (by the income effect). As work effort does not rise beyond base case, the individual

compensates for his income drop by reducing both consumption and saving. Moreover, these

reductions persist over the next decade even if the economy eventually recovers; consumption

drops by 2 percent and periodic saving by 2-3 percent compared to the normal scenario. Not yet

having accumulated financial assets, the young individual does not suffer from the 30 percent

downturn in the stock market at the beginning of the financial and economic crisis, so his stock

holdings are hardly affected, only dropping slightly (2.5 percent) in the first two years.

       By comparison, a young worker hit by a triple whammy will substantially reduce work

effort. His hours worked per week drop by almost 10 percent in the first two years, compared to

the base case, after which they slowly rise again. The corresponding drop in income drives a

consumption decline of about 15 percent over the first four years. Periodic saving is even more

affected, dropping by more than 60 percent for a worker in his early 20s. Having so few liquid

assets, the worker cannot afford to participate in the stock market, and overall stock fractions

drop by 10-20 percent during the first five years (from a low base). After four years’ time, as the

initial crisis wanes, the individual strives to recover by increasing work effort above that in the

base case over the second half of the decade. While consumption again converges toward the

base case level, even at age 30, it remains about two percent less than in the normal scenario. At

the same time, the household seeks to replenish accumulated funds by saving between 10-20
                                                                                               16

percent more than the base line investor from the mid through late 20s. Once sufficient funds

have been built up again, the household can then afford to invest in equities and stock holdings

converge to those in the normal scenario from the mid-20s.

       Finally, the doubly fortunate are even inclined to work slightly more in the early-20s than

our base line households, which enables them to consume about 2-3 percent more; this is the

result of never being unemployed and not confronting a financial/economic crisis. Additionally,

these individuals save substantially more, which increases their ability to early invest in stocks.

With above average labor income and capital market performance, they can reduce their work

effort even more than the baseline households in their late 20s, while still being able to afford 2-3

percent higher consumption.

Short-term Effects for the Near-Retirement Cohort. Next we turn to our attention to the

cohort looking ahead to retirement, initially age 55. In the baseline scenario, people reduce

their work effort into their late 50s and early 60s, following the conventional hump-shape

work pattern. At age 55, on average, they still engage in near full-time employment, but work

hours per week gradually taper to 20 by age 65 (Figure 2, Panel A). As in the case of the

younger cohorts, older people who experience the financial/economic crisis maintain a

virtually identical work effort path.

       The picture changes, however, when looking at households hit by the triple whammy.

The near-retirement cohort – with a shorter period of economic activity remaining -- must

compensate for reductions in wage rates and wealth by immediately increasing work hours. (It

will be recalled that the younger cohort can work less, counting on a longer time horizon over

which it can recover income losses.) Consequently, older persons’ work effort rises by around

10 percent relative to the base case, and in their 60s, the difference is greater, about 25 percent.

Sensibly, the doubly fortunate workers cash in on their luck in both the labor and capital markets

by substantially reducing work effort sooner.

       In the base case, the older cohort consumes about $30,000 per year on average, or two to
                                                                                                17

three times the consumption of households in their 20s. This consumption level is financed, to a

large extent, by drawing down liquid financial assets (Figure 2, Panels B and C). Those older

persons beset by a financial/economic crisis reduce annual consumption by around four percent

per year from age 55 to 65, and annual withdrawals fall by about 2-3 percent. Those hit by a

triple whammy experience substantial and persistent reductions in annual consumption of about

10 percent compared to the base case. Early in the crisis, workers seek to maintain consumption

by withdrawing almost 30 percent more from liquid assets, compared to the base case. As

financial wealth was already heavily battered due to the stock market downturn at the beginning

of the crisis, these high withdrawals can only be maintained over a short period. Subsequently,

withdrawals must be reduced by 30 percent more than the base case between the late 50s and

mid 60s. Consumption can only be maintained by substantially increasing work effort.

       In our base case, as is typical in life-cycle models, the fraction of financial wealth

invested in stocks, around 80 percent in the mid-50s, is below that early in working life, but it

slightly increases again toward retirement age as the worker’s exposure to labor market shocks

declines. Given a financial/economic crisis, equity exposure falls short of the base case value by

over 20 percent during the first four years; thereafter, after the initial crisis is over, stock

fractions again converge. For those hit by the triple whammy, the change in the stock fraction

compared to the base case traces out an S-shape. Early in the crisis, stock allocations drop by

about 10 percent, but from the late-50s it exceeds that of base case households by about 10

percent. Anticipating a high probability of poor stock market performance in the following

period, the household is less inclined to hold equities over the first years of the crisis. Later, low

remaining financial wealth provides incentives to gamble and invest more in the stock market.

Finally, doubly fortunate workers have persistently lower stock fractions over the entire period

under scrutiny. Having accumulated high financial wealth allows the household to invest more

conservatively.

       In sum, for both younger and older cohorts, the financial/economic crisis has hardly any
                                                                                               18

short-term impact on work effort on average. But a subset of people fares far worse, including

near-retirees hit by a triple whammy who face a hostile labor market environment and also suffer

substantial losses in financial wealth. Since they only have a few work years available to adjust

to these shocks, they must immediately and significantly increase their work effort after being

unemployed. By contrast, those hit at the beginning of their work lives must optimally reduce

work hours in the less favorable labor market environment. The same conclusion holds for

consumption on average: the impact of the financial/economic crisis is comparable for younger

versus older cohorts. Yet older households hit by the triple whammy experience persistent

consumption shortfalls, which are mitigated for the younger cohort where consumption

converges to the base case level in time. The same holds for saving at young ages and

withdrawals near retirement. And most striking is the difference in household allocations to

stocks. Near-retirees have already accumulated financial wealth, and hence are more vulnerable

to equity fluctuations, while the young have accumulated little in the way of financial assets. For

this reason, the financial/economic crisis has little impact on the young, but near-retirees will

optimally cut their equity exposure by over 20 percent during the crisis. This depends on the

nature of the shock, however, since near-retirees hit by the triple whammy will invest more in

stock, hoping to hit high returns.

Long-term Effects

       Next we turn our attention to the impacts of and the reaction to an economic/financial

crisis in the long run (i.e., over the remaining lifecycle). Findings are presented in Figures 3-4

and Tables 1-4. Figure 3 depicts expected work hours (Panel A), consumption (Panel B), and

saving/withdrawal (i.e., labor income/Social Security benefits after taxes and housing

expenditures minus consumption, Panel C) for the younger cohort. Again, the black line presents

absolute values for the baseline or normal scenario (left axis), while the bars show relative

deviations from the base case for the alternative scenarios (right axis): crisis (light grey), double

fortune (black), and triple whammy (dark grey). Panel C distinguishes between saving (solid
                                                                                                                19

black line) and withdrawal, i.e., negative saving (dashed black line). Figure 4 presents

consumption (Panel A) and withdrawal (Panel B) for the near-retirement cohort. Work hours for

this cohort are omitted as households in this cohort will all have retired over the longer run.

Tables 1 and 2 show retirement behavior for both cohorts and Tables 3 and 4 present their long-

term asset allocations.

Figures 3 and 4, and Tables 1-4 here

Long-term Effects for the Younger Cohort. Looking at the cohort of persons first

experiencing a shock at age 20, it is clear that patterns that already emerged in the later years

of our short-term analysis of work effort continue to persist over the longer run (Figure 3,

Panel A). Our base case household in a normal scenario will gradually reduce weekly work

hours from about 50 at age 30, to around 25 by age 60. As in the short-term case, the long-

term effects of the financial/economic crisis on work effort are negligible. By contrast, doubly

fortunate households reduce their level of work effort below that of base case households, by

about 10 percent at age 45, and 20 percent at age 55. Those hit by the triple whammy,

however, must boost work hours substantially compared to the base case, by about 10 percent

at age 50, and 20 percent at age 60. Hence, work effort at these ages is still as high as that of

base case households that are five years younger.

           Turning to lifetime effects on consumption (Panel B, Figure 3), we find that under the

normal scenario, consumption grows to age 60 and peaks at an annual $30,500. Subsequently,

households start to retire and substitute less goods consumption with more leisure time

consumption.14 Doubly fortunate households can substantially increase their consumption level

relative to the normal scenario, by 17 percent during their 70s and still by 15 percent at age 90.

Crisis households, however, experience a persistent consumption reduction of two percent, and

those going through a triple whammy have three percent shortfalls over their work lives. Though

the latter are surely financially worse off, due to poor capital market performance, they can

14
     This accords with empirical evidence regarding pre/post consumption patterns in Aguiar and Hurst (2005).
                                                                                                 20

maintain much of their consumption by working more. Later in life, however, they lose this

flexibility and hence suffer from higher consumption shortfalls, of around 10 percent at age 70.

       Wealth patterns are also different. Base case households continue to build up financial

wealth until their 40s (Figure 3, Panel C); from their 50s onward, they begin drawing down

assets to pay for high and still increasing consumption while already reducing work effort.

Apparently, as consumption reaches its peak at age 60, so do withdrawals with a maximum value

of $12,500 per annum. A worker who started his work life in the crisis will save about four

percent less than base case households by age 30; over the next decade, he must boost saving to

ensure sufficient financial reserves for the withdrawal phase, so by age 40, saving exceeds that of

base case households by about five percent. Later in the life-cycle, withdrawals are similar to the

normal scenario. Doubly fortunate households can afford to save less and withdraw more than

the base case household due to their above-average labor and capital market performance. For

those experiencing the triple whammy, obviously, the opposite is true and they have to save

more and invest less.

       Table 1 depicts how the younger cohort allocates financial wealth to liquid stocks and

bonds, as well as to illiquid life annuities over the life cycle. First, in the normal scenario, we see

a typical stock fraction path over the life cycle. The young household is almost fully invested in

stocks by age 30, and over time he reduces equity exposure near retirement to well below 80

percent. Initially, stocks are substituted by bonds which make up about 20 percent of the

portfolio by age 50. As the survival credit and, hence, the excess return of annuities over bonds

increases with household age, annuities start to crowd out bonds, making up about 14 percent of

the portfolio by age 70. At older ages, the individual gradually depletes his liquid financial

wealth and lowers his stock fraction to 34 percent by age 80; the share of annuities in the

allocation of overall financial wealth increases to about half. Even at age 80, the investor

optimally holds over 16 percent of financial wealth in bonds, despite the fact that annuities

substantially outperform liquid bond holdings. The reason is that, as liquid assets are consumed,
                                                                                                       21

it becomes more and more difficult for the household to meet the minimum requirement on stock

investments. Accordingly, bonds increasingly represent the only sensible liquid asset held by the

household.

        Comparing the crisis setting to our base case scenario, we find hardly any differences,

indicating that the long-term effects of the crisis on workers’ asset allocations are negligible

when the impact strikes young, as these individuals lack financial assets. By contrast,

experiencing the triple whammy young does have a life-long impact. Young workers with very

low financial wealth have only one major asset, their bond-like human capital, so they are much

more likely to hold more stock over their lifetimes. In their 60s, for example, they still invest

over 85 percent of financial wealth in equities. The opposite is true for the doubly fortunate

households, who invest less in equity over the whole life-cycle. Their bond-like labor income

makes up a smaller part of their overall wealth, leading them to diversify by shifting a higher

share of financial wealth into less risky assets (i.e. bonds earlier in life, and later, annuities).

        It is also of interest to ask how the crisis shapes retirement behavior. Table 2 presents the

fraction of households that retire from age 62-70 (retiring is defined by reducing work effort to

below 20 hours per week). The base case setting exhibits the empirically well documented two-

peaked distribution: over one-quarter of households retires at the early retirement age of 62,

while around half retire later, at ages 66 and 67. By age 68, all households have retired, and on

average, retirement occurs at age 64.8. Workers struck by the crisis at a young age have several

decades to adjust, and they make retirement timing decisions virtually identical to those of base

case households (resulting in the same average retirement age). By contrast, young workers

experiencing a triple whammy when young must work longer to make up the shortfall: three-

quarters postpone retirement beyond the normal retirement age, and on average they retire one

year later than the base case scenario, at age 65.8. Not surprisingly, half of the doubly fortunate

group retires as early as possible; 70 percent leave work prior to normal retirement age, twice as

high as in the base case, which drives down the average retirement age by more than a year (to
                                                                                               22

63.5).

Long-term Effects for the Older Cohort. Our base case households in the normal scenario

consume about $31,000 at age 65 on average, and reduce their spending over the following two

decades to around $22,000. After that, consumption increases again (Figure 4, Panel A). Being

exposed to a financial/economic crisis leaves households with lower financial wealth as well as

lower Social Security income. Consequently, retirement consumption falls short of that of base

case households by four percent per year. Households hit by the triple whammy close to

retirement suffer dramatically over the remaining life-time, as consumption persistently drops by

11-18 percent. By contrast, doubly fortunate households enjoy consumption that exceeds base

case levels by 8-15 percent. Consumption is predominantly financed through constant Social

Security income, to about 80 percent from age 75 on. The remainder must be supported by

withdrawals from financial wealth that, consequently, exhibit the same temporal pattern as

consumption, yet with higher magnitude due to the base effect (Figure 4, Panel B).

         Long-term asset allocation patterns for the older cohort appear in Table 3. Under all

scenarios, stock fractions decrease over time as the household gradually depletes liquid financial

wealth, from 80-95 percent at age 65, to 24-38 percent at age 85. Bond fractions decline through

the 60s, increase again through the 70s, and peak in the early 80s, when due to diminishing liquid

wealth, households increasingly face difficulties to finance the minimum amount required to

participate in the stock market. To take advantage of the increasing survival credit, households

gradually shift financial wealth from liquid assets into annuities. When combined with the

depletion of liquid assets due to consumption-financing withdrawals, this drives annuity fractions

up from 0.2-5 percent at age 65 to 45-64 percent at age 85. In general, compared to the base case

calibration, the allocation to liquid assets is marginally higher under the crisis scenario and

substantially higher for triple whammy households. The asset allocation of doubly fortunate

households, on the other hand, is characterized by lower stock and higher annuity fractions.

         Finally, Table 4 summarizes the impact of the financial/economic crisis on retirement
                                                                                              23

patterns of the older cohort. In the baseline case, the average retirement age is 65.1; one fifth of

all households (20.6 percent) retire at the early retirement age 62; about half (51 percent) at age

66-67, and the remainder (5.1 percent) at age 68.         In the crisis scenario, the fraction of

households retiring at the early retirement age drops by 2.4 percent, and that of households

retiring prior to the normal retirement age of 65 drops by a mere 0.4 percent; this produces a tiny

increase in the average retirement age of only 0.07 years (a little less than a month). Things are

very different for those individuals who experienced the triple whammy: almost 90 percent

cannot afford to retire before the normal retirement age, which drives up the average retirement

age by 1 year compared to the normal scenario. Two of five doubly fortunate households retire at

the early retirement age, and three of five retire prior to the normal retirement age; consequently,

the average retirement age falls by about 1 year compared to the base case scenario. Under all

scenarios, the latest retirement age is 68.



Conclusions

       Our goal was to investigate the short- and long-term impacts of a combined financial and

economic crisis on households at different stages in their life-cycles. To this end, we have

developed a life-cycle model that allows for optimal consumption, work effort, retirement, asset

allocation, and annuitization decisions, incorporating countercyclical labor income and

unemployment risk as well as regime shifts in the investment opportunity set. We show that for

young households, the financial/economic crisis will have little impact on either work effort or

retirement behavior, though they do suffer from a long-term decline in annual consumption

accompanied by lower saving. Stock fractions are marginally lower at the onset of the crisis, but

over the remaining life-cycle, asset allocation does not change much.

       Young households hit particularly badly by the financial/economic crisis do have more

response, reducing their work effort during the crisis by up to 10 percent; later in life, they must

boost work hours substantially – over 20 percent at age 60 compared to the non-crisis scenario,
                                                                                              24

and must defer retirement by one year on average. Lifetime consumption is also lower: in their

early 20s, it is about 15 percent less, and five percent less even after age 70. The other effect is

that young households must save substantially more than non-crisis households later in life, to

build up at least some financial wealth. Low savings early in life go hand in hand with low stock

investment; thereafter, from about age 40 on, equity exposure is continuously higher than that of

non-crisis households, while both bond investments and annuity purchases are reduced.

           When older persons are hit by a combined financial and economic crisis, they are

predicted to boost work effort slightly, around 0.3-1.3 percent, over the rest of their work lives.

Moreover, their average retirement age rises slightly as well (less than one month). The crisis is

felt, instead, in more marked declines in annual consumption, both short- and long-term.

Compared to a non-crisis scenario, consumption drops by 3.5 percent before retirement and by

around 4.5 percent after age 80. Households reduce their asset withdrawals by about 2.5 percent

over the short-run and by about nine percent later in life. During the immediate crisis,

households reduce their equity exposure by more than 20 percent, on average, in favor of risk-

free bonds. Over the longer run, however, investors have a marginally higher appetite for liquid

assets, both stocks and bonds, than investors in a non-crisis scenario. Consequently, the level of

annuitization decreases.

           Those older households hit especially badly by unemployment and stock market shocks

must substantially boost their work effort, by over 20 percent in their early 60s. Moreover, they

cannot afford to retire early and must postpone retirement by about one year, on average.15 Yet

they still experience consumption losses of about 10 percent in the short-term and about 15

percent later in life. While they are able to dampen the immediate impacts of the crisis through

an increase in withdrawal of financial assets (about 30 percent at age 55), the corresponding drop

in financial wealth results in substantial cuts in withdrawals later in life (more than 40 percent

from age 70). These households reduce their equity exposure only by 10 percent early in the

15
     This is in line with the simulations developed by Brady (2009).
                                                                                             25

crisis. Over the remaining life-cycle, allocation to stocks is substantially higher than that of

households in the non-crisis scenarios.

       Our predictions that older households must curtail their consumption, boost work effort,

and defer retirement correspond to recent evidence on short-term effects of the crisis on older

individuals (Gustman, Steinmeier, and Tabatabai, 2010; Hurd and Rohwedder, 2010; Shapiro,

2010). For younger cohorts, on the other hand, there are (to the best of our knowledge) no

empirical studies on how they are responding to the crisis in the short term. And for obvious

reasons, it will take years to trace out how the crisis will influence long-term work, saving,

consumption, and investment behavior. Our research offers a valuable means for informing

policymakers about how such crises can differentially influence household responses to

economic shocks, as they deploy the adjustment mechanisms at their disposal. Based on the

framework provided, subsequent work can evaluate how policy changes might enhance

wellbeing in the face of such crises, for instance by making the retirement process more versus

less flexible, supporting annuitization of retirement assets, or by changing retirement ages under

Social Security.
                                                                                            26

References

Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst. (2005). Consumption vs Expenditure. Journal of Political Economy
       113, 5 (October), 919-948.
Ang, A. and G. Bekaert (2002). International Asset Allocation with Regime Shifts. Review of
      Financial Studies 15, 1137–87.
Bosworth, B., G. Burtless and G. Steuerle. (2000). Lifetime Earnings Patterns, the Distribution
      of Future Social Security Benefits, and the Impact of Pension Reform. Social Security
      Bulletin, 63(4), 74-98.
Brady, P. (2009). What Does the Market Crash Mean for the Ability of 401(k) Plans to Provide
       Retirement Income? National Tax Journal. LXIl (3), 455-476.
Brown, J., O. S. Mitchell, J. Poterba, and M. Warshawsky. (1999). Taxing Retirement Income:
      Nonqualified Annuities and Distributions from Qualified Accounts. National Tax
      Journal. LII3, 563-592.
Buchinsky, M, Rust, J. and Benítez-Silva, H (2000). Dynamic Structural Models of Retirement
      and Disability. Yale University Department of Economics Working Paper.
Carroll C. D. and Dunn, W. E. (1997). Unemployment Expectations, Jumping (S,s) Triggers, and
        Household Balance Sheets. NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Chai, J., W. Horneff, R. Maurer, and O. S. Mitchell (2011). Optimal Portfolio Choice over the
        Life-Cycle with Flexible Work, Endogenous Retirement, and Lifetime Payouts.
        Forthcoming in Review of Finance.
Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and P. Maenhout (2005). Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the Life
       Cycle. Review of Financial Studies 18, 491-533.
Coile, C., P.Diamond, J. Gruber, and A. Jousten. (2001). Delays in Claiming Social Security
        Benefits. Journal of Public Economics 84: 357-385.
Fehr, H., S. Jokisch, and L.J. Kotlikoff . (2006). Will China Eat our Lunch or Take Us Out to
       Dinner? Simulating the Transition Paths of the US, EU, Japan and China. In: Takatoshi
       Ito and Andrew K. Rose (Eds.). Fiscal Policy and Management in East Asia. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 133-198.
Gomes, F., L. Kotlikoff, and L.M. Viceira (2008). Optimal Life-Cycle Investing with Flexible
      Labor Supply: A Welfare Analysis of Life-Cycle Funds. American Economic Review:
      Papers & Proceedings 98, 297-303.
Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides (2005). Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding the
      Empirical Evidence. Journal of Finance 60, 869-904.
Gordon, S., and Pascal St-Amour, (2000). A Preference Regime Model of Bull and Bear
      Markets. American Economic Review 90, 1019-1033.
Guidolin, M., and Allan Timmermann (2008). International Asset Allocation under Regime
       Switching, Skew, and Kurtosis Preferences. Review of Financial Studies 2, 889 - 935.
Gustman, A.L., T.L. Steinmeier, and N. Tabatabai (2010). What the Stock Market Decline
      Means for the Financial Security and Retirement Choices of the Near-Retirement
      Population. Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (1), 161-182.
Hurd, M. and S. Rohwedder (2010). The Effects of the Economic Crisis on the Older Population.
       MRRC Working Paper 2010-231.
Kim, S., and B. Lee, (2007). Stock Returns, Asymmetric Volatility, Risk Aversion, and Business
                                                                                                      27

       Cycle: Some New Evidence. Economic Inquiry, 46, 131 – 148.
Mitchell, O. S. and J. Phillips (2006). Social Security Replacement Rates for Alternative
       Earnings Benchmarks. Benefits Quarterly 4, 37-47.
OECD (2009). Pensions at a Glance: Retirement-Income Systems in OECD Countries. OECD:
     Paris.
Shapiro, M. D. (2010). The Effects of the Financial Crisis on the Well-Being of Older
       Americans: Evidence from the Cognitive Economics Study. MRRC Working paper 2010-
       228.
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004). Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic Labor
        Market Risk. Journal of Political Economy 112, 695-717.
Smetters, K. and Y. Chen (2010). Optimal Portfolio Choice over the Life Cycle with Social
       Security. Wharton School Working Paper.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS, 2010). Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population
      Survey. Viewed 7-2-10.
       http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/servlet/SurveyOutputServlet?request_action=wh&graph_name=LN_cpsbref3
Whitehouse, E. (2010). Pensions During the Crisis: Impact on Retirement-Income Systems and
      Policy Responses. OECD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  28


                                                   Figure 1: Short-term Effects of Financial/Economic Crises on Young Cohort (Age 20)

                                                                       Panel A                                                                                                               Panel B
                                            52.0                                                        30                                                   18000                                                           30
                                            51.4                                                        20                                                   17100                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Change in Consumption (%)
                                                                                                              Change in Work Hours (%)
                                            50.8                                                        10                                                   16200                                                           10




                                                                                                                                         Consumption (US$)
                        Work Hours (p.w.)

                                            50.2                                                        0                                                    15300                                                           0
                                            49.6                                                        ‐10                                                  14400                                                           ‐10
                                            49.0                                                        ‐20                                                  13500                                                           ‐20
                                            48.4                                                        ‐30                                                  12600                                                           ‐30
                                            47.8                                                        ‐40                                                  11700                                                           ‐40
                                            47.2                                                        ‐50                                                  10800                                                           ‐50
                                            46.6                                                        ‐60                                                      9900                                                        ‐60
                                            46.0                                                        ‐70                                                      9000                                                        ‐70
                                                   20   21   22   23   24   25 26   27   28   29   30                                                                   20   21   22   23   24   25 26   27   28   29   30
                                                                            Age                                                                                                                  Age


                                                                       Panel C                                                                                                               Panel D
                                            4200                                                        30                                                       100                                                         30
                                            3940                                                        20                                                        97                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Change in Stock Fraction (%)
                                            3680                                                        10                                                        93                                                         10




                                                                                                              Change in Saving (%)

                                                                                                                                            Stock Fraction (%)
                                            3420                                                        0                                                         90                                                         0
                        Saving (US$)




                                            3160                                                        ‐10                                                       86                                                         ‐10
                                            2900                                                        ‐20                                                       83                                                         ‐20
                                            2640                                                        ‐30                                                       79                                                         ‐30
                                            2380                                                        ‐40                                                       76                                                         ‐40
                                            2120                                                        ‐50                                                       72                                                         ‐50
                                            1860                                                        ‐60                                                       69                                                         ‐60
                                            1600                                                        ‐70                                                       65                                                         ‐70
                                                   20   21   22   23   24   25 26   27   28   29   30                                                                   20   21   22   23   24   25 26   27   28   29   30
                                                                            Age                                                                                                                  Age


                                                                               Triple Whammy             Double Fortune                                                       Crisis         Normal


Note: Panel A: Expected work hours; B: Expected consumption; C: Expected saving/withdrawal (i.e., labor income/Social Security benefits after taxes and housing expenditures
minus consumption); D: Expected stock investment. Solid black line (left axis): Absolute values under normal scenario. Bars (right axis): Relative deviations from normal case
for alternative scenarios: Crisis (light grey), Double fortune (black), Triple whammy (dark grey). Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29


Figure 2: Short-term Effects of Financial/Economic Crises on Near-retirement Cohort (Age 55)
                                                                         Panel A                                                                                                                        Panel B
                                            40.0                                                            40                                                   31200                                                                     40
                                            37.5                                                            30                                                   31050                                                                     30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Change in Consumption (%)
                                                                                                                  Change in Work Hours (%)
                                            35.0                                                            20                                                   30900                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                             Consumption (US$)
                        Work Hours (p.w.)


                                            32.5                                                            10                                                   30750                                                                     10
                                            30.0                                                            0                                                    30600                                                                     0
                                            27.5                                                            ‐10                                                  30450                                                                     ‐10
                                            25.0                                                            ‐20                                                  30300                                                                     ‐20
                                            22.5                                                            ‐30                                                  30150                                                                     ‐30
                                            20.0                                                            ‐40                                                  30000                                                                     ‐40
                                                    55   56   57   58   59   60 61      62   63   64   65                                                                          55   56   57   58   59   60    61   62   63   64   65
                                                                             Age                                                                                                                            Age


                                                                         Panel C                                                                                                                        Panel D
                                            19000                                                           40                                                               90                                                            40
                                            17500                                                           30                                                               88                                                            30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Change in Stock Fraction (%)
                                                                                                                  Change in Withdrawal (%)
                                            16000                                                           20                                                               86                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                        Stock Fraction (%)
                        Withdrawal (US$)




                                            14500                                                           10                                                               84                                                            10
                                            13000                                                           0                                                                83                                                            0
                                            11500                                                           ‐10                                                              81                                                            ‐10
                                            10000                                                           ‐20                                                              79                                                            ‐20
                                             8500                                                           ‐30                                                              77                                                            ‐30

                                             7000                                                           ‐40                                                              75                                                            ‐40
                                                    55   56   57   58   59   60    61   62   63   64   65                                                                         55    56   57   58   59   60    61   62   63   64   65
                                                                             Age                                                                                                                            Age


                                                                                   Triple Whammy                Double Fortune                                                           Crisis         Normal

Notes: Panel A: Expected work hours; B: Expected consumption; C: Expected saving/withdrawal (i.e. labor income/Social Security benefits after taxes and housing expenditures
minus consumption); D: Expected stock investment. Solid black line (left axis): Absolute values under normal scenario. Bars (right axis): Relative deviations from normal case
for alternative scenarios: Crisis (light grey), Double fortune (black), Triple whammy (dark grey). Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                                                                          30


Figure 3: Long-term Effects of Financial/Economic Crises on Young Cohort (Age 20)

                                                                                       Panel A
                                                             54                                                     30

                                                             49                                                     20




                                                                                                                             Change in Work Hours (%)
                                         Work Hours (p.w.)
                                                             44                                                     10

                                                             39                                                     0

                                                             34                                                     ‐10

                                                             29                                                     ‐20

                                                             24                                                     ‐30
                                                                    30     35     40     45      50    55     60
                                                                                         Age


                                                                                       Panel B
                                                   30500                                                            30




                                                                                                                             Change in Consumption (%)
                                                   28250                                                            20
                         Consumption (US$)




                                                   26000                                                            10

                                                   23750                                                            0

                                                   21500                                                            ‐10

                                                   19250                                                            ‐20

                                                   17000                                                            ‐30
                                                                      30    40    50      60     70    80     90
                                                                                         Age


                                                                                       Panel C
                                                   13500                                                                120
                                                                                                                                        Change in Saving/Withdrawal (%)




                                                   11500                                                                80
                         Saving/Withdrawal (US$)




                                                             9500                                                       40

                                                             7500                                                       0

                                                             5500                                                       ‐40

                                                             3500                                                       ‐80

                                                             1500                                                       ‐120
                                                                      30    40     50     60      70    80     90
                                                                                          Age

                                                                  Triple Whammy           Double Fortune             Crisis
                                                                  Normal Saving           Normal Withdrawal


Note: Panel A: Expected work hours. Panel B: Expected consumption. Panel C: Expected saving/withdrawal
(i.e., labor income/Social Security benefits after taxes and housing expenditures minus consumption). Solid black
line (axis on the left): Absolute values under normal scenario. Bars (axis on the right): Relative deviations from
normal case for alternative scenarios: Crisis (light grey), Double fortune (black), Triple whammy (dark grey).
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                               31




Figure 4: Long-term Effects of Financial/Economic Crises on Near-Retirement Cohort
(Age 55)

                                                          Panel A
                                 32100                                                       60

                                 30100                                                       40




                                                                                                   Change in Consumption (%)
             Consumption (US$)




                                 28100                                                       20

                                 26100                                                       0

                                 24100                                                       ‐20

                                 22100                                                       ‐40

                                 20100                                                       ‐60
                                          65        70   75         80    85        90
                                                              Age


                                                          Panel B
                                 18500                                                       60

                                 16000                                                       40



                                                                                                   Change in Withdrawal (%)
             Withdrawal (US$)




                                 13500                                                       20

                                 11000                                                       0

                                 8500                                                        ‐20

                                 6000                                                        ‐40

                                 3500                                                        ‐60
                                          65        70   75         80    85        90
                                                              Age

                                         Triple Whammy   Double Fortune    Crisis        Normal


Notes: Panel A: Expected consumption. Panel B: Expected withdrawal (i.e., labor income/Social Security
benefits after taxes and housing expenditures minus consumption). Solid black line (axis on the left): Absolute
values under normal scenario. Bars (axis on the right): Relative deviations from normal case for alternative
scenarios: Crisis (light grey), Double fortune (black), Triple whammy (dark grey).

Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                          32


Table 1: Long-term Impacts of Crisis on Asset Allocation of Young Cohort (Age 20)

                                             Asset Allocation (%)

                                        Average                            Tails
                                                                  Double       Triple
                     Age         Normal       Crisis
                                                                  Fortune     Whammy
                                                         Stocks
                     30           99.3        99.3                  99.0           99.2
                     40           90.0        90.0                  84.3           94.5
                     50           79.5        79.5                  69.3           87.1
                     60           77.3        77.3                  66.3           86.7
                     70           79.5        79.3                  63.6           85.8
                     80           34.1        34.2                  21.1           41.1


                                                         Bonds
                     30           0.6             0.7               1.0            0.7
                     40           10.0            9.9               15.5           5.5
                     50           19.3        19.3                  25.7           12.7
                     60           18.7        18.6                  20.4           12.5
                     70           6.7         6.7                   6.0            8.1
                     80           16.5        16.5                  11.3           23.1


                                                        Annuities
                     30           0.0             0.0               0.0            0.1
                     40           0.1             0.1               0.2            0.0
                     50           1.2             1.2               5.0            0.2
                     60           4.1             4.1               13.4           0.8
                     70           13.8        14.0                  30.3           6.1
                     80           49.4        49.3                  67.6           35.8


Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                 33


Table 2: Crisis Impact on Retirement Behavior of Young Cohort (Age 20)

                                                           Retirement Ratio (%)

                                                  Average                             Tails
                                                                            Double          Triple
                      Age                  Normal          Crisis
                                                                            Fortune        Whammy
                     62                      27.4           27.4               53.9             8.0
                     63                      6.3             6.2               8.8              3.6
                     64                      6.6             6.5               7.3             5.5
                     65                      8.2            8.2                5.1             8.8
                     66                      24.6           24.5               12.6            36.3
                     67                      22.3           22.3               9.9             32.7
                     68                      4.7            4.8                2.1             5.1
                     69                      0.0            0.0                0.2             0.1
                     70                      0.0            0.0                0.0             0.0
            Avg. Retirement Age             64.82          64.82              63.53           65.80

Note: Fractions of households that retire at specific age. Definition of retirement: work effort reduced to below 20
hours per week.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                             34


Table 3: Long-term Impacts of Crisis on Asset Allocation of Near-retirement Cohort
(Age 55)

                                                   Asset Allocation (%)

                                         Average                              Tails
                                                                    Double         Triple
                      Age        Normal        Crisis
                                                                    Fortune       Whammy
                                                           Stocks
                      65          88.1             88.7               80.6            95.2
                      70          86.2             88.0               81.4            88.8
                      75          64.3             65.7               59.0            69.3
                      80          41.0             41.8               35.5            48.3
                      85          29.9             30.8               23.7            38.0

                                                           Bonds
                      65          9.9              10.2               14.4             4.6
                      70          7.7              7.3                7.2              8.9
                      75          13.0             13.1               12.6            13.6
                      80          21.9             22.3               17.1            28.5
                      85          13.8             14.3               12.2            17.3

                                                          Annuities
                      65          2.1              1.1                 5.0             0.2
                      70          6.2              4.8                11.5             2.3
                      75          22.6             21.3               28.4            17.1
                      80          37.1             35.8               47.4            23.2
                      85          56.2             54.9               64.2            44.7

Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                                                                 35


Table 4: Crisis Impact on Retirement Behavior of Near-Retirement Cohort (Age 55)

                                                             Retirement Ratio (%)

                                                   Average                             Tails
                                                                             Double         Triple
                      Age                  Normal           Crisis
                                                                             Fortune       Whammy
                     62                      20.6            18.2              40.6              4.4
                     63                       7.0             7.4              9.3               3.3
                     64                       7.0             8.1              9.1               3.2
                     65                       9.0             9.5              8.7              10.2
                     66                      26.8            26.8              16.6             38.2
                     67                      24.4            24.7              13.0             33.2
                     68                      5.1             5.4               2.8              7.5
                     69                      0.0             0.0               0.0              0.0
                     70                      0.0             0.0               0.0              0.0
            Avg. Retirement Age             65.08           65.15             64.02            66.04

Note: Fractions of households that retire at specific age. Definition of retirement: work effort reduced to below 20
hours per week.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
