                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      A PYRRHIC VICTORY? - BANK BAILOUTS AND SOVEREIGN CREDIT RISK

                                          Viral V. Acharya
                                          Itamar Drechsler
                                           Philipp Schnabl

                                        Working Paper 17136
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17136


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We are grateful to Ilan Kremer, Mitchell Petersen, Isabel Schnabel and Luigi Zingales (discussants),
Dave Backus, Mike Chernov, Amir Yaron, Stan Zin, and seminar participants at the American Economics
Association Meetings (2011), Austrian Central Bank, Bundesbank-ECB-CFS Joint Luncheon workshop,
Douglas Gale's Financial Economics workshop at NYU, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, HEC
Paris and BNP Paribas Hedge Fund Center conference, Indian School of Business, Indian Institute
of Management (Ahmedabad), London Business School and Moody's Credit Risk Conference, Oxford
Said Business School, Rothschild Caesarea Center 8th Annual Conference (Israel), Stockholm School
of Economics and SIFR, Universitat van Amsterdam and de Nederlandsche Bank, and University of
Minnesota for helpful comments. Farhang Farazmand and Nirupama Kulkarni provided valuable research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Viral V. Acharya, Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Pyrrhic Victory? - Bank Bailouts and Sovereign Credit Risk
Viral V. Acharya, Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 17136
June 2011
JEL No. D62,E58,G21,G28,G38

                                              ABSTRACT

We show that financial sector bailouts and sovereign credit risk are intimately linked. A bailout benefits
the economy by ameliorating the under-investment problem of the financial sector. However, increasing
taxation of the non-financial sector to fund the bailout may be inefficient since it weakens its incentive
to invest, decreasing growth. Instead, the sovereign may choose to fund the bailout by diluting existing
government bondholders, resulting in a deterioration of the sovereign's creditworthiness. This deterioration
feeds back onto the financial sector, reducing the value of its guarantees and existing bond holdings
and increasing its sensitivity to future sovereign shocks. We provide empirical evidence for this two-way
feedback between financial and sovereign credit risk using data on the credit default swaps (CDS)
of the Eurozone countries for 2007-10. We show that the announcement of financial sector bailouts
was associated with an immediate, unprecedented widening of sovereign CDS spreads and narrowing
of bank CDS spreads; however, post-bailouts there emerged a significant co-movement between bank
CDS and sovereign CDS, even after controlling for banks' equity performance, the latter being consistent
with an effect of the quality of sovereign guarantees on bank credit risk.


Viral V. Acharya                                     Philipp Schnabl
Stern School of Business                             Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University                                  Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84                       44 West 4th Street, Room 9-76
New York, NY 10012                                   New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                             schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Itamar Drechsler
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-79
New York, NY 10012
Itamar.Drechsler@stern.nyu.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17136
1    Introduction
Just two and a half years ago, there was essentially no sign of sovereign credit risk in the
developed economies and a prevailing view was that this was unlikely to be a concern for them
in the near future. Recently, however, sovereign credit risk has become a significant problem
for a number of developed countries. In this paper, we are motivated by three closely related
questions surrounding this development. First, were the financial sector bailouts an integral
factor in igniting the rise of sovereign credit risk in the developed economies? We show that
they were. Second, what was the exact mechanism that caused the transmission of risks
between the financial sector and the sovereign? We propose a theoretical explanation wherein
the government can finance a bailout through both increased taxation and via dilution of
existing government debt-holders. The bailout is beneficial; it alleviates a distortion in
the provision of financial services. However, both financing channels are costly. Increased
taxation reduces the non-financial sector’s incentives to invest. When the optimal bailout
is large this implies that dilution can become a relatively attractive option, even though
it leads to deterioration in the sovereign’s creditworthiness. Finally, we ask whether there
is also feedback going in the other direction– does sovereign credit risk feedback on to the
financial sector? We explain – and verify empirically – that such a feedback is indeed present,
due to the financial sector’s implicit and explicit guarantees and holdings of sovereign bonds.
    Our results call into question the usually implicit assumption that government resources
are vastly deep and that the main problem posed by bailouts is that of moral hazard –
that is, the distortion of future financial sector incentives. While the moral hazard cost is
certainly pertinent, our conclusion is that bailout costs are not just in the future. They are
tangible right around the timing of bailouts and are priced into the sovereign’s credit risk
and cost of borrowing. Thus, aggressive bailout packages that stabilize financial sectors in
the short run but ignore the ultimate taxpayer cost might end up being a Pyrrhic victory.

Motivation: The case of Irish bailout. On September 30, 2008 the government of Ireland
announced that it had guaranteed all deposits of the six of its biggest banks. The immediate
reaction that grabbed newspaper headlines the next day was whether such a policy of a full
savings guarantee was anti-competitive in the Euro area. However, there was something
deeper manifesting itself in the credit default swap (CDS) markets for purchasing protection
against the sovereign credit risk of Ireland and that of its banks. Figure 1 shows that while
the cost of purchasing such protection on Irish banks – their CDS fee – fell overnight from
around 400 basis points (bps) to 150 bps, the CDS fee for the Government of Ireland’s credit

                                              2
risk rose sharply. Over the next month, this rate more than quadrupled to over 100 bps
and within six months reached 400 bps, the starting level of its financial firms’ CDS. While
there was a general deterioration of global economic health over this period, the event-study
response in Figure 1 suggests that the risk of the financial sector had been substantially
transferred to the government balance sheet, a cost that Irish taxpayers must eventually
bear.
    Viewed in the Fall of 2010, this cost rose to dizzying heights prompting economists
to wonder if the precise manner in which bank bailouts were awarded have rendered the
financial sector rescue exorbitantly expensive. Just one of the Irish banks, Anglo Irish, has
cost the government up to Euro 25 bln (USD 32 bln), amounting to 11.26% of Ireland’s Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Ireland’s finance minister Brian Lenihan justified the propping up
of the bank “to ensure that the resolution of debts does not damage Ireland’s international
credit-worthiness and end up costing us even more than we must now pay.” Nevertheless,
rating agencies and credit markets revised Ireland’s ability to pay future debts significantly
downward. The original bailout cost estimate of Euro 90 bln was re-estimated to be 50%
higher and the Irish 10-year bond spread over German bund widened significantly, ultimately
leading to a bailout of Irish government by the stronger Eurozone countries.1
    This episode is not isolated to Ireland though it is perhaps the most striking case. In
fact, a number of Western economies that bailed out their banking sectors in the Fall of
2008 have experienced, in varying magnitudes, similar risk transfer between their financial
sector and government balance-sheets. Our paper develops a theoretical model and provides
empirical evidence that help understand this interesting phenomenon.

Model. Our theoretical model consists of two sectors of the economy – “financial” and
“corporate” (more broadly this includes also the household and other non-financial parts of
the economy), and a government. The two sectors contribute jointly to produce aggregate
output: the corporate sector makes productive investments and the financial sector invests in
intermediation “effort” (e.g., information gathering and capital allocation) that enhance the
return on corporate investments. Both sectors, however, face a potential under-investment
problem. The financial sector is leveraged (in a crisis, it may in fact be insolvent) and
under-invests in its contributions due to the well-known debt overhang problem (Myers,
1977). We assume that restructuring this financial sector debt is impossible or prohibitively
  1
    See “Ireland’s banking mess: Money pit – Austerity is not enough to avoid scrutiny by the markets”,
the Economist, Aug 19th 2010; “S&P downgrades Ireland” by Colin Barr, CNNMoney.com, Aug 24th 2010;
and, “Ireland stung by S&P downgrade”, Reuters, Aug 25th, 2010.


                                                  3
expensive. For simplicity, the corporate sector is un-levered. However, if the government
undertakes a “bailout” of the financial sector, in other words, makes a transfer from the
rest of the economy that results in a net reduction of the financial sector debt, then the
transfer must be funded in the future (at least in part) through taxation of corporate profits.
Such taxation, assumed to be proportional to corporate sector output, induces the corporate
sector to under-invest.
    A government that is fully aligned with maximizing the economy’s current and future
output determines the optimal size of the bailout. We show that tax proceeds that can
be used to fund the bailout have, in general, a Laffer curve property, so that the optimal
bailout size and tax rate are interior. The optimal tax rate that the government is willing to
undertake for the bailout is greater when the financial sector’s debt overhang is higher and
its relative contribution (or size) in output of the economy is larger.
    In practice, governments fund bailouts in the short run by borrowing or issuing bonds,
which are repaid by future taxation. There are two interesting constraints on the bailout size
that emerge from this observation. One, the greater is the legacy debt of the government, the
lower is its ability to undertake a bailout. This is because the Laffer curve of tax proceeds
leaves less room for the government to increase tax rates for repaying its bailout-related
debt. Second, the announcement of the bailout lowers the price of government debt due to
the anticipated dilution from newly issued debt. Now, if the financial sector of the economy
has assets in place that are in the form of government bonds, the bailout is in fact associated
with some “collateral damage” for the financial sector itself. Illustrating the possibility of
such a two-way feedback is a novel contribution of our model.
    To get around these constraints, the government can potentially undertake a strategic
default. Assuming that there are some deadweight costs of such default, for example, due
to international sanctions or from being unable to borrow in debt markets for some time,
we derive the optimal boundary for sovereign default as a function of its legacy debt and
financial sector liabilities. This boundary explains that a heavily-indebted sovereign faced
with a heavily-insolvent financial sector will be forced to “sacrifice its credit rating” to save
the financial sector and at the same time sustain economic growth.
    We then extend the model to allow for uncertainty about the realized output growth of
the corporate sector. This introduces a possibility of solvency-based default on government
debt. Interestingly, given the collateral damage channel, an increase in uncertainty about
the sovereign’s economic output not only lowers its own debt values but also increases the
financial sector’s risk of default. This is because the financial sector’s government bond


                                               4
holdings fall in value, and in an extension of the model, so do the value of the government
guarantees accorded to the financial sector as a form of bailout. In turn, these channels
induce a post-bailout co-movement between the financial sector’s credit risk and that of the
sovereign, even though the immediate effect of the bailout is to lower the financial sector’s
credit risk and raise that of the sovereign.

Empirics. Our empirical work analyzes this two-way feedback between the financial sector
and sovereign credit risk. Our analysis focuses mainly on the Western European economies
during the financial crisis of 2007-10.
    We examine sovereign and bank CDS in the period from 2007 to 2010 and find three
distinct periods. The first period covers the start of the financial crisis in January 2007
until the first bank bailout announcement. This period includes the bankruptcy of Lehman
Brothers. Across all Western economies, we see a large, sustained rise in bank CDS as the
financial crisis develops. However, sovereign CDS spreads remain very low. This evidence
is consistent with a significant increase in the default risk of the banking sector with little
effect on sovereigns in the pre-bailout period.
    The second period covers the bank bailouts starting with the announcement of a bailout
in Ireland in late September 2008 and ending with a bailout in Sweden in late October 2008.
During this one-month period, we find a significant decline in bank CDS across all countries
and a corresponding increase in sovereign CDS. This evidence suggests that bank bailouts
produced a transfer of default risk from the banking sector to the sovereign.
    The third period covers the period after the bank bailouts and until 2010. We find
that both sovereign and bank CDS increased during this period. The increase was larger
for countries whose public debt ratios were higher and whose financial sectors were more
distressed in the pre-bailout period. Consistent with our models’ prediction of bailout-
induced dilution of debtholders, we also find that there emerges post-bailouts a strong,
positive relationship between public debt ratios and sovereign CDS, though none existed
beforehand. This evidence supports our view that the bailouts spilled banks’ credit risk onto
the sovereigns and triggered the rise in sovereign credit risk.
    We then carry out a series of empirical tests to document and quantify the direct two-way
feedback between sovereign and financial credit risk emphasized by our model. The tests
show that in the post-bailout period an increase in sovereign credit risk is associated with
a robust and economically significant increase in the credit risk of that country’s banks,
even after controlling for market-wide shocks to credit risk, volatility, ‘local’ CDS-market
conditions, common variation in bank CDS, and changes in bank-level fundamentals. The

                                              5
additional impact of sovereign risk beyond these extensive controls arises because of the spe-
cial subsidy that government guarantees provide to debt-holders, allowing us to empirically
establish the sovereign-bank feedback.
    Finally, in support of the collateral damage channel as being potentially relevant for
the co-movement between financial sector and sovereign CDS, we collect bank-level data on
holdings of different sovereign government bonds released as part of the stress tests conducted
for European banks in 2010. We document that on average Eurozone banks stress-tested in
2010 had Eurozone government bond holdings that were as large as one-sixth of their risk-
weighted assets. We also find that bank CDS co-moves with sovereign CDS in accordance
with banks’ holdings of government bonds.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the model. Section
3 presents the equilibrium outcomes. Section 4 provides empirical evidence and in conclusion
also discusses the case of Iceland as a possible counterfactual for the case of Ireland. Section
5 relates our theoretical and empirical analysis to the extant literature. Section 6 concludes.
All proofs not in the main text are in the online Appendix.


2     Model
There are three time periods in the model: t = 0, 1, and 2. The productive economy consists
of two parts, a financial sector and a non-financial sector. In addition, there is a government
and a representative consumer. All agents are risk-neutral.

Financial sector: The operator of the financial sector solves the following problem, which
is to choose, at t = 0, the amount of financial services to supply at t = 1 in order to maximize
his expected payoff at t = 1, net of the effort cost required to produce these services:
               h                                                        i
      max
       s
          E0        ws ss0   − L1 + Ã1 + AG + T0 × 1{−L1 +A˜1 +AG +T0 >0} − c(ss0 ) .        (1)
       s0


where ss0 is the amount of financial services supplied by the financial sector at t = 1. The
financial sector earns revenues at the rate of ws per unit of financial service supplied, with ws
determined in equilibrium. To produce s0 units, the operator of the financial sector expends
c(s0 ) units of effort. We assume that c0 (s0 ) > 0 and c00 (s0 ) > 0.
    The financial sector has both liabilities and assets on its books. It receives the payoff
from its efforts only if the value of assets exceeds liabilities at t = 1. This solvency condition
is given in equation (1) by the indicator function for the expression −L1 + Ã1 + AG + T0 > 0.

                                                      6
L1 denotes the liabilities of the financial sector, which are due (mature) at t = 1. There are
two types of assets held by the financial sector, denoted Ã1 and AG . AG is the value of the
financial sector’s holdings of a fraction kA of the existing (pre-bailout) stock of government
bonds, while Ã1 represents the payoff of the other assets held by the financial sector.2 We
model the payoff Ã1 , which is risky, as a continuously valued random variable that is realized
at t = 1 and takes values in [0, ∞). The payoff and value of government bonds is discussed
below. The variable T0 represents the value of the time 0 transfer made by the government to
the financial sector and is discussed further below. Finally, in case of insolvency, debtholders
receive ownership of all financial sector assets and wage revenue.3

Non-financial sector: The non-financial sector comes into t = 0 with an existing capital
stock K0 . Its objective is to maximize the sum of the expected values of its net payoffs,
which occur at t = 1 and t = 2:
            h                                                       i
      max E0 f (K0 , sd0 ) − ws sd0 + (1 − θ0 )Ṽ (K1 ) − (K1 − K0 )                                     (2)
      sd0 , K1


The function f is the production function of the non-financial sector, which takes as inputs at
t = 0 the financial services it demands, sd0 , and the capital stock, K0 , to produce consumption
goods at t = 1. The output of f is deterministic and f is increasing in both arguments and
concave. At t = 1, the non-financial sector is faced with a decision of how much capital
K1 to invest, at an incremental cost of (K1 − K0 ), in a project Ṽ , whose payoff is realized
at t = 2. This project represents the future or continuation value of the non-financial
sector and is in general subject to uncertainty. The expectation at t = 1 of this payoff
is V (K1 ) = E1 [Ṽ (K1 )] and, as indicated, is a function of the investment K1 . We assume
that V 0 (K1 ) > 0 and V 00 (K1 ) < 0, so that the expected payoff is increasing but concave
in investment. A proportion θ0 of the payoff of the continuation project is taxed by the
government to pay its debt, both new and outstanding, as we explain next.

Government: The government’s objective is to maximize the total output of the economy
and hence the welfare of the consumer. It does this by reducing the debt-overhang problem
of the financial sector, which induces it to supply more financial services, thereby increasing
   2
     While we refer to government claims principally as government bonds, a broader interpretation can
include claims on quasi-governmental agencies (e.g., Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac) and also the value of different
types of government subsidies or support.
   3
     We could include wage revenues in the solvency indicator function, which would provide an additional
channel for wages to feed back into the probability of solvency. Although such a channel would reinforce the
mechanism at work in the model, we choose to abstract from this to avoid the additional complexity.

                                                     7
output. To achieve this, the government issues bonds that it then transfers to the balance
sheet of the financial sector. These bonds are repaid with taxes levied on the non-financial
sector at a tax-rate of θ0 .4 In particular, the tax rate θ0 is set by the government at t = 0
and is levied at t = 2 upon realization of the payoff Ṽ (K1 ). We assume that the government
credibly commits to this tax rate.
    We let ND denote the number of bonds that the government has issued in the past –
its outstanding stock of debt. For simplicity, bonds have a face value of one, so the face
value of outstanding debt equals the number of bonds, ND . The government issues NT new
bonds to accomplish the transfer to the financial sector. Hence, at t = 2 the government
receives realized taxes equal to θ0 Ṽ (K1 ) and then uses them to pay bondholders NT + ND .
We assume that if there are still tax revenues left over (a surplus), the government spends
them on programs for the representative consumer, or equivalently, just rebates them to the
consumer. On the other hand, if tax revenues fall short of NT + ND , then the government
defaults on its debt. In that case, it pays out all the tax revenue raised to bondholders. We
assume that the government credibly commits to this payout policy.5
    We further assume that default incurs a deadweight loss. In case of default, the sovereign
incurs a fixed deadweight loss of D. Hence, default is costly and there is an incentive to avoid
it.6 Finally, let P0 denote the price of government bonds, which is determined in equilibrium.
    The government’s objective is to maximize the expected utility of the representative
consumer, who consumes the combined output of the financial and non-financial sector.
Hence, the government faces the following problem:
             h                                                             i
       max E0 f (K0 , s0 ) + Ṽ (K1 ) − c(s0 ) − (K1 − K0 ) − 1def D + Ã1                              (3)
       θ0 , NT


where s0 is the equilibrium provision of financial services. This maximization is subject to
the budget constraint: T0 = P0 NT and subject to the choices made by the financial and
non-financial sectors. Note that 1def is an indicator function that equals 1 if the government
defaults (if θ0 Ṽ (K1 ) < NT + ND ) and 0 otherwise.
   4
     Issuing bonds that are repaid with future taxes allows the government to smooth taxation over time.
We do not model the tax-smoothing considerations here but note that tax-smoothing would be optimal if,
for example, there is a convex cost of taxation in each time period.
   5
     We can consider more generally a policy whereby the government pays only a fraction m̃ of tax revenue
and gives back any remaining tax funds to the consumer. Since it will actually be optimal for the government
to commit to paying bondholders all the tax revenue raised, we restrict ourselves to the case m̃ = 1.
   6
     Although D here is obviously reduced-form, one can think of the deadweight cost in terms of loss
of government reputation internationally, loss of domestic government credibility, degradation of the legal
system and so forth. If a country’s reputation is already weak, it will have less to lose from default.


                                                     8
Consumer: The representative consumer consumes the output of the economy. He solves a
simple consumption and portfolio choice problem by allocating his wealth W between con-
sumption, government bond holdings, and equity in the financial and non-financial sectors.
Since the representative consumer is assumed to be risk-neutral and there is no time dis-
counting, asset prices equal the expected values of asset payouts. Let P (i) and P̃ (i) denote
the price and payoff of asset i, respectively. At t = 0, the consumer chooses optimal portfolio
allocations, {ni }, that solve the following problem:
                 h                                i
           max E0 Σi ni P̃ (i) + (W − Σi ni P (i))                                                           (4)
             ni


The consumer’s first order condition gives the standard result that equilibrium price of an
asset equals the expected value of its payoff, P (i) = E0 [P̃ (i)].


3         Equilibrium Outcomes
We begin by examining the maximization problem of the financial sector. Let p(Ã) denote
the probability density of Ã. Furthermore, let A1 be the minimum realization of Ã1 for which
the financial sector does not default: A1 = L1 − AG − T0 . Then, the first order condition of
the financial sector can be written as:

           ws psolv − c0 (ss0 ) = 0 .                                                                        (5)
                    R∞
where psolv ≡ A p(Ã1 )dÃ, is the probability that the financial sector is solvent at t = 1.
                      1
Henceforth, we parameterize c(s0 ) as follows: c(s0 ) = β m1 sm
                                                              0 where m > 1.
    Consider now the problem of the non-financial sector at t = 0. Its demand for financial
services, ŝd0 , is determined by its first-order condition:7

           ∂f (K0 , sd0 )
                          = ws .                                                                             (6)
               ∂sd0

We parameterize f as Cobb-Douglas with the factor share of financial services given by ϑ:
f (K0 , s0 ) = αK01−ϑ sϑ0 .
    In equilibrium the demand and supply of financial services are the same: ŝd0 = ŝs0 . From
    7
        Both the second-order conditions of the financial and non-financial sectors are satisfied: −c00 (s0 ) < 0
        ∂ 2 f (K0 ,sd
                    0)
and          ∂ 2 sd
                         < 0.
                  0




                                                         9
here on, we drop the superscripts and denote the equilibrium quantity of financial services
simply by s0 .


3.1    Transfer Reduces Underprovision of Financial Services
Taken together, the first-order conditions of the financial sector (5) and non-financial sector
(6) show how debt-overhang impacts the provision of financial services by the financial sector.
The marginal benefit of an extra unit of financial services to the economy is given by ws ,
while the marginal cost, c0 (s0 ), is less than ws if there is a positive probability of insolvency.
This implies that the equilibrium allocation is sub-optimal. The reason is that the possibility
of liquidation psolv < 1 drives a wedge between the social and private marginal benefit of an
increase in the provision of financial services. As long as psolv < 1, there is an under-provision
of financial services relative to the first-best case (psolv = 1). Hence, we obtain that

Lemma 1. An increase in the transfer T0 leads to an increase in the provision of financial
services since this raises the probability psolv that the financial sector is solvent at t = 1.


3.2    Tax Revenues: A Laffer Curve
Next, to understand the government’s problem, we first look at how expected tax revenue
responds to the tax rate, θ0 . Let the expected tax revenue, θ0 V (K1 ), be denoted by T .
Raising taxes has two effects. On the one hand, an increase in the tax rate θ0 captures a
larger proportion of the future value of the non-financial sector, thereby raising tax revenues.
On the other hand, this reduces the incentive of the non-financial sector to invest in its future,
thereby leading to reduced investment, K1 . At the extreme, when θ0 = 1, the tax distortion
eliminates the incentive for investment and tax revenues are reduced to zero. Hence, tax
revenues are non-monotonic in the tax rate and maximized by a tax rate strictly less than 1.
    Formally, the impact on tax revenue of an increase in the tax rate is given by:

      dT                           dK1
          = V (K1 ) + θ0 V 0 (K1 )       .
      dθ0                          dθ0

Note that at θ0 = 0, an increase in the tax rate increases the tax revenue at a rate equal to
V (K1 ), the future value of the non-financial sector. It can be shown that since the production
function V (K1 ) is concave, as taxes are increased the incentive to invest is decreased by the
tax rate, which reduces the marginal revenue of a tax increase. To see this, consider the


                                                10
first-order condition for investment of the non-financial sector at t = 1:

       (1 − θ0 )V 0 (K1 ) − 1 = 0 .                                                                       (7)

Taking the derivative with respect to θ0 using the Implicit Function theorem gives: dK    1
                                                                                        dθ0
                                                                                            =
     0
   V (K1 )
(1−θ0 )V 00 (K1 )
                  < 0, which shows that as the tax rate is increased, the non-financial sector
reduces investment.8 Since at θ0 = 1 the tax revenue is zero this implies that the marginal
tax revenue decreases until it eventually becomes negative. Hence, tax revenues satisfy the
Laffer curve property as a function of the tax rate:

Lemma 2. The tax revenues, θ0 V (K1 ), increase in the tax rate, θ0 , as it increases from zero
(no taxes), and then eventually decline.

  Henceforth, we parameterize V with the functional form V (K1 ) = K1γ , 0 < γ < 1.9 As
                                                 γ               γ
Appendix A.3 shows, (7) implies that T = θt+1 γ 1−γ (1 − θt+1 ) 1−γ . It can then be shown that:

Lemma 3. The tax revenue, T , is maximized at θ0max = 1 − γ, is increasing (dT /dθ0 > 0)
and concave (d2 T /dθ02 < 0) on [0, θ0max ), and decreasing (dT /dθ0 < 0) on (θ0max , 1).


3.3     Optimal Transfer Under Certainty and No Default
We analyze next the government’s decision starting first with a simplified version of the
general setup. We make two simplifying assumptions: (1) we set to zero the variance of the
realized future value of the non-financial sector, so that Ṽ (K1 ) = V (K1 ), (2) we force the
government to remain solvent. In subsequent sections we remove these assumptions.
    If the government must remain solvent, it can only issue a number of bonds NT that
it can pay off in full, given its tax revenue. By assumption (1), the tax revenue is known
exactly (it is equal to T ), and hence by assumption (2), NT + ND = T . Moreover, since
every bond has a sure payoff of 1, we know that the bond price is P0 = 1.
   8
     While we have chosen to model the tax-induced distortion in investment, a tax on the non-financial
sector’s labor income would have a similar effect if the sector makes a labor-leisure trade-off. In that case,
the tax on labor income decreases the marginal benefit from labor, thereby reducing the equilibrium labor
choice and resulting output. More generally, we may broadly interpret the investment K1 as going beyond
investment in capital to include e.g., the investment of entrepreneurial effort and other human capital.
   9
     This functional form is a natural choice for an increasing and concave function of K1 . Appendix A.2
provides a more structural motivation for this choice based on the calculation of a continuation value un-
der our choice of production function. This calculation suggests that the continuation value implied by a
multiperiod model should take a similar functional form.



                                                     11
    Under the two simplifying assumptions, we have that the transfer to the financial sector
is T0 = θ0 V (K1 ) − ND and there is no probability of default, E[1def ] = 0. Hence, the only
choice variable for the government in this case is the tax rate. Appendix A.4 shows that the
first-order condition for the government can be written as:

      dG   dL
         +      = 0 , where                                                                 (8)
      dT   dT
      dG   ∂f (K0 , s0 )              ds0
         =               (1 − psolv )     ,   and
      dT        ∂s0                   dT0
      dL                dK1
         = θ0 V 0 (K1 )     .
      dT                dT

This expresses the first-order condition in terms of the choice of transfer size (T0 ) and ex-
pected tax revenue (T ), rather than in terms of the tax rate, and equates the marginal gain
asnd marginal loss of increasing tax revenue.

Gain From Increased Provision of Financial Services: The term dG/dT in (8) is
the marginal gain to the economy of increasing expected tax revenue. Equations (5) and
(6) show that it reflects the wedge between the social and private benefits of an increase in
financial services. Since ds0 /dT0 > 0, the marginal gain from increasing tax revenue (and
hence the transfer) will be large when psolv is low, that is, when the financial sector is at
high risk of insolvency and debt-overhang is significant.

Under-Investment Loss Due to Taxes: The term dL/dT in (8) is the marginal under-
investment loss to the economy due to a marginal increase in expected tax revenue, which
distorts the non-financial sector’s incentive to invest. Equation (7) shows that it reflects
the size of the tax-induced distortion, which is greater than zero as long as the tax rate is
positive. Since dK1 /dT < 0, then dL/dT < 0.

The Optimal Tax Rate and Issuance of Debt: The following proposition, which de-
scribes the solution to the government’s problem under assumptions 1 (certainty), 2 (no
default) and m ≥ 2ϑ, is proven in Appendix A.6.

Proposition 1. There is a unique optimal tax rate, θ̂0 , which is strictly less than θ0max . Let
T̂ represent the associated tax revenues. Then newly issued sovereign debt has face value
NT = T̂ − ND and a price of P0 = 1. Moreover,

  1. The optimal tax rate and revenue are increasing in L1 , the financial sector liabilities,
     and in ND , the outstanding government debt.

                                                    12
   2. The face value of newly issued sovereign debt (the transfer) is increasing in the fi-
      nancial sector liabilities L1 , but decreasing in the amount of existing government debt
      ND . Moreover, the gross transfer, T0 + kA ND , is also decreasing in ND .

   3. If also m ≤ 2, then the optimal tax rate, revenue, and newly issued sovereign debt, are
      increasing in the factor share of the financial sector.

    The optimal tax rate is less than θ0max due to the Laffer-curve property of tax revenues.
In addition, if there is any debt-overhang (i.e., psolv < 1), then the optimal tax rate will be
strictly greater than zero, since at a zero tax rate there is a marginal benefit to having a
transfer but no marginal cost.
    Consider the three parts of Proposition 1.
    For any level of transfer, the marginal gain from the transfer is greater the more severe
is the debt-overhang, since a lower probability of solvency increases the distortion in the
provision of financial services. Therefore, as (1) and (2) of Proposition 1 state, an increase in
L1 , the financial sector liabilities, leads to a higher tax rate, more tax revenue, and greater
issuance of new sovereign debt to fund a larger transfer.
    If the level of pre-existing government debt (ND ) is increased, there is again a greater
marginal gain from the transfer since for any level of tax revenue, the effective transfer (T0 )
is smaller, and therefore the probability of solvency of the financial sector is lower. As (1)
of Proposition 1 states, this pushes the government to increase the optimal tax rate, tax
revenue, and overall amount of sovereign debt.
    However, as (2) of Proposition 1 shows, the rate of increase in total sovereign debt is less
than the increase in ND . Hence, under the no-default and certainty assumptions, an increase
in existing government debt corresponds to a decrease in newly issued sovereign debt and a
smaller transfer T0 . The reason for this decrease is that the underinvestment cost of raising
additional tax revenues is increasing.10
    Finally, Proposition 1 shows that, ceteris paribus, a larger factor share of the financial
sector in aggregate production implies that the government will issue a greater amount of
new debt and a larger transfer. Intuitively, if the financial sector’s output is a more important
input into production, then there will be a greater marginal gain from an increase in the
provision of financial services due to the transfer.11
  10
    Later, we show that the possibility of default or the introduction of uncertainty can alter this result.
  11
    The factor share is given by ϑ. Note, however, that the comparative static is not simply to vary ϑ, but
to hold total output constant while doing so. Equivalently, we may think about comparing the ratio to total
output of our variable of interest while varying the factor share.

                                                    13
3.4    Default Under Certainty
Now we allow the government to deviate from the no-default choice of setting NT = T − ND .
Increasing NT above this threshold has both an associated cost and benefit. The benefit is
that this can increase the transfer to the financial sector. Recall that the transfer T0 equals
P0 NT , where P0 = max(1, T /(NT + ND )) is the price of the government bond. The cost is
that when NT > T − ND , the government will not be able to fully cover its obligations. In
that case, P0 < 1 and the government will default, triggering the dead-weight loss of D.
    Hence, the government’s decision on how many new bonds to issue, NT , splits the decision
space into two regions:

  1.    NT = T − ND       and    1def = 0      (No Default)

  2.    NT > T − ND       and    1def = 1     (Default)

    As shown in Appendix A.7, if the choice to default is made, then it is optimal for the
government to issue an infinite amount of new debt in order to fully dilute existing debt (P0
becomes 0) and hence capture all tax revenues towards the transfer. The resulting situation
is the same as if existing debt ND had been set to zero. Therefore, to determine whether
defaulting is optimal, the government evaluates whether its objective function for given ND
and no default exceeds by at least D (the deadweight default cost) its objective function
with ND set to zero. Formally, let Wno def denote the maximum value of the government’s
objective function conditional on no default, Wdef denote the maximum value conditional on
default, and W = max(Wno def , Wdef ). The following lemma, which is proved in Appendix
A.7, characterizes the optimal government action and resulting equilibrium:

Lemma 4. Conditional on default, it is optimal to set NT → ∞ (and hence P0 → 0).
This implies that Wdef = Wno def N =0 − D. Moreover, if default is undertaken then (1)
                                         D
the optimal tax rate is lower, θ̂0def < θ̂0no def ; (2) provided that kA ND < T̂ def , the gross
                        def       no def
transfer is bigger, Tˆ0     > Tˆ0        + kA ND ; and, (3) equilibrium provision of financial
                       def    no def
services is higher, sˆ0 > sˆ0         .

   Figure 2 displays the optimal default boundary in L1 × ND space along with the No-
Default and Default regions. The following proposition characterizes how a number of factors
pus the sovereign towards default, or in other words, move it closer to the default boundary.

Proposition 2. Ceteris paribus, the benefit to defaulting is:


                                              14
  1. increasing in the financial sector liabilities L1 (severity of debt-overhang), the amount
     of existing government debt ND , and in the factor share of the financial sector.

  2. decreasing in the dead-weight default cost D, and in the fraction of existing govern-
     ment debt held by the financial sector kA .

    Appendix A.8 provides the proof. Consider a worsening of the financial sector’s health,
leading to a decreased provision of financial services. This increases the marginal gain from
further government transfer, and, in turn, increases the gain to the sovereign from defaulting.
This is represented by a move towards the right in Figure 2, decreasing the distance to the
default boundary. A similar kind of result holds if the factor share of financial services is
increased, since the marginal gain of further transfer is higher at every level of transfer.
    An increase in existing debt implies a bigger spread between the optimal transfer and tax
revenue with and without default. Both the extra transfer and decreased underinvestment
represent benefits to defaulting. This is represented by a move upwards in Figure 2, again
decreasing the distance to the default-boundary.
    It is clear that an increase in the deadweight loss raises the threshold for default.
    Finally, and importantly, an increase in the fraction of existing sovereign debt held by
the financial sector also raises the threshold for default since the act of defaulting, which is
aimed at freeing up resources towards the transfer, causes collateral damage to the financial
sector balance sheet. From the vantage point of Figure 2, both an increase in D and k cause
an outward shift in the default boundary.

3.4.1   Two-way Feedback

Propositions 1 and 2 indicate that there is a two-way feedback between the solvency situation
of the financial sector and of the sovereign. First, by Proposition 1, a severe deterioration
in the financial sector’s probability of solvency (e.g., an increase in L1 ) leads to a large
expansion in new debt (NT ) by the sovereign, as it acts to mitigate the under-provision
of financial services. Since the marginal cost of raising the tax revenue (dL/dT ) to fund
this debt expansion is increasing, the sovereign is pushed closer to the decision to default
(Proposition 2), as well as is its maximum debt capacity (Lemma 3). Hence, a financial
sector crisis pushes the sovereign towards distress.
    Going in the other direction, by Proposition 1, a distressed sovereign, e.g., one with high
existing debt (ND ), will have a financial sector with a worse solvency situation. This is
because it is very costly for such a sovereign to fund increased debt to make the transfer to

                                              15
the financial sector. Hence, a more distressed sovereign will tend to correspond to a more
distressed financial sector (lower post-transfer psolv ). Strategically defaulting is an avenue for
a distressed sovereign to free debt capacity for additional transfer. However, large holdings
of sovereign debt (k) by the financial sector mean that taking this avenue simultaneously
causes collateral damage to the balance sheet of the financial sector, limiting the benefit
from this option (Proposition 2). In this case, a distressed sovereign is further incapacitated
in its ability to strengthen the solvency of its financial sector.


3.5     Uncertainty, Default, and Pricing
We now introduce uncertainty about future output (i.e., growth) by allowing the variance
of Ṽ (K1 ) to be nonzero. Instead of a binary default vs. no-default decision, the government
now implicitly chooses a continuous probability of default when it sets the tax rate and new
debt issuance. In this case, if raising taxes further incurs a large under-investment loss, the
government can choose to increase debt issuance while holding the tax rate constant. This
dilutes the claim of existing bondholders to tax revenues, thereby generating a larger transfer
without inducing further underinvestment. The trade-off is an increase in the government’s
probability of default and expected dead-weight default loss. In this case, the sovereign
effectively ‘sacrifices’ its own creditworthiness to improve the solvency of the financial sector,
leading to a ‘spillover’ of the financial sector crisis onto the credit risk of the sovereign.
    Although θ0 and NT , are the variables the government directly chooses, it is more en-
lightening to look at two other variables that map one-to-one to them. The first variable is
T , which again equals θ0 V (K1 ), the expected tax revenue. The second variable is:

             NT + ND
       H=
                T

In words, H is the ratio of outstanding debt to expected tax revenue. It is the sovereign’s
“insolvency ratio”, i.e. its ability to cover its total debt at face value. The government’s
problem (3) then is equivalent to optimally choosing T and H.12 Note that the no-default and
total-default cases under certainty correspond to setting H = 1 and H → ∞, respectively.
   To represent uncertainty we write Ṽ (K1 ) = V (K1 )R̃V , where R̃V ≥ 0 represents the
shock to Ṽ (K1 ). By construction, E[R̃V ] = 1. We also assume that the distribution of R̃V
  12
     Formally, the mapping from θ0 to T is invertible on [0, θ0max ] (as before, we can limit our concern to
this region) and given T , the mapping from H to NT is invertible. Hence, these alternative control variables
map uniquely to the original ones on the region of interest.


                                                     16
is independent of the variables K1 , θ0 , and NT .

Pricing, Default Probability and the Transfer: Using H we can easily express the
sovereign’s bond price, P0 , and probability of default, pdef , as follows:
                       "                 !#                
                             θ0 Ṽ (K1 )                 1
        P0    = E0 min 1,                    = E0 min 1, R̃V    ,                                       (9)
                             NT + ND                    H
                                                          
       pdef   = prob θ0 Ṽ (K1 ) < NT + ND    = prob R̃V < H .                                         (10)

Note that these quantities depend only on H and do not directly change with T . Next, as
NT = (T − ND /H)H, we can express the transfer in terms of T and H:

                                         ND    h          i
       T0     =   NT P0     =     (T −      )E0 min H, R̃V    .                                        (11)
                                         H


The Optimal Probability of Default: Appendix A.9 and A.10 derive the first-order
conditions for T and H, respectively. The first-order condition for T , the expected tax
revenues, involves the same transfer-underinvestment trade-off as under certainty (adjusted
to account for H). Varying H, the sovereign’s insolvency ratio, involves a new trade-off.
Raising H increases the transfer by diluting existing bondholders–it raises outstanding debt
but without increasing expected tax revenue. This captures a greater faction of tax revenues
towards the transfer but raises the sovereign’s probability of default.
    The top panel of Figure 3 illustrates the marginal gain (solid line) and loss (dashed
line) incurred by increasing H for a fixed level of T .13 The marginal cost of an increase
in H is the rise in expected dead-weight default cost. This is shown by the dashed green
line in Figure 3. Figure 3 indicates that (with T held constant) there are two potential
candidates for the optimal choice of H. The first is the value of H at which the gain and loss
curves intersect. The second is to let H → ∞, representing a total default and full dilution
of existing bondholders. The bottom panel of Figure 3 plots the corresponding value of
the government’s objective as a function of H. The plot shows that for the configuration
displayed, a relatively small value of H achieves the optimum, which is at the intersection
of the gain and loss curves in the top panel. As this optimal H is beyond the left end of
the support of R̃V (which is the origin in the figure), it corresponds to an optimal non-zero
  13
    To generate the plots, we need to assume a specific distribution for uncertainty. For simplicity, we let
R̃V have a uniform distribution.



                                                    17
probability of default. Note that beyond the upper end of the support of R̃V , the objective
function again rises in H, because once debt issuance is large enough that default is certain,
it is optimal for the government to fully dilute existing bondholders to obtain the largest
possible transfer. Finally, the dash-dot curves in Figure 3 show a case with an increase in
L1 (more severe debt-overhang in the financial sector) relative to the solid lines.

3.5.1   Comparative Statics Under Uncertainty

The government jointly chooses T and H in an optimal way by comparing the relative
marginal cost and benefit of adjusting each quantity. When the marginal benefit of additional
transfer is large, but the marginal underinvestment loss due to taxation is already high, the
government will optimally begin to ‘sacrifice’ its own creditworthiness to generate additional
transfer. The following proposition characterizes how different factors impact Ĥ and T̂ , the
government’s optimal choices of H and T in equilibrium:

Proposition 3. If (T̂ , Ĥ) is an interior solution to the government’s problem on a region
of the parameter space, then Ĥ is increasing in L1 , in ND and in ϑ, and decreasing in
D. Furthermore, T̂ is also increasing in L1 .

    Figure 4 plots comparative statics of the equilibrium (optimal) values of T , H, T0 , and
P0 as L1 and ND are varied. The discontinuities that appears in the plots, as indicated by
the dotted lines, represent the point at which total default becomes optimal.
    The top panel of Figure 4 varies L1 . It shows that T increases monotonically in L1 ,
up to the point where the sovereign chooses total default. The corresponding plot for H
tells a different story. For low levels of L1 , H is held constant at a low value. This value
corresponds to the lower end of the support of R̃V , so the probability of sovereign default
remains 0. Correspondingly, the plot shows that in this range, P0 remains fully valued at
1. For sufficiently high L1 (e.g., financial crisis), the government chooses to increase H. It
‘sacrifices’ its own creditworthiness in order to achieve a larger transfer. The increase in the
transfer is apparent in the subplot for T0 , while the damage to the sovereign’s creditworthiness
is apparent in the plot for P0 , which begins to decrease once H begins to rise.14
    The plots also show that when the financial sector’s situation is severe enough (L1 is
large), the optimal government response can be a total default. The outcome of a total
default is illustrated in the plots at the point of the dotted line. As in the certainty case,
  14
    Note that the transfer increases more rapidly in L1 once H begins to increase. This occurs because
higher H means a a greater proportion of expected tax revenue is captured towards the transfer.


                                                 18
total default fully dilutes existing bondholders, freeing extra capacity for the sovereign to
generate the transfer. As indicated in the plots, this leads to a jump up in T0 and a jump
down in T . At the same time, P0 drops to 0.
    The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the comparative statics for ND . It is apparent that
for low levels of legacy debt the sovereign keeps H constant at the low end of its support, so
there is no probability of default and P0 remains at 1. For these values of ND , the government
funds the transfer exclusively through increases in tax revenues. Note that in this range the
transfer is decreasing in ND , similar to the case of certainty. Once ND is sufficiently high, the
underinvestment costs of increasing tax revenue become so high that the sovereign begins to
increase H to fund the transfer. Consequently, the probability of default rises and P0 begins
to decrease, as shown in the plot. Interestingly, in this range the combination of increased
H and T imply that the transfer is actually increasing in ND . The reason for this is that
for large ND , the dilution of existing bondholders is an effective channel for increasing the
transfer. Moreover, as the plots show, at high enough ND , total default becomes optimal.


3.6     Government ‘Guarantees’
Explicit government guarantees of financial sector debt have been a part of a number of
countries’ financial sector bailouts, notably Ireland. Moreover, it has been common for
sovereigns to step in to prevent the liquidation of banks by guaranteeing their debt, which
strongly suggests that there is an implicit ‘safety net’.15
    In this section, we add to the model a simple notion of a government guarantee of financial
sector debt. We do this for two reasons. First, guarantees are a measure that serves to
prevent liquidation of the financial sector by debtholders, which is a necessary pre-condition
for increasing the provision of financial services. Second, guarantees are rather unique in
that, by construction, their benefit is targeted at debt holders and not equity holders. This
unique feature is important in helping us identify empirically a main implication of our
model, that there is direct feedback between sovereign and financial sector credit risk.
    In the interest of simplicity, and since debt-overhang alleviation is the central feature of
bailouts in the model, we do not explore the feedback of the guarantees on the transfer and
taxation decisions analyzed above. Instead, we simply set the stage for the implications of
the guarantees for our empirical strategy.
  15
    The fallout from the failure of Lehman brothers and the apparent desire to prevent a repeat of this
experience has strongly reinforced this view.



                                                  19
3.6.1     Avoiding Liquidation

We model debtholders as potentially liquidating (or inducing a run on) the financial sector
if they are required to incur losses in case of financial sector default. To prevent debtholders
from liquidating, the government ‘guarantees’ their debt. That is, it pledges to bondholders
L1 − Ã1 − T0 from tax revenues in case of insolvency. The guarantee is pari-passu with other
claims on tax revenue. Hence, the guarantee has the same credit risk as other claims on the
sovereign. In fact, the guarantee is just equivalent to a claim that issues L1 − Ã1 − T0 new
government bonds to debt holders in case of insolvency.
    Note that this claim accrues exclusively to debtholders and not to equityholders. This
differentiates it from general assets of the financial sector, such as the asset paying Ã1 or
the transfer, T0 . Importantly, a change in the value of general assets of the firm changes
the value of equity and debt in a certain proportion, while a change in the value of the
guarantee changes the value of debt but not the value of equity. This implies that, if there
are guarantees, the change in equity value will not be sufficient for determining the change
in debt value. The following proposition gives a formal statement of this, derived under a
uniform distribution for Ã1 (same as used above to generate the figures).

Proposition 4. Let D be the value of debt, E the value of equity, and Ã1 ∼ U [Amin , Amax ].
In the absence of a guarantee, the return on equity is sufficient for knowing the return on
debt. In contrast, in the presence of a guarantee, the return on debt is a bivariate function
of both the return on equity and the return on the sovereign bond price.

   This bivariate dependence is approximated by the following relation:

        dD   (1 − psolv )(1 − P0 ) E dE (1 − psolv )2 (Amax − Amin ) P0 dP0
           ≈                           +                                       ,           (12)
        D           psolv          D E                 2             D P0

which is derived in the Appendix. The term involving the equity return ( dE     E
                                                                                  ) captures the
impact on the debt value of any changes in the value of the general pool of assets of the
firm, including changes in the firm’s expected future profits. This type of result goes back
to Merton (1974), where the changes in both the debt and equity value reflect the change in
the total value of the firm. In the presence of a guarantee, there is an additional component,
which picks up the change in the value of debt coming from changes in the value of the
government guarantee. The change in value of the guarantee, which reflects variation in
the credit risk of the sovereign ( dP
                                    P0
                                      0
                                        ), is concentrated primarily with debt and therefore not


                                              20
captured adequately by the return on equity.16

3.6.2     Two-way Feedback Revisited

Proposition 3 and Figure 4 show that with uncertainty about future output, the ‘spillover’
of the financial sector crisis onto the sovereign takes the form of a higher insolvency ratio H,
which is reflected in a lower sovereign bond price (and higher CDS rate).
    The creditworthiness of the sovereign also feeds back directly onto the credit risk of the
financial sector. Governments that have a higher level of legacy debt (ND ) generate smaller
transfers and so the health of their financial sectors will be relatively weaker post-transfer
(lower post-transfer psolv ). Furthermore, once a bailout pushes the government to increase
its insolvency ratio H, its debt becomes risky and propagates through to banks negative
sovereign shocks (e.g., shocks to growth and tax revenue R̃V ) via changes in the value of their
sovereign debt exposure–the transfer, holdings of legacy government debt, and government
guarantees. This feedback implies a post-bailout increase in co-movement between sovereign
and financial sector credit risk.


4       Empirics
In this section we present empirical evidence in favor of the main arguments formalized in
our model: (1) bank bailouts reduced financial sector credit risk but were a key factor in
triggering the rise in sovereign credit risk of the developed countries, and (2) there is a
two-way feedback between the credit risk of the sovereign and the financial sector.
    The setting for our empirical analysis is the financial crisis of 2007-10. We divide the crisis
into three separate periods relative to the bailouts: pre, around, and after. The pre-bailout
period, which culminated in Lehman Brother’s bankruptcy, saw a severe deterioration in
banks’ balance sheets, a substantial rise in the credit risk of financial firms, and a significant
loss in the market value of bank equity. This negative shock generated substantial debt
overhang in the financial sector and significantly increased the likelihood of failure of, or
  16
     Note that there is theoretically also an indirect feedback of sovereign credit risk on financial sector credit
risk. This is because the guarantee represents additional (state-contingent) debt issuance by the sovereign,
which raises expected default costs of the sovereign and potentially reduces the size of the transfer to the
financial sector. As mentioned above, to maintain simplicity we will not incorporate the impact of the
guarantee on the government’s optimal choice of tax revenue or debt issuance. Instead, we will mainly use
the above result to motivate part of our empirical work.




                                                        21
runs on, financial institutions. We interpret this as setting the stage for the initial time
period in the model, and the bank bailouts as the sovereign’s response, per the model.
    We present our empirical results in two parts. The first part focuses on point (1). We
present evidence that the bailouts transmitted risk from the banks to the sovereigns and
triggered a rise in sovereign credit risk across a broad cross-section of developed countries.
We then confirm a prediction of the model by documenting the post-bailout emergence of a
positive relationship between sovereign credit risk and government debt-to-gdp ratios. We
also analyze the ability of the pre-bailout credit risk of the financial sector and the pre-bailout
government debt-to-gdp ratio to predict post-bailout sovereign credit risk. This relationship
is predicted by the model and is supportive of the argument that the bailouts led to the
emergence of sovereign credit risk in developed countries.
    The second part of our analysis focuses on point (2) by testing for the sovereign-bank two-
way feedback. We use a broad panel of bank and sovereign CDS data to carry out tests that
establish this channel and show that it is quantitatively important. A significant challenge
in demonstrating direct sovereign-bank feedback is the concern that another (unobserved)
factor directly affects both bank and sovereign credit risk, giving rise to co-movement between
them even in the absence of any direct feedback. We address these concerns by utilizing a
particularly useful feature of government ‘guarantees’–that they are targeted specifically at
bank debt holders. This allows us to control for bank fundamentals using equity returns and
establish the direct sovereign-bank feedback.
    We also gather data on the sovereign bond holdings of European banks that were released
after the stress tests conducted in the first half of 2010. Using these data we show that
bank holdings of foreign sovereign bonds have information about how sovereign credit risk
affects a bank’s credit risk. This result provides further evidence of a direct sovereign-to-
bank feedback because we control for country-specific macroeconomic changes by using the
change in value of foreign (rather than home) sovereign bonds.
    We next describe the data construction and provide some summary statistics.


4.1    Data and Summary Statistics
We use Bankscope to identify all banks headquartered in Western Europe, the United States,
and Australia with more than $50 billion in assets as of the end of fiscal year 2006. We choose
this sample because smaller banks and banks outside these countries usually do not have
traded CDS. We then search for CDS in the database Datastream. We find CDS for 99


                                                22
banks and match CDS to bank characteristics from Bankscope. Next, we search for equity
returns using Datastream. We find equity returns for 62 banks and match returns to CDS
and bank characteristics. Finally, we match these data to sovereign CDS (based on bank
headquarters) and OECD Economic Outlook data on public debt.
    Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics for all banks with CDS prices and invest-
ment grade credit ratings. As of July 2007, the average bank had assets of $589.3 billion
and equity of $26.8 billion. The average equity ratio was 5.1% and the average Tier 1 ratio
was 8.5%. The average bank CDS was 21.8 bps and the average sovereign CDS (if available
as of July 2007) was 6.6 bps.
    Panel B of Table 1 present summary statistics of weekly changes in bank CDS and
sovereign CDS for the main bailout periods. We drop all observations with zero changes in
bank CDS or sovereign CDS to avoid stale data. All results presented below are robust to
including these observations. Before the bank bailouts, the average bank CDS was 93.2 bps.
The average sovereign CDS was 13.5 bps. This low level of sovereign credit risk suggests that
financial market participants did not anticipate large-scale bank bailouts prior to September
2008.
    In the bailout period, we see a significant rise in both bank and credit risk with average
bank and sovereign CDS of 288.6 bps and 39.3 bps, respectively. As we discuss below, a
substantial part of the increase in bank credit risk was triggered by the Lehman bankruptcy.
Bank equity values declined sharply during this period with a negative weekly return of
6.7%.
    In the post-bailout period, average bank and sovereign CDS were 188.7 and 108.5 bps,
respectively. These CDS levels are suggestive of a significant transfer of financial sector
credit risk on sovereign balance sheets. We also find significant variation in sovereign CDS
with a standard deviation of weekly changes of 11.3%. This evidence suggests the emergence
of significant sovereign credit risk after the bank bailouts.


4.2     The Sovereign Risk Trigger
4.2.1   Bank and Sovereign CDS

The first bank bailout announcement in Western Europe was on September 30, 2008 in
Ireland. We define the pre-bailout period as starting on January 1, 2007 and ending on
September 26, 2008. We start the period in January 2007 to include the increase in bank
credit risk because of the financial crisis. Note that the pre-bailout period includes the


                                             23
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008 and the period immediately after-
wards, so that it includes the immediate effect of Lehman’s bankruptcy on other banks.
Hence, the pre-bailout period captures both the prolonged increase in bank credit risk dur-
ing 2007-2008 and the post-Lehman spike that occurs before the bank bailouts. To examine
bank and sovereign credit risk in this period, we analyze the country-level change in sovereign
and bank CDS. For each country, we compute the change in bank CDS as the unweighted
average of all banks with traded CDS.
    Figure 5 summarizes the results for the pre-bailout period. For each country, the first
column depicts the change in sovereign CDS and the second column depicts the change in
bank CDS over the pre-bailout period. The figure shows that there is a large increase in
bank CDS during this period. For example, the average bank CDS in Ireland increases by
300 bps. However, there is almost no change in sovereign CDS. Overall, the figure shows
that the credit risk of the financial sector was greatly increased over the pre-bailout period
but that there was little impact on sovereign credit risk.17
    Within one month after the Irish bailout, almost every Western European country an-
nounced a bank bailout. The bailouts typically consisted of asset purchase programs, debt
guarantees, and equity injections or some combination therefore. The programs were sub-
stantial with up-front government financing of up to 20% of GDP. Several countries made
more than one announcement during this period. As noted above, the first country to make
a formal announcement was Ireland on September 30, 2010. Many other countries soon fol-
lowed Ireland’s example, in part to offset outflows from their own financial sectors to newly
secured financial sectors. As a result, the bank bailout announcements were not truly inde-
pendent since sovereigns partly reacted to other sovereigns’ announcements. We therefore
define the bailout period as the one-month period in which most bank bailouts were first
announced.
    Figure 6 plots the average change in bank CDS and sovereign CDS during the bailout
period. For most countries, bank CDS significantly decreased over this one-month period.
For example, the average bank CDS in Ireland decreased by about 200 bps. At the same
time, there is a significant increase in sovereign CDS. For example, the sovereign CDS of
  17
    We note that some investors may have expected bank bailouts even before the first official announcement
on September 30, 2008. Such an expectation would reduce the observed increase in bank CDS and shift
forward in time the rise in sovereign CDS. To the extent that investors held such expectations prior to
September 30, 2008, they can explain the small rise in sovereign CDS that occurs late in the pre-bailout
period. However, the fact that the impact in this period is so small quantitatively suggest that the bank
bailouts were a surprise to the majority of investors.



                                                    24
Ireland increased by about 50 bps. Most other countries exhibit a similar pattern with
decreasing bank CDS and increasing sovereign CDS.
    The appearance of this striking pattern across a broad cross-section of countries is di-
rectly in line with the predictions of our model. It shows that the sovereigns responded to
the distress in the financial sector with the bailouts, achieving a substantial reduction in
banks’ credit risk. However, in accordance with our model, this caused a contemporaneous,
immediate increase in the sovereigns’ credit risk.
    Next, we examine the period after the bailouts. We define the post-bailout period as
beginning after the end of the bank bailouts and ending in March 2010. We choose March
2010 because this is the date for which the European bank stress data results were released
but prior to large-scale interventions by the European Central Bank. The qualitative results
are robust to using later cut-off dates.
    Figure 7 plots the change in bank CDS and sovereign CDS over the post-bailout period.
We find that both sovereign CDS and bank CDS increased across most countries. Moreover,
bank CDS and sovereign CDS move together after the bank bailouts. This suggests that
they are tied together and potentially feedback on each other as suggested by our model and
as we further explore below.

4.2.2   Debt Ratios, Financial Distress and Sovereign CDS

Our model predicts that the increase in sovereign credit risk upon bailouts should depend
on the pre-bailout debt of the sovereign and the pre-bailout level of financial sector distress.
The model also suggests that there should be a positive relationship between sovereign credit
risk and measures of government debt-to-gdp after the bailout even if no such relationship
appears beforehand.
    Figure 8 shows the relationship between debt-to-gdp ratio and sovereign CDS across
countries. The upper panel plots the relationship before the bailouts. The panel shows
almost no correlation between the two variables. The lower panel plots the relationship
after the bank bailouts. The panel shows a strong and positive relationship between the two
variables. These figures are highly suggestive of a link between public debt and sovereign
credit risk because of the bank bailouts.
    To test this relationship more formally, we use data on sovereign CDS, financial sector
distress, and government debt-to-gdp ratios. We measure pre-bailout financial sector distress
at the country level by averaging bank CDS on September 22, 2008. We choose this date
midway between Lehman’s bankruptcy and the first bailout announcement. We measure the

                                              25
government debt-to-gdp ratio as the government gross liabilities as a percentage of gdp. For
the post-bailout date we again choose March 31, 2010, the reporting date for the European
bank stress tests. We estimate the following regression:

       yi = α + β(Pre-Bailout Debti ) + γ log(Financial Sector Distressi ) + εi

where the outcome variable yi is either the natural logarithm of sovereign CDS or the debt-
to-gdp ratio of country i.
    Table 2 presents the result of our analysis. We first focus on the post-bailout results.
Column (3) finds that a 1% increase in the pre-bailout debt-to-gdp ratio leads to a 1.5%
increase in sovereign CDS post-bailout.18 Column (4) shows that a 1% increase in pre-bailout
financial sector distress increases post-bailout sovereign CDS by 0.965%. The coefficient on
debt-to-gdp decreases slightly but remains marginally significant. The R-squared of the
regression is close to 50%. These results suggest that pre-bailout financial sector distress
and sovereign’s debt-to-gdp ratio are highly predictive of post-bailout sovereign credit risk.
    In contrast, Column (1) of Table 2 shows that in the pre-bailout period there is only a
very weak relationship between debt-to-gdp and sovereign CDS. The coefficient is small and
statistically insignificant. Column (2) shows that the coefficient on financial sector distress
in the pre-bailout period is also statistically insignificant.
    From these results we can see that there emerged a relationship between debt-to-gdp and
sovereign credit risk that was not present beforehand. Note, moreover, that the emergence
of this relationship coincides with an overall rise in sovereign debt ratios. In the context of
our model, the sovereigns have increased debt-to-god ratios into the region where dilution
of existing debt occurs and there is a negative relationship between debt ratios and the
government bond price (see Figure 4).
    Column (5) examines the ability of pre-bailout financial sector distress to predict the
change in government debt-to-gdp from the pre-bailout to the post-bailout period. Consis-
tent with the model, we find that financial sector distress is positively related to the increase
in debt-to-gdp. The coefficient is positive and marginally statistically significant. Column (6)
shows that consistent with the model’s predictions, post-bailout debt-to-gdp is predicted by
  18
     We make note of two points. First, the model predicts that H determines the level of sovereign CDS.
However, the debt-to-gdp ratio corresponds to θ0 H in the model rather than simply H. Nevertheless, the
prediction of the model carries over to θ0 H since θ0 is increasing in financial sector distress. Second, debt-
to-gdp ratios are an imperfect proxy for θ0 H because H takes into account any future issuance of debt to
pay for current obligations related to the bailouts, whereas debt-to-gdp ratios are lagging. We can address
this to some extent by using leading debt-to-gdp.


                                                      26
pre-bailout debt-to-gdp and pre-bailout financial sector distress. Both coefficients are statis-
tically significant and together the two variables explain 84% of the variation in post-bailout
debt-to-gdp.


4.3     The Sovereign-Bank Feedback
This section analyzes the two-way feedback between sovereign and bank sector credit risk.
Once the sovereign opens itself up to credit risk due to bailouts, the price of its debt becomes
sensitive to macroeconomic shocks. Moreover, our model indicates that subsequent changes
in the sovereign’s credit risk should impact the financial sector’s credit risk through three
channels: (i) ongoing bailout payments and subsidies,19 (ii) direct holdings of government
debt, and (iii) explicit and implicit government guarantees. In our empirical analysis, we
estimate the aggregate effect of these three channels.
    We start by estimating the following relationship in the post-bailout period:

       ∆ log(Bank CDSijt ) = α + β∆ log(Sovereign CDSjt ) + εijt

where ∆ log(Bank CDSijt ) is the change in the log CDS of bank i headquartered in country j
from time t to time t − 1 and ∆ log(Sovereign CDSjt ) is the change in the log Sovereign CDS
of country j from time t to time t − 1. At the weekly frequency, in the post-bailout period
the estimate of β is 0.47 and highly statistically signficant. This means that a 10% increase
in sovereign CDS is associated with a 4.7% increase in bank CDS. This result suggests
that sovereign and bank CDS exhibit a strong comovement, which is consistent with direct
sovereign-to-bank feedback.
    However, an obvious concern is that there is another (unobserved) factor that affects
both bank and sovereign credit risk. Such a factor could explain the co-movement without
there necessarily being an underlying direct channel between sovereign and bank credit risk.
More specifically, we interpret changes in sovereign credit risk as changes in expectations
about macroeconomic fundamentals, such as employment, growth, and productivity. These
fundamentals also have a direct effect on the value of bank assets such as mortgages or
bank loans. Hence, changes in macroeconomic conditions may generate a correlation be-
  19
    While we model the bailout as happening in one stage, in practice bailouts may occur in mutliple steps.
This may occur when early efforts are deemed to be insufficient. As with the one-stage bailout in our model,
the sovereign’s creditworthiness is important in determining the potential for and magnitude of future bailout
steps. This presents another, dynamic channel through which changes in sovereign creditworthiness impact
both financial sector debt and equity values.


                                                     27
tween sovereign and bank credit risk even in the absence of the direct feedback mechanism.
Therefore, establishing that there is a direct feedback between sovereign and financial sector
credit risk is a significant empirical challenge.
    We use several strategies to address this concern. Our first strategy is to include three
sets of controls. First, we add controls that capture market-wide changes that affect both
bank and sovereign risk directly. Our market-wide controls are a CDS-market index and a
measure of aggregate volatility. Our CDS market index is the iTraxx Europe index, which is
comprised of 125 of the most liquid CDS names referencing European investment grade cred-
its. The CDS market index captures market-wide variation in CDS rates caused by changes
in fundamental credit risk, liquidity, and CDS-market specific shocks.20 For the volatility
index we follow the empirical literature and use a VIX-like index, the VDAX, which is the
German counterpart to the VIX index for the S&P 500. This captures changes in aggregate
volatility, which is an important factor in the pricing of credit risk. Second, we include
weekly fixed effects. The fixed effects captures (unobserved) variation that is common across
all banks. Third, we include bank-specific coefficients on all the control variables and bank
fixed effects. This accommodates potential non-linearities in the estimated relationships.
    We implement this approach by estimating the following regression:

       ∆ log(Bank CDSijt ) = αi + δt + β∆ log(Sovereign CDSjt ) + γ∆Xijt + εijt

where ∆Xijt are the changes in the control variables from time t to time t − 1, δt are weekly
fixed effects, and αi are bank fixed-effects.
    Table 3 shows the results for the pre-, around, and post-bailout period. For each period
there are three columns of results. The left column reports the coefficient after including the
market-wide control variables. The middle column adds the weekly fixed effects. The right
column adds bank fixed effects and bank-specific coefficients on controls.
    Our main focus is on testing for the sovereign-bank feedback, so we examine the post-
bailout results first. Column (7) shows that β is positive, as expected, and highly statistically
significant. The magnitude is also economically important, implying that an increase in
sovereign CDS of 10% translates into a 2.21% increase in bank CDS. The control coefficients
are both statistically significant and the signs are as expected; an increase in aggregate CDS
  20
     Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) find that a substantial part of the variation in corporate
credit spread changes is driven by a single factor that is independent of changes in risk factors or measures
of liquidity. They therefore conclude that this variation represents ‘local supply/demand shocks’ in the
corporate bond market.



                                                     28
levels or aggregate volatility is associated with a rise in bank CDS. Altogether, the variables
explain 33.8% of the variation in weekly bank CDS.
    Column (8) adds the weekly fixed effects. The coefficient on sovereign CDS decreases but
remains highly statistically significant. The decrease is not surprising, as time fixed effects
represent a rich set of controls. The weekly fixed effects are collinear with the market-wide
control variables; therefore, we do not estimate coefficients on the market-wide controls.
There is an increase in the R-squared of about 7.6% over column (7), indicating that most
of the unobserved market-wide variation was already captured by the market-wide controls.
    Column (9) shows that the coefficient on sovereign CDS is essentially unchanged and
remains highly statistically significant after adding bank-specific coefficients on the control
variables. Given the flexibility of this specification, we interpret the coefficients on sovereign
CDS as robust evidence in favor of direct sovereign-to-bank feedback.
    Comparing these results with those for the around-bailout period in columns (4)-(6) shows
interesting differences. For the around-bailout period, the coefficient on sovereign CDS is
negative after controlling for week fixed effects. In other words, in the around-bailout period
an increase in sovereign CDS is associated with a decrease in bank CDS. This is very much
consistent with the evidence presented above that the sovereigns took onto themselves credit
risk from their financial sectors during this phase. As shown in Column (6), the coefficient
is large and statistically significant with a 10% increase in sovereign CDS leading to 12.9%
decrease in bank CDS.
    Columns (1)-(3) show the results for the pre-bailout period. They show small coefficients
on sovereign CDS that are indistinguishable from zero. As expected, in the pre-bailout
period there is no evidence for sovereign-bank feedbacks. In contrast, the CDS market
control coefficient is significant and has a large magnitude, similar to the results for the
other periods.

4.3.1   Controlling for Bank Fundamentals

The results above establish that there is a strong two-way sovereign-bank feedback. However,
there may remain a concern that our strategy to this point does not control for country-
specific macroeconomic shocks that affect both sovereign and credit risk. For example, a
negative shock to expected growth will decrease the value of banks’ assets or future earnings
power, while at the same time reducing national output. This will raise bank and sovereign
CDS even in the absence of a direct feedback between them. This shock may not be fully
captured by our market-wide controls if it has a heterogenous impact across countries.

                                               29
     We address this concern employing a strategy that utilizes a particularly useful feature
of bank bailouts. Specifically, most bailouts were partly structured in the form of govern-
ment ‘guarantees’, which are targeted specifically at bank debt holders. This implies that
sovereign-specific shocks should have a disproportionate impact on debt holders because, in
addition to changing the value of bank assets, such shocks change the value of government
‘guarantees’ (implicit or explicit). Therefore, to establish whether there is direct sovereign-
to-bank feedback, we can test if sovereign CDS is a determinant of bank CDS even after we
control for the impact of shocks to bank fundamentals.
     Our empirical strategy for dealing with this concern is motivated by the model. Our
guarantees model (Section 3.6) shows that bank equity returns are sufficient for determining
changes in bank CDS in the absence of government ‘guarantees’.21 This implies that once
we control for bank equity returns we should not find that changes in sovereign CDS have
any further explanatory power for changes in bank CDS. Indeed, a-priori it seems that even
if there are direct sovereign-to-bank feedback channels, their impact may be subsumed into
an equity control, making it difficult to document their existence. On the other hand, if one
finds that sovereign CDS does have further explanatory power for bank CDS beyond equity
returns, then this is strongly supportive of a sovereign-to-bank feedback channel. Propo-
sition 4 shows that ‘guarantees’ present a source for such a potential finding because they
discriminate precisely in favor of debtholders. In the presence of ‘guarantees’, a projection of
changes in bank CDS that controls for equity returns should still find a (positive) exposure
on changes in sovereign CDS.
     We therefore augment the regression with banks’ weekly equity returns. The estimates
are shown in Table 4. The structure is similar to Table 3. Columns (7)-(9) show that in
the post-bailout period the coefficient on sovereign CDS survives and is highly statistically
significant. As shown in columns (7) and (8), although the bank stock return coefficient
is highly statistically significant and possesses the expected negative sign, its inclusion has
little impact on the magnitude of the sovereign CDS coefficient. Column (9) includes bank-
specific coefficients on bank stock returns. The results show that the coefficient on sovereign
CDS decreases somewhat but remains highly significant.
     We note that the coefficients in Column (7) to (9) are slightly smaller than the comparable
coefficients in Table 3. This is consistent with small, positive benefits of bank bailouts to
  21
    This result is in fact quite general. It holds in models of defaultable bond pricing that build on the
canonical model of Merton (1974), where stock returns contain all information about changes in bank asset
values and therefore can (locally) capture all variation in the price of debt.



                                                   30
bank equity holders.
    For the bailout and pre-bailout periods, the results are quite similar to those in Table 3.
As shown in columns (1) to (6), we again find a negative coefficient on sovereign CDS in the
bailout period and an essentially zero coefficient in the pre-bailout period.

4.3.2    Bank-level Heterogeneity

To analyze further the sovereign-bank feedback, we also examine whether heterogeneity in
bank characteristics affects banks’ sensitivity to changes in sovereign CDS. To this end, we
estimate the coefficient on an interaction term of changes in sovereign CDS and a bank’s
Tier 1 capital ratio. The Tier 1 capital ratio is commonly used in the banking industry as
a proxy for a bank’s probability of solvency. This specification is motivated by the model.
Our guarantees model suggests that we should find that the magnitude of the coefficient on
changes in sovereign CDS is decreasing in banks’ Tier 1 ratios. Intuitively, the impact of
changes in the value of government guarantees is stronger for less well-capitalized banks.
    Table 5 reports the results. The coefficient of interest is the interaction term. For the
post-bailout period, the negative estimates for the interaction term indicate that banks with
higher Tier 1 ratios were less sensitive to variation in sovereign CDS rates. Although the
estimates are negative in columns (7) to (9), only column (9), which includes the full set of
controls is statistically significant.
    The results in the bailout period are surprising. Similar to the post-bailout period,
the coefficient on the interaction term is negative. This implies that well-capitalized banks
experienced a larger CDS decrease relative to poorly capitalized banks during the bailout
period.22 In the pre-bailout period, the interaction term is positive but small and statistically
insignificant.

4.3.3    The Impact on Equity Value

For the purposes of establishing the existence of a two-way feedback we have mainly focused
on changes in bank CDS. It is also interesting to look at the impact of bailouts on bank
stock returns. From the viewpoint of the model, bank stock returns should reflect changes
in sovereign credit risk due to their impact on the value of continuing bailout payments and
  22
    This might perhaps reflect that bailout packages partly attempted to “pool” the risks of banks in the
economy.




                                                   31
banks’ holdings of government bonds. To that end, we estimate the following regression:

      Bank Stock Returnijt = αi + δt + β∆ log(Sovereign CDSjt ) + γ∆Xijt + εijt

where Bank Stock Returnijt is the stock return of bank i headquartered in country j from
time t to time t − 1. We use the same control variables as in Table 4.
    Table 6 presents the results. Columns (7) to (9) show that in the post-bailout period an
increase in sovereign CDS is associated with a decrease in bank stock returns. This result
is robust to the inclusion of the full set of controls. Note also that the coefficients on the
controls have the expected signs and are significant.
    During the bailout period, the coefficient on sovereign CDS is not distinguishable from
zero. The point estimate is positive in columns (5) and (6), but is not statistically significant.
Still, across the board, the point estimates are clearly higher than for the post-bailout period,
which is consistent with the idea that equity holders benefitted from bank bailouts. One
potential offsetting effect on this result is that in some countries the benefits of bailouts to
equity holders were offset by charges (or expectations of charges) levied by the government.
    Columns (1) to (3) show that as before, the coefficient on sovereign CDS in the pre-bailout
period is essentially zero.


4.4    European Bank Stress Test Analysis
As a final part of our analysis, we use data on the sovereign bond holdings of European
banks. These data were released as part of the European bank stress tests, which were
conducted in the first half of 2010. The data provide a view of a bank’s bond holdings of
both its own government bonds and those of other European countries.
    We first describe the data and provide summary statistics. We collect the stress test
data from the websites of national bank regulators in Europe. The data consists of bank
characteristics and holdings of European sovereign bonds. A total of 91 banks participated
in the bank stress tests. These banks represent about 70 percent of bank assets in Europe.
For all banks, we search for CDS prices in the database Datastream. Using bank names,
we match 51 banks to CDS prices. Unmatched banks are mostly smaller banks from Spain
and Eastern Europe that do not have publicly quoted CDS prices. For each bank we match
sovereign holdings to sovereign CDS.
    Table 7 presents summary statistics for all banks that participated in the European bank
stress tests. As of March 2010, the average bank had risk-weighted assets of 126 billion

                                               32
euros and a Tier 1 capital ratio of 10.2%. The average holdings of gross and net European
sovereign bonds are 20.6 billion euros and 19.7 billion euros, respectively. Hence, the average
bank holds about one sixth of risk-weighted assets in sovereign bonds. Banks have a strong
home bias in their sovereign holdings: about 69.4% of bonds are issued by the country in
which a bank is headquartered. This is supportive of the model’s assumption that banks are
exposed to home-country sovereign risk through their holdings of government bonds.
   We use these data to conduct an alternative test of the impact of sovereign credit risk on
bank credit risk. Our test focuses on changes in the value of foreign-sovereign holdings rather
than own-country sovereign holdings. The benefit of this approach is that it circumvents the
usual concerns about omitted country-specific macro shocks.
   To implement this test, we construct a bank-specific variable measuring variation in
the value of banks’ foreign sovereign bond holdings. Let SovBondik be the share of for-
eign sovereign holdings of country k by bank i. We calculate the foreign holdings variable,
ForeignBondCDSit as the following weighted average:
                            X
     ForeignBondCDSit =            SovBondik ∗ SovereignCDSkt .
                            i6=j


where SovereignCDSkt is the sovereign CDS of country k on day t. Note that for each bank
the foreign holdings variable excludes home-sovereign bonds. We then estimate the following:

     ∆ log(Bank CDSit ) = δt + γ∆ log(ForeignBondCDSit ) + εit .                          (13)

where δt are time fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is γ, which captures the effect of
changes in the value of foreign bond holdings on bank CDS.
    We estimate the regressions using the period one month before and one month after
the reporting date for the sovereign bond holdings. By estimating this regression, we are
implicitly assuming that the marginal CDS investor either knows or at least has some idea
of the bank holdings.
    Table 8 shows the results. Column (1) shows a positive and statistically significant asso-
ciation between changes in bank CDS and their foreign sovereign holdings. This coefficient
suggests that a one-standard deviation increase in the change in the foreign sovereign hold-
ings variable leads to an increase of about half of a one-standard deviation in the change of
the bank CDS. Column (2) shows that the coefficient remains unchanged when bank fixed
effects are included. Column (3) controls for week fixed effects. The coefficient of interest


                                               33
decreases by about one third but remains statistically signicant. This suggests that common
shocks affect both the change in bank CDS and the change in the foreign holdings variable.
Column (4) controls for day fixed effects. The coefficient decreases by two third relative to
the specificiation without time fixed effects but remains statistically significant at the 1%-
level. This result suggests that variation in foreign sovereign holdings contains economically
important information about variation in bank credit risk.
    To further check for robustness, column (5) adds back bank fixed effects. This does
not have any effect on the coefficient. Column (6) estimates the same regression as in
Column (5) but excludes the holdings of German bonds from the construction of the foreign-
holdings variable. We do this to address a potential concern about reverse causality due
to the possibility that Germany may provide bailouts to other countries, or banks in other
countries. The column shows that this has no effect on the coefficient of interest.


4.5    The Case of Iceland: A Counterfactual?
We end by considering the case of Iceland. As is now well-known, by 2008 the Icelandic
banking sector was extremely highly leveraged and very large compared to the size of the
Icelandic economy. The three biggest Icelandic banks had active subsidiaries in the UK,
Scandinavia, and continental Europe. In late September 2008, fears of a run on the Ice-
landic banks lead to their being put into receivership under the supervision of the Icelandic
government. At the very onset of this crisis, the Icelandic government moved to bailout
the first of its failing banks. However, it soon became clear that the government would
not be able to save the Icelandic banks under any circumstance. The outstanding debts
of the three biggest banks alone included over $62 billion in foreign currency obligations,
which was an order of magnitude bigger than Iceland’s 2007 GDP. Facing no possibility
of a successful bailout, the Icelandic government separated the domestic and international
parts of its banks’ operations. It kept the foreign liabilities within the failed lenders and
provided no support to banks’ foreign creditors (either bondholders or depositors). Hence,
Iceland’s banks became effectively bankrupt and indeed still owe creditors $85 billion today.
As the massive scale of these obligations show, it is very clear that Iceland was completely
incapable of bailing out its banks. The banking crisis was followed by high inflation, a large
depreciation in the currency, and a severe contraction of the Icelandic economy.
    CDS rates on Euro-denominated Icelandic government obligations increased tremen-
dously with the onset of the crisis, reaching well over 1000 bps. This reflected the market’s


                                             34
fear that the foreign-currency obligations of the banks would in some ways be taken on by
the government, as Iceland’s pre-crisis foreign-currency obligations were not very large. The
credit-rating agencies precisely expressed this concern as they downgraded Iceland’s sovereign
debt in 2008, with Moody’s stating that “the Icelandic authorities’ resolution not to save
the whole banking system at the cost of jeopardizing the government’s creditworthiness –
reflected in decisions damaging to bank creditors’ interests – is fraught with operational
difficulties”, and “’some of the banks’ external liabilities will eventually filter through to the
government’s balance sheet”’ (Moody’s Investors Services, 8 October 2008). In this sense, the
rise in Icelandic credit risk corresponds well with the model presented by this paper. Since
banks obligations were denominated in foreign currency, the Icelandic government would
need to fund any transfers in foreign currency as well. The default risk associated with these
obligations was reflected in the traded CDS on Euro-denominated Icelandic bonds.
    Ultimately, Iceland did not take on significant foreign obligations from its banking sec-
tor. Perhaps this was due to the tremendous magnitude of these obligations relative to its
resources. Within our model, we can interpret this outcome as the corner solution that arises
when the government is incapable of increasing the financial sector’s probability of solvency
(psolv ) above zero for any level of taxation and corresponding transfer. Under such circum-
stances it is optimal within the model for the government to avoid increasing outstanding
debt or giving any transfer to the financial sector.
    Figure 9 shows that subsequently, Iceland CDS rates have decreased tremendously. The
figure compares the sovereign CDS of Iceland with that of Ireland. It shows that Iceland CDS
rates are now significantly below those of Ireland. Note that, by all estimates, Iceland has
experienced a contraction in output that is greater than that of Ireland, so that this difference
does not reflect Iceland’s greater economic performance over the subsequent period. In that
sense, Figure 9 can serve as a counterfactual that provides support for the inference that if
sovereigns abstained from financial sector bailouts, they would face lower sovereign credit
risk.


5     Related literature
Our paper is related to three different strands of literature: (i) the theoretical literature on
bank bailouts; (ii) the literature on costs of sovereign default; and, (iii) the recent empirical
literature on effects of bank bailouts on sovereigns.
    The theoretical literature on bank bailouts has mainly focused on how to structure bank

                                               35
bailouts efficiently. While the question of how necessarily involves an optimization with
some frictions, the usual friction assumed is the inability to resolve failed bank’s distress
entirely due to agency problems. This could be due to under-investment problem as in our
setup (e.g., Philippon and Schnabl, 2009), adverse selection (e.g., Gorton and Huang, 2004),
risk-shifting or asset substitution (e.g., Acharya, Shin and Yorulmazer, 2008, Diamond and
Rajan, 2009), or tradeoff between illiquidity and insolvency problems (e.g., Diamond and
Rajan, 2005). Some other papers (Philippon and Schnabl, 2009, Bhattacharya and Nyborg,
2010, among others) focus on specific claims through which bank bailouts can be structured
to limit these frictions.
    A large body of existing literature in banking considers that bank bailouts are inherently
a problem of time consistency and induce moral hazard at individual-bank level (Mailath
and Mester, 1994) and at collective level through herding (Penati and Protopapadakis, 1988,
Acharya and Yorulmazer, 2007). Aghion, Bolton and Fries (1999) consider the cost that
bank debt restructuring can in some cases delay the recognition of loan losses. Brown and
Dinc (2009) show empirically that the governments are more likely to rescue a failing bank
when the banking system, as a whole, is weak.
    A small part of this literature, however, does consider ex-post costs of bailouts. Notably,
Diamond and Rajan (2005, 2006) study how bank bailouts can take away a part of the
aggregate pool of liquidity from safe banks and endanger them too. Acharya and Yorulmazer
(2007, 2008) model, in a reduced-form manner, a cost of bank bailouts to the government
or regulatory budget that is increasing in the quantity of bailout funds. They provide
taxation-related fiscal costs as a possible motivation. Panageas (2010a,b) considers the
optimal taxation to fund bailouts in a continuous-time dynamic setting, also highlighting
when banks might be too big to save.
    In the theoretical literature on sovereign defaults, Bulow and Rogoff (1989a, 1989b) ini-
tiated a body of work that focused on ex-post costs to sovereigns of defaulting on external
debt, e.g., due to reputational hit in future borrowing, imposition of international trade
sanctions and conditionality in support from multi-national agencies. Broner and Ventura
(2005), Broner, Martin and Ventura (2007), Acharya and Rajan (2010) and Gennaioli, Mar-
tin and Rossi (2010), among others, consider a collateral damage to the financial institutions
and markets when a sovereign defaults. They employ this as a possible commitment device
that gives the sovereign “willingness to pay” its creditors. Our model considers both of these
effects, an ex-post deadweight cost of sovereign default in external markets as well as an
internal cost to the financial sector through bank holdings of government bonds.


                                              36
    One strand of recent empirical work focuses on the distortionary design of bank bailout
packages. Acharya and Sundaram (2009) document how the loan guarantee program of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the Fall of 2008 was charged in a manner that
favored weaker banks at the expense of safer ones, producing a downward revision in CDS
spreads of the former. Veronesi and Zingales (2009) conduct an event study and specifically
investigate the U.S. government intervention in October 2008 through TARP and calculate
the benefits to banks and costs to taxpayers. They find that the government intervention
increased the value of banks by over $100 billion, primarily of bank creditors, but also
estimate a tax payer cost between $25 to $47 billion. Panetta et al. (2009) and King (2009)
assess the Euro zone bailouts and reach the conclusion that while bank equity was wiped out
in most cases, bank creditors were backstopped reflecting a waiting game on part of bank
regulators and governments.
    Another strand of recent empirical work relating financial sector and sovereign credit
risk during the ongoing crisis shares some similarity to the very recent papers on this theme.
Sgherri and Zoli (2009), Attinasi, Checherita and Nickel (2009) and Ejsing and Lemke (2011)
focus on the effect of bank bailout announcements on sovereign credit risk measured using
CDS spreads. Some of their evidence mirrors our descriptive evidence. Dieckmann and
Plank (2009) analyze sovereign CDS of developed economies around the crisis and document
a significant rise in co-movement following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Demirguc-Kunt
and Huizinga (2010) do an international study of equity prices and CDS spreads around bank
bailouts and show that some large banks may be too big to save rather than too big to fail.
Our analysis corroborates and complements some of this work. In particular, our empirical
investigation of banking sector holdings of government debt and how this introduces a linkage
between bank CDS and sovereign CDS is novel.


6    Conclusion
This paper examines the intimate and intricate link between bank bailouts and sovereign
credit risk. We develop a model in which the government faces an important trade-off:
bank bailouts ameliorate the under-investment problem in the financial sector but reduce
the investment incentives of the non-financial sector due to the corresponding increase in
future taxation. In the short-run, bailouts are funded through the issuance of government
bonds. A high level of issuance helps to fund the bailout but dilutes existing bondholders
and introduces credit risk into the government bond price. This creates a two-way feedback

                                             37
between sovereign and financial sector credit risk because financial firms are exposed to
the value of government debt through both their direct bond holdings and via the value of
explicit government guarantees or an implicit safety net.
    We provide supporting evidence for our model using data from the financial crisis of
2007-10. In particular, we document that developed country governments transferred credit
risk from the financial sector to taxpayers during the height of the crisis in October 2008.
Using a panel of bank and sovereign CDS we document and quantify the direct two-way
feedback between sovereign and bank credit risk. We also collect data on sovereign bond
holdings from the European bank stress test in May 2010 and find that the value of foreign
sovereign bond holdings is informative about banks’ credit risk.
    We consider the emergence of meaningful sovereign credit risk as an important potential
cost of bank bailouts. This cost is a reflection of the future taxation (or more generally, even
inflation risk) imposed on the corporate and household sectors of the economy. This cost of
bailouts can render the immediate stabilization of the financial sector a Pyrrhic victory, but
it has received little theoretical attention and has also not been analyzed much empirically.
Taking cognizance of this ultimate cost of bailouts has important consequences for the future
resolution of financial crises, the design of fiscal policy, and the nexus between the two.


References
 Acharya, Viral V. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2010, “Financial Sector and Sovereign Credit
     Risk”, Work in progess, New York University Stern School of Business.

 Acharya, Viral, Hyun Song Shin and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2008, “Crisis Resolution and Bank
     Liquidity”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

 Acharya, Viral V. and Rangarajan Sundaram, 2009, “The Financial Sector ‘Bailout’: Sow-
     ing the Seeds of the Next Crisis”, Chapter 15 in Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew
     Richardson (editors), 2009. “Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed
     System”, New York University Stern School of Business, John Wiley & Sons.

 Acharya, Viral V. and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2007 “Too Many to Fail - An Analysis of Time-
     inconsistency in Bank Closure Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16(1),
     1–31.



                                              38
Acharya, Viral V. and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2008, “Cash-in-the-Market Pricing and Optimal
    Resolution of Bank Failures,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 2705–2742.

Aghion, Philipp, Patrick Bolton and Steven Fries, 1999, “Optimal Design of Bank Bailouts:
    The Case of Transition Economies”, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Eco-
    nomics, 155, 51–70.

Attinasi, Maria-Grazia, Cristina Checherita and Christiane Nickel, 2009, “What Explains
    the Surge in Euro Area Sovereign Spreads during the Financial Crisis of 2007-09?”,
    European Central Bank Working Paper No. 1131.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto and Kjell G. Nyborg, 2010, “Bank Bailout Menus”, Swiss Finance
    Institute Research Paper Series No. 10–24.

Broner, Martin and Jaume Ventura, 2005, “Globalization and Risk Sharing”, Working
    Paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Broner, Martin, Alberto Martin and Jaume Ventura, 2007, “Enforcement Problems and
    Secondary Markets”, Working Paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Brown, C. and Dinc, S., 2009, “Too Many to fail? Evidence of regulatory forbearance When
    the banking sector is weak”, Review of financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff, 1989a, “Sovereign debt: Is to forgive to forget?”, American
    Economic Review, 79, 43-50.

Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff, 1989b, “A constant recontracting model of sovereign debt”,
    Journal of Political Economy, 97, 155-178.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, “The Determi-
     nants of Credit Spread Changes”, Journal of Finance, 56(6), 2177-2207.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 2010, “Are Banks Too Big to Fail or Too Big
   to Save? International Evidence from Equity Prices and CDS Spreads”, World Bank
   Policy Research Working Paper 5360.

Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2005, “Liquidity Shortages and Banking
    Crises”, Journal of Finance, 60(2), 615–647.



                                          39
Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2006, “Bank Bailouts and Aggregate Liquid-
    ity”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), 38–41.

Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2009, “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking
    and Credit Freeze”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Dieckmann, Stephan and Thomas Plank, 2009, “Default Risk of Advanced Economies:
    An Empirical Analysis of Credit Default Swaps during the Financial Crisis”, Working
    Paper, Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania.

Ejsing, Jacob and Wolfgang Lemke, 2011, The Janus-headed salvation: Sovereign and bank
     credit risk premia during 20082009, Economics Letters, 110, 28–31.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin and Stefano Rossi, 2010, “Sovereign Default, Domestic
   Banks and Financial Institutions,” Working Paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Gorton, Gary and Lixin Huang. 2004. Liquidity, Efficiency, and Bank Bailouts. American
    Economic Review, 94(3): 455-483.

King, Michael R, 2009, “Time to Buy or Just Buying Time? The Market Reaction to Bank
    Rescue Packages”, BIS Papers No 288 (September).

Mailath, George and Loretta Mester, 1994, “A Positive Analysis of Bank Closure,” Journal
    of Financial Intermediation, 3(3), 272–299.

Merton, Robert C., 1974, “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
    Rates,” Journal of Finance, 29, 449-470.

Moody’s Investors Services, 8 October 2008, ”Moody’s downgrades Iceland’s ratings to A1
   from Aa1,”.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977, “The Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 5(2), 147–175.

Panageas, Stavros, 2010a, “Optimal taxation in the presence of bailouts”, Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, 57, 101?-116.

Panageas, Stavros, 2010b, “Bailouts,the incentive to manage risk,and financial crises”, Jour-
    nal of Financial Economics, 95, 296?-311.


                                            40
Panetta, Faib, Thomas Faeh, Giuseppe Grande, Corrinne Ho, Michael King, Aviram Levy,
    Federico M Signoretti, Marco Taboga, and Andrea Zaghini, 2009, “An Assessment of
    Financial Sector Rescue Programmes”, BIS Papers No 48 (July).

Penati, A. and Protopapadakis, A., 1988, “The effect of implicit deposit insurance on
    banks? portfolio choices, with an application to international overexposure”, Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 21(1), 107–126.

Veronesi, P. and Zingales, L., 2009, “Paulson’s Gift”, Journal of Financial Economics,
    forthcoming.

Philippon, Thomas and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “Efficient Recapitalization”, Working Paper,
     New York University Stern School of Business.

Sgherri, Silvia and Edda Zoli, 2009, “Euro Area Sovereign Risk During the Crisis”, Working
    paper, International Monetary Fund, No. 09–222.




                                           41
                                Figure 1: Sovereign CDS and Bank CDS of Ireland




                          900



                          800



                          700



                          600



                          500


                                                                                      Sovereign CDS




            basispoints
                          400                                                         Average Bank CDS



                          300



                          200



                          100



                           0




Figure 1 plots the sovereign CDS and bank CDS for Ireland in the period from 3/1/2007 to 8/31/2010. The bank
CDS is computed as the unweighted average of bank CDS for banks headquartered in Ireland (Allied Irish Bank,
Anglo Irish Bank, Bank of Ireland, and Irish Life and Permanent). The data are from Datastream.
                    Figure 2: The Default Boundary (Certainty Case)

                                 Default and No−Default Regions
              0.3



             0.25



              0.2                                Default
        ND




             0.15



              0.1

                           No Default
             0.05



               0
                    0.2   0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6      0.7       0.8   0.9
                                              L1



Figure 2 shows the Default and No-Default Regions in the space of L1 × ND (financial
sector leverage/debt overhang × pre-existing sovereign debt) for the model under cer-
tainty. The black curve separating these two regions gives the default boundary. The
plot corresponds to a parameterization of the model where Ã1 ∼ U [0, 1], L1 = 0.5,
α = 1, ϑ = 0.3, γ = 0.2, β = 0.5, m = 1.3, D = 0.02, k = 0, and ND = 0.25 (solid
line).
                        Figure 3: Marginal Gain and Loss of Increasing H

                                                        dG vs. dL




               dG/dH and dL/dH




                                 0.8   1   1.2    1.4     1.6       1.8    2   2.2   2.4   2.6
                                                           H




                                 Value of Government’s Objective Function
                                                 value of gov. objective




                                 0.8   1   1.2    1.4     1.6       1.8    2   2.2   2.4   2.6
                                                           H




The top panel of Figure 3 plots the marginal gain of increasing H while holding constant
T , dG/dH (solid line and dash-dot line) and the resulting marginal increase in expected
dead-weight default cost D dpdef
                             dH (dashed line). Uncertainty over growth/tax revenues,
R̃V , is assumed to have a uniform distribution. The dash-dot line corresponds to a
higher level of L1 than for the solid line. The bottom panel of the Figure shows the
resulting value of the government’s objective function, with the the solid and dash-dot
line corresponding to their counterparts in the top panel. The plots correspond to a
parameterization of the model where R̃V ∼ U [0.6, 1.4], Ã1 ∼ U [0, 1], L1 = 0.5 (solid
line), α = 1, ϑ = 0.3, γ = 0.2, β = 0.5, m = 1.3, D = 0.06, k = 0, and ND = 0.25.
                       Figure 4: Comparative Statics for L1




                                                H
       τ




                0.4     0.6         0.8              0.4     0.6         0.8
                        L1                                   L1




                                                P0
       T0




                0.4     0.6         0.8              0.4     0.6         0.8
                        L1                                   L1




                              Comparative Statics for ND
                                                H
       τ




                0.1   0.2     0.3         0.4        0.1   0.2     0.3         0.4
                        ND                                   ND
                                                P0
       T0




                0.1   0.2     0.3         0.4        0.1   0.2     0.3         0.4
                        ND                                   ND




Figure 4 plots the equilibrium values of T (expected tax revenue), H, T0 (the transfer),
and P0 (price of sovereign bond) as L1 (top panel) and ND (bottom panel) are varied.
The dotted line in the plots represents the point at which total default (H → ∞)
is optimal, resulting in a discontinuity in the plot. The parameters of the model
correspond to those in Figure 3.
                                      Figure 5: Change in Sovereign and Bank CDS before Bank Bailouts



                                400




                                350




                                300




                                250




                                200
                                                                                                 Sovereign CDS
                                                                                                 Bank CDS




                 basis points
                                150




                                100




                                50




                                 0




                                ‐50




Figure 5 plots the change in average bank CDS and sovereign CDS for Western European countries in the period from
1/1/2007 to 9/25/2008. The bank CDS is computed as the unweighted average of bank CDS for banks headquartered
in that country. The data are from Datastream (no data available for Swiss sovereign CDS and Greek bank CDS).
                          Figure 6: Change in Sovereign and Bank CDS during the Period of Bank Bailouts




                  100




                          50




                          0




                    ‐50

                                                                                                Sovereign CDS
                                                                                                Bank CDS




           basis points
              ‐100




              ‐150




              ‐200




              ‐250




Figure 6 plots the change in average bank CDS and sovereign CDS for Western European countries in the period
from 9/26/2008 to 10/21/2008. The bank CDS is computed as the unweighted average of bank CDS for banks
headquartered in that country. The data are from Datastream (no data available for Swiss sovereign CDS and Greek
bank CDS).
                              Figure 7: Change in Sovereign and Bank CDS after Bank Bailouts




           1,200




           1,000




                    800




                    600

                                                                                               Sovereign CDS
                                                                                               Bank CDS




           basis points
                    400




                    200




                          0




                ‐200




Figure 7 plots the change in average bank CDS and sovereign CDS for Western European countries in the period
from 10/22/2008 to 6/30/2010. The bank CDS is computed as the unweighted average of bank CDS for banks
headquartered in that country. The data are from Datastream.
Figure 8: Correlation between Sovereign CDS and Public Debt before and after bank bailouts




     Figure 8 shows the correlation between sovereign CDS and public liabilities (as a per-
     centage of GDP) for Western European countries before and after the bank bailouts.
     The top figure shows no correlation before the bailouts (as of 3/1/2007). The bottom
     figure shows a strong correlation after the bank bailouts (as of 3/1/2010). The CDS
     data are from Datastream and the public liabilities data are from the OECD Economic
     Outlook database.
                                  Figure 9: Sovereign CDS of Iceland and Ireland




                          1,600




                          1,400




                          1,200




                          1,000




                           800
                                                                                              Ireland




            basispoints
                                                                                              Iceland

                           600




                           400




                           200




                             0




Figure 9 plots the sovereign CDS of Iceland and Ireland in the period from 3/1/2007 to 4/30/2011. The data are
from Datastream.
Table 1: Summary Statistics

The sample shows summary statistics on bank and sovereign credit risk. The sample includes all
European, U.S., and Australian banks with available data on bank CDS, sovereign CDS, and equity
returns. The data are at the weekly level. Panel A presents summary statistics for the first week of July
2007. Panel B presents summary statistics for the period before, around, and after the bailouts.

                                    Panel A: Cross-Section (7/1/2007)
                                #      Mean      Std.Dev    50th percentile   5th percentile   95th percentile
Assets ($ billion)               81     589.3       594.9            362.6             77.9         1,896.90
Equity ($ billion)               81      26.8        29.3             20.2              3.5            112.4
Equity Ratio (%)                 81       5.1         2.7              4.8              1.9               10
Tier 1 Ratio (%)                 66       8.5         1.9              8.2              6.5             12.4
Bank CDS (bp)                    75      21.8        13.4             10.5              6.5               41
Sovereign CDS (bp)               56       6.6        11.5                2              1.5             52.1
                                          Panel B: Time-Series
                                    Pre-Bailout (1/1/2007-9/17/2008)
                                #      Mean      Std.Dev    50th percentile   5th percentile   95th percentile
Bank CDS (bp)                 2,891     93.2         129            67.7                 6.6            271.2
Sovereign CDS (bp)            2,891     13.5        12.1              9.6                1.8             38.3
∆ Bank CDS (%)                2,891    0.038       0.247           0.025             -0.242             0.329
∆ Sovereign CDS (%)           2,891    0.024          0.3          0.028             -0.256             0.318
Bank Stock Return (%)         2,891   -0.011       0.084          -0.006             -0.116             0.081
∆ CDS Market Index (%)        2,891    0.021       0.118           0.005             -0.141             0.211
∆ Volatility (%)              2,891    0.003       0.032           0.002             -0.038             0.043
                                    Bailout (9/18/2008-10/22/2008)
Bank CDS (bp)                   254    288.6       626.0           133.3               70.0             740.0
Sovereign CDS (bp)              254     39.3        18.8            32.5               12.5              73.5
∆ Bank CDS (%)                  254 -0.065          0.44          -0.037             -0.629             0.405
∆ Sovereign CDS (%)             254    0.146        0.19           0.129             -0.105             0.502
Bank Stock Return (%)           254 -0.067         0.268           -0.03             -0.374             0.201
∆ CDS Market Index (%)          254    0.017       0.095            0.04             -0.157             0.116
∆ Volatility (%)                254    0.048       0.071           0.076             -0.036             0.127
                                 Post-Bailout (10/23/2008 - 30/4/2011)
Bank CDS (bp)                 6,500    188.7       179.9           131.2               65.5             560.6
Sovereign CDS (bp)            6,500    108.5       142.9            60.1               24.9               347
∆ Bank CDS (%)                6,500    0.003        0.12          -0.001             -0.158             0.184
∆ Sovereign CDS (%)           6,500    0.004       0.113           0.003             -0.181             0.186
Bank Stock Return (%)         6,500        0       0.098           0.002             -0.132             0.129
∆ CDS Market Index (%)        6,500 -0.002         0.071          -0.006             -0.113             0.117
∆ Volatility (%)              6,500 -0.003         0.048          -0.004             -0.059              0.06
Table 2: Emergence of Sovereign Credit Risk

This table shows the relation between sovereign credit risk, public debt-to-gdp, and financial sector distress. The sample includes Australia,
Denmark, Great Britain, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and all Eurozone countries with publicly available data on sovereign CDS and bank CDS.
The data are at the country-level. The independent variable in Columns (1) and (2) is the sovereign CDS before the bank bailouts (as of 1/1/2008).
Columns (1) and (2) control for Pre-bailout Debt (debt-to-gdp ratio) measured as Government Liabilities as share of GDP (collected from the
OECD Economic Outlook). Column (2) controls for financial sector distress measured as the natural logarithm of the average banks CDS before
the bank bailouts (as of 9/22/2008). The independent variable in Columns (3) and (4) is the sovereign CDS after the bank bailouts (as of
3/31/2010). The dependent variables are the same as in Columns (1) and (2), respectively. The independent variable in Column (5) is the change
in the debt-to-gdp ratio from June 2008 to June 2010. The dependent variable is financial sector distress. The independent variable in column (6)
is the debt-to-gdp ratio in June 2010. The dependent variables are the pre-bailout debt-to-GDP ratio and financial sector distress. We report
robust standard errors. ** 1% significant, * 5% significant, and + 10% significant



                                                             Log (Sovereign CDS)                                     Debt-to-GDP
                                                    Pre-Bailout                Post-Bailout                          Post-Bailout
                                                     1/1/2008                   3/31/2010                    ∆ 2008-2010        3/31/2010
                                                (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)                    (5)               (6)

    Pre-Bailout Debt-to-GDP                     0.006         0.005         0.015*         0.013+                                 1.107**
                                               (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.007)                                (0.144)
    Financial Sector Distress                                 0.311                        0.965*              20.118+           21.726+
                                                             (0.208)                       (0.357)             (10.168)          (11.555)
    Constant                                  2.137**         0.601         3.112**         -1.593             -86.920           -101.548
                                              (0.320)        (1.154)        (0.401)        (2.019)             (49.456)          (60.923)

    Observations                                  15           14              17             15                   15                15
    R-squared                                   0.134         0.171          0.261          0.488                0.364             0.843
Table 3: Change in Bank and Sovereign Credit Risk

This table shows the effect of sovereign credit risk on bank credit risk during the financial crisis. The sample includes all European, U.S., and
Australian banks with available data on bank and sovereign CDS. The data are at the weekly level. Columns (1) to (3) cover the pre-bailout
period (1/1/2007-9/17/2008), Columns (4) to (6) cover the bailout period (9/18/2008-10/22/2008), and Columns (7) to (9) cover the post-bailout
period (10/23/2008-04/30/2011). The dependent variable is the weekly change in the natural logarithm of bank CDS. The main independent
variable is the weekly change in the sovereign CDS. The sovereign CDS is assigned based on the country where the bank is headquartered. The
control variables are the change in the CDS market index and the volatility index. Columns (2), (3), (5), (6), (8), and (9) include week fixed
effects. Column (3), (6), (9) include bank fixed effects and interactions of bank fixed effects with the change in CDS market index and the
volatility index. The standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. ** 1% significant, * 5% significant, and + 10% significant



                                                                                  ∆ Log(Bank CDS)
                                            Pre-Bailout                              Bailout                              Post-Bailout
                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)             (7)          (8)          (9)
∆ Log(Sovereign CDS)               0.017        0.003      0.003         0.448*      -0.715*     -1.293**      0.221**       0.163**      0.163**
                                  (0.010)      (0.016)    (0.017)       (0.169)      (0.282)      (0.387)      (0.026)       (0.035)      (0.033)
∆ Log(CDS Market Index)           0.962**                               0.893**                                0.722**
                                  (0.043)                               (0.216)                                (0.034)
∆ Volatility Index                0.671**                              -0.946**                                 0.057
                                  (0.113)                               (0.238)                                (0.051)

Week FE                              N           Y           Y            N             Y            Y             N            Y            Y
Interactions                         N           N           Y            N             N            Y             N            N            Y
Observations                       2,891       2,891       2,891         254           254          254          6,500        6,500        6,500
Banks                                62          62          62          53             53           53            59           59           59
R-squared                          0.262       0.344       0.476        0.114         0.256        0.599         0.338        0.414        0.479
Table 4: Change in Bank and Sovereign Credit Risk (controlling for Equity Return)

This table shows the effect of sovereign credit risk on bank credit risk during the financial crisis. The sample includes all European, U.S., and
Australian banks with available data on bank CDS, sovereign CDS, and equity returns. The data are at the weekly level. Columns (1) to (3) cover
the pre-bailout period (1/1/2007-9/17/2008), Columns (4) to (6) cover the bailout period (9/18/2008-10/22/2008), and Columns (7) to (9) cover the
post-bailout period (10/23/2008-04/30/2011). The dependent variable is the weekly change in the natural logarithm of bank CDS. The main
independent variable is the weekly change in the sovereign CDS. The sovereign CDS is assigned based on the country where the bank is
headquartered. The control variables are the change in the CDS market index, the change in the volatility index, and equity return. Columns (2),
(3), (5), (6), (8), and (9) include week fixed effects. Column (3), (6), (9) include bank fixed effects and interactions of bank fixed effects with the
change in CDS Market index, the change in volatility index, and equity return. The standard errors are clustered at the bank-level. ** 1%
significant, * 5% significant, and + 10% significant

                                                                                   ∆ Log(Bank CDS)
                                             Pre-Bailout                             Bailout                                 Post-Bailout
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)              (7)           (8)           (9)
∆ Log(Sovereign CDS)                0.014         0.003      0.004       0.449**      -0.691**       -1.020       0.197**       0.153**      0.146**
                                   (0.010)      (0.016)     (0.018)      (0.164)       (0.257)      (1.034)       (0.028)       (0.036)      (0.033)
Equity Return                      -0.306*       -0.211                   -0.194                     -0.911      -0.145**      -0.095**
                                   (0.142)      (0.140)                  (0.185)                    (2.602)       (0.030)       (0.030)
∆ Log(CDS Market Index)            0.932**                               0.753**                                  0.688**
                                   (0.048)                               (0.200)                                  (0.031)
∆ Volatility Index                 0.429**                              -1.100**                                   -0.027
                                   (0.134)                               (0.207)                                  (0.052)

Week FE                               N           Y           Y             N             Y            Y            N              Y             Y
Interactions                          N           N           Y             N             N            Y            N              N             Y
Observations                        2,891       2,891       2,891          254           254          254         6,500          6,500         6,500
Banks                                62          62          62            53             53           53          59             59             59
R-squared                           0.271       0.347       0.517         0.126         0.259        0.854        0.349          0.417         0.495
Table 5: Change in Bank and Sovereign Credit Risk (by Tier 1 Capital)

This table shows the effect of sovereign credit risk on bank credit risk during the financial crisis. The sample includes all European, U.S., and
Australian banks with available data on bank CDS and share prices. The data are at the weekly level. Columns (1) to (3) cover the pre-bailout
period (1/1/2007-9/17/2008), Columns (4) to (6) cover the bailout period (9/18/2008-10/22/2008), and Columns (7) to (9) cover the post-bailout
period (10/23/2008-04/30/2011). The dependent variable is the weekly change in the natural logarithm of bank CDS. The Tier 1 capital ratio is
the regulatory bank capital ratio. All other variables are defined in Tables 3 to 5. The regression includes the Tier 1 capital ratio and an
interaction between the Tier1 capital ratio and the change in sovereign CDS. All other controls are the same as in Table 4. The standard errors are
clustered at the bank-level. ** 1% significant, * 5% significant, and + 10% significant

                                                                                  ∆ Log(Bank CDS)
                                                Pre-Bailout                           Bailout                              Post-Bailout
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)              (7)          (8)          (9)
∆ Log(Sovereign CDS)*Tier 1            0.005        -0.000      0.003       -0.114      -0.090      -0.035        -0.026       -0.025     -0.033+
                                      (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.096)     (0.089)     (0.298)      (0.018)      (0.017)     (0.017)
∆ Log(Sovereign CDS)                  -0.030         0.006     -0.016        1.284      -0.040      -1.029       0.432**       0.375*     0.436**
                                      (0.048)      (0.050)     (0.069)      (0.772)     (0.840)     (2.447)      (0.150)      (0.143)     (0.139)
Tier 1                                -0.002        -0.001                  0.027+       0.021                    -0.000       -0.000
                                      (0.003)      (0.003)                  (0.014)     (0.014)                  (0.001)      (0.001)
Equity Return                        -0.418**      -0.360*                  -0.574      -0.454                  -0.137**      -0.086*
                                      (0.103)      (0.154)                  (0.520)     (0.553)                  (0.034)      (0.034)

Other Controls                           Y            Y           Y           Y            Y           Y            Y            Y           Y
Week FE                                  N            Y           Y           N            Y           Y            N            Y           Y
Interactions                             N            N           Y           N            N           Y            N            N           Y
Observations                           2,262        2,262       2,262        198          198         198         5,154        5,154       5,154
Bank                                    48           48           48          41           41          41           47          47           47
R-squared                              0.248        0.322       0.492       0.157        0.294       0.852        0.351        0.419       0.489
Table 6: Equity Return and Change in Sovereign Credit Risk

This table shows the effect of sovereign credit risk on bank stock returns during the financial crisis. The sample includes all European, U.S., and
Australian banks with available data on sovereign CDS and equity returns. The data are at the weekly level. Columns (1) to (3) cover the pre-
bailout period (1/1/2007-9/17/2008), Columns (4) to (6) cover the bailout period (9/18/2008-10/22/2008), and Columns (7) to (9) cover the post-
bailout period (10/23/2008-04/30/2011). The dependent variable is the equity return. The main independent variable is the weekly change in the
sovereign CDS. The sovereign CDS is assigned based on the country where the bank is headquartered. The control variables are the change in the
CDS market index and the volatility index. Columns (2), (3), (5), (6), (8), and (9) include week fixed effects. Column (3), (6), (9) include bank
fixed effects and interactions of bank fixed effects with the change in CDS market index and the volatility index. The standard errors are clustered
at the bank-level. ** 1% significant, * 5% significant, and + 10% significant

                                                                                   Equity Return
                                             Pre-Bailout                            Bailout                               Post-Bailout
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)           (9)
∆ Log(Sovereign CDS)               -0.008*       0.001       0.001        0.001       0.234+        0.225     -0.163**      -0.098**      -0.096**
                                   (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.072)      (0.140)      (0.190)     (0.019)       (0.018)       (0.017)
∆ Log(CDS Market Index)           -0.100**                              -0.720**                              -0.235**
                                   (0.017)                               (0.072)                               (0.015)
∆ Volatility Index                -0.792**                              -0.793**                              -0.575**
                                   (0.063)                               (0.131)                               (0.037)

Week FE                               N            Y           Y            N            Y           Y            N            Y             Y
Bank FE                               N            N           Y            N            N           Y            N            N             Y
Interactions                          N            N           Y            N            N           Y            N            N             Y
Observations                        2,891        2,891       2,891         254          254         254         6,500        6,500         6,500
Banks                                62           62           62           53           53          53           59           59            59
R-squared                           0.155        0.344       0.417        0.142        0.172       0.706        0.259        0.455         0.494
Table 7: Summary Statistics of European Bank Stress Test Sample

The table shows summary statistics for all banks that participated in the EU Bank Stress Tests from July
2010. The data was collected from the website of the Committee of European Banking Regulators and
nation websites of the respective bank regulators. The sovereign holdings are computed as the total value
of sovereign holdings relative to risk-weighted assets. We report both the gross and net exposure as
reported to bank regulators. The share of trading book and banking book are the share of sovereign
holdings held in the respective book. The shares are computed based on gross exposure (net exposure
was not reported).

                                           Sovereign Holdings
                              Euro Bank Stress Tests Sample, March 31, 2010

                                                                     50th           5th          95th
                                     N     Mean       Std.Dev      Percentile    Percentile    Percentile
                                    (1)     (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)

Bank Characteristics
   Risk-weighted Assets (EUR
   million)                         91     126,337     179,130         63,448         3,269      493,307
   Tier 1 Capital Ratio (%)         91        10.2          2.4            9.8           7.2        14.4
Sovereign Exposure
   Sovereign Holdings (gross,
   EUR million)                     91      20,668       27,948         7,930           105       81,765
   Sovereign Holdings (net,
   EUR million)                     91      19,719       27,329         6,960           105       78,959
   Home Sovereign Holdings
   (gross, EUR million)             91      11,493       14,422         5,774           182       42,800
   Home Sovereign Holdings
   (net, EUR million)               91      11,023       13,956         5,348           117       42,800

   Home Share (%)                   91         69.4        30.0          81.6          18.9           100
   Greek Sovereign Holdings         91          669       2,844             0             0         5,601
   Share Banking Book (%)           91         84.9        19.9          92.2          35.4         100.0
Table 8: Summary Statistics of European Bank Stress Test Sample

The table shows regression of change in bank CDS on change in exposure to sovereign bank holdings.
The sovereign bond holdings data were collected from the website of the Committee of European
Banking Regulators and nation websites of the respective bank regulators. We construct the exposure
variable as the weighted average of country CDS with sovereign holdings as weights. Changes are
computed as log changes. The data covers the period from 3/1/2010 to 4/30/2010. Columns (2), (5) and
(6) include bank fixed effects. Column (3) includes week fixed effects. Column (4) to (6) include day
fixed effect. The exposure variable in Column (6) excludes German bonds. The standard errors are
clustered at the bank-level (51 banks). ** 1% significant, * 5% significant, and +10% significant


                                                        Change in Bank CDS
                                                                                            Excluding
Sample                           All         All         All         All         All        Germany
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)

Change in Sovereign
Exposure                       0.325**     0.326**     0.261**     0.141**     0.135**       0.137**
                               (0.027)     (0.028)     (0.027)     (0.049)     (0.046)       (0.046)

Bank FE                           N           Y           N           N           Y             Y
Week FE                           N           N           Y           N           N             N
Day FE                            N           N           N           Y           Y             Y

Observations                    2,317       2,317       2,317       2,317       2,317         2,317
Banks                            51          51          51          51          51           0.357
R-squared                       0.173       0.188       0.228       0.342       0.357         0.357
Adjusted R-Squared              0.173       0.170       0.224       0.329       0.329         0.329
