NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A PROBLEM OF FINANCIAL MARKET
EQUILIBRIUM WHEN THE TIMING OF
TAX PAYMENTS IS INDETERMINATE

David F. Bradford

Working Paper No. 1713

MITTflMII

riinrnt rr r.,uioiii
r-,-r,i-r,' nrcrrij
wr,n

t%1IUI'ML ourcLi-u or
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER 3rking Paper #1713
October 1985

Z Probln of Financial Market
?hen the Timing of
Tax Payrrents is Indeterminate

Equilibrium

ABSTRACT

If

firms are indifferent about the timing of dividends, the

government's cash flow from taxes on dividends is indeterminate.
In an earlier paper, I showed in the context of a world without
uncertainty that variations in tax receipts from this source

would have no real effects. The extension of the analysis to a
world of risk turns out to involve new elements that may be of

some general interest. In particular, the conditions for neutrality seem less likely to be fulfilled in a practical context.

David F. Bradford
Woodrc Wilson School
Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544

A Problem of Financial Market Equilibrium
When the Timing of Tax Payments is Indeterminate

by
David F. Bradford*
Princeton University

1.

Introduction.

This paper concerns an aspect of the question: When do government
deficits matter? It takes as a starting point previous work (1981)
showing how endogenously generated deficits might have no real effect, a
result obtained under an assumption of perfect substitutability between

government and private debt. The extension to a world of risky debt
where the latter no longer holds turns out to involve new elements that

may be of some general interest. In particular, the conditions for
neutrality seem less likely to be fulfilled in practice.

Princeton University and National Bureau of Economic Research. This
paper has been prepared, with gratitude, for a festschrift in honor of
my dissertation supervisor, Kenneth J. Arrow. I would like to express
my appreciation for helpful discussions with Pete Kyle, David
Starrett, Joseph Stiglitz, and seminar participants at the
National Bureau of Economic Research and at the Workshop on Economic
Structural Change of the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis.

-2-

The underlying idea is that it should not matter when taxes are
paid, provided there is an appropriate compensating interest element in

the postponed liability. This notion conflicts with the assumption often
employed that it is the government's cash flow balance that counts, even
though current deficits may be offset by correspondingly larger liability
for future tax payments, and surpluses may reflect drawing down liabili-

ties for future taxes. This issue arises especially strongly in the
context of analysis of proposals for consumption-type taxes, where there
is a choice between a literal consumption tax and a tax on wage and

transfer receipts. Typically the two approaches generate the same
liabilities in a present value sense, but very different cash flows. In
some systems (for example, the Cash Flow Tax analysed in Bradford et al.
(1984)), the taxpayer has wide latitude to choose between the approaches.
The specific case I analyze here presents the same issues in a

particularly clear way. It involves a tax on distributions by corporations to equity holders, in essence, a dividend tax. If such a tax is
assessed at a flat rate which is not expected to change, and if negative
distributions (sales of new equity) are included (i.e., subsidized), the
case is quite compelling in a partial equilibrium setting that the level
of the tax should have no influence on real or financial transactions of

a corporation acting in the interest of its stockholders. The reason is
simply that the flat tax changes proportionately the consequences of all

decisions as far as stockholder outcomes are concerned. In particular,
the trade-off in the after-tax dollars for the shareholders between a
larger distribution today and the consequently smaller distribution at
some future time is unaffected by the rate of tax.

-3—

In the absence of all taxes (and transactions costs) the various
versions of the Nodigliani-Niller (1958) Theorem tell us the corporation

will be indifferent between debt and equity finance. An implication is
that the timing of dividend payments is a matter of indifference.

Since,

as I have just argued informally, a flat tax on dividends has no effect
on the optimal financial policy, something like the Nodigliani-Miller

Theorem should continue to hold. However, the choice of pay-out affects
the government's cash flow. Government receipts will be determined by
the whims of corporate managers; private wealth-maximizing calculations

are insufficient to fix the path of revenues. Will the consequent
fluctuations in tax receipts have real effects?
In Bradford (1981) I spelled out an overlapping-generations model in
which government debt does generally influence the rational expectations
equilibrium path, but in which variations in government debt attributable

to variations in distribution-tax receipts do not matter. The indifference about financial policy at the level of the firm, in spite of the tax
on distributions, carries over to neutrality of the economy's path to the
choice of financial policy, even though the flow of tax receipts is
affected.

The key question is whether there are general equilibrium effects on

the rate of interest. The basis for the neutrality conclusion may be
sketched as follows: The capital investment level chosen by the firm is

governed by the going interest rate. Therefore, a decision to issue an
extra dollar of debt implies a decision to distribute an extra dollar to

shareholders. This in turn implies extra tax receipts of t dollars
(where t is the rate of tax). If real government spending is fixed,

the extra t dollars are devoted to reducing the public debt. The

-4-

result thus far is a net addition of 1-t dollars to the supply of
financial assets. There remains, however, the equity interest in the
corporation, the value of which is predicted to fall, not by one dollar,

as a result of the extra debt cum distribution, but by 1-t dollars, in

reflection of the government's claim to a fraction t of all cash flows
to shareholders. As a consequence, all markets continue to clear. The
firm's decision has no real effect, even though tax receipts are
increased.

The foregoing analysis support two conclusions. First, a tax on
corporate distributions may not have the often-assumed incentive effects

with respect to real and financial allocations. And second, variations
in government receipts attributable to changes in corporate distribution

policy may have no effect on the real path of the economy. The present
investigation concerns how the neutrality results are affected if the
perfect substitutability among financial assets, used in the argument
above and attributable to the assumption of certainty, is replaced in the
context of an explicit treatment of uncertainty.
As it. turns out, the earlier results carry over without significant

complication when only equity is risky at the margin, while corporate

debt and marginal public debt are risk free and therefore perfect substi-

tutes. The restriction on government financial choices is a special case
of the requirement that applies when the risk characteristics of corpo-

rate debt are unrestricted. In the more general case, the neutrality
conclusions require that the government policy be describable as one of
issuing a certain pre-specified risky debt together with the purchase of
a fraction of the private debt supply equal to the tax rate.

—5—

These conditions on government behavior are not as arbitrary as

might appear. As I stressed in my earlier paper, the proportional tax on
corporate distributions in effect gives the government a fractional

ownership in the firm. Neutrality will follow if the government uses the
tax revenue incident upon an incremental distribution to purchase bonds

of the firm. This is just what is needed to preserve the pre—distri—
bution portfolio of the government, taking into account its implicit

ownership of corporate equity. The government's behavior, in other
words, is exactly what we would——in Modigliani—Miller fashion——expect of
a shareholder that receives a dividend.
In Section 2 below I review the uncertainty results as a way of

introducing the basic model. The extension to a model with uncertainty
is presented in Section 3. Section 4 contains concluding remarks.

2. Review of the Certainty Model.
The model underlying the analysis is in the Sanuelson (1959) con—
suniption loan tradition. Individuals live for two periods in an infinite

time horizon world. In the first life period each individual works
(offering one unit of labor inelastically), consumes, and saves for

retirement. "Retirement" describes the second life period, when each
individual dissaves and consumes, leaving nothing to his heirs.

All production takes place in the consolidated corporate sector

which is modeled as a single price—taking firm. Production conditions
are described by a neoclassical production function of capital and labor

employed, with constant returns to scale. The capital available to the
corporation in any period is inherited from the previous period and is

thus fixed in amount before the time of actual production. The output of

-6-

a period may either be consumed or frozen into infinitely durable capi-

tal. Investment is regarded as reversible.
Savings may be held in three forms: bonds issued by the corporation, shares of its common stock, or bonds issued by the government. A
given generation of individuals acquires these financial assets at the
end of its first life period, after production for that period has been
completed, and after the investment and financial plans of the corporation have been realized.

The holders of its common stock "own" the corporation. The owners
at the beginning of a period control that period's production and the
real investment which determines the amount of capital which will be

available for use in production at the beginning of the next period. The
owners of the firm at the beginning of a period specify as well the
financial policy for that period, which means they set the amount of
funds to be distributed to themselves as dividends and the amount of

corporate borrowing. At the end of the period the current owners sell
the equity to the young generation of savers.

The government's real spending program is assumed fixed, for sim-

plicity at a zero level. The government is thus modeled as a mechanical
cash flow manager: In each period the inherited debt obligation must be
paid off, with any shortfall of tax receipts covered by the issue of new

debt. Since the distribution tax is the only tax, there is nothing else
for the government to do. Note that by allowing the government to make
lump-sum transfers the model could be used to permit the government to

engage in (pre-announced) intertemporal redistributions. This would
involve issue of government debt in amounts larger or smaller than the
difference between old debt obligations and distribution tax receipts.

—7—

Notation.

To describe the results of the analysis formally, I use the
following notation (involving minor changes from that of the 1981 paper
to facilitate extension to incorporate uncertainty):

L: total number of labor units available for application
during the period (equals the number of individuals born
in the period, exogenously given).

K: stock of corporate capital at the beginning of the period
(used for production during the period).

B: total stock of corporate indebtedness at the beginning of
the period, which must be repaid during the period.

F(K,L): the production function, characterized by constant returns
to scale.

D: total distribution made by the corporation during the
period.

total stock of government indebtedness at the beginning of
period, which must be repaid during the period.

t: rate of tax on corporate distributions to stockholders
(which may be negative).

There are two ordinary prices in the model (current output is
numeraire), and one price-like "valuation function:"

w: wage.
d: discount factor, the current-period price of a bond
paying one dollar next period.

V(K÷, B+): a function relating the "ex-dividend" value of equity,
that is, the value at the end of a period, after

-8-

production is complete, to the financial and investment
decisions of the current owners.

For any variable, X, let X÷, X÷, etc., represent its value in
succeeding periods: X

its value in the preceding period. In order to

determine how to value the firm's equity, individuals must form expecta-

tions about the prices and valuation function one period hence. Let

denote the value of w expected to obtain in the next period, and

similarly for d and V. I assume that everyone agrees about w, d
and V; forecasts more than one period into the future are not needed.
There are three classes of agents in the model, two displaying

maximizing behavior. The "young" try to maximize U(c1, c) (labor is

supplied inelastically), where c1 is consumption dunn the th period
of the life cycle. The "old" manage the corporation to maximize c2,
which means maximize the sum of after-tax distributions and the proceeds "

from sale of equity, (1 - t)D

-

V(K÷, B÷). The third agent is the

government which simply manages the cash flow according to dB =

tD.

-

(Reminder: d is a price, not the differential operator.)

Evolution of the Economy.

The situation inherited from the past is described by (K, B,

L),

with L evolving exogenously along a known path. The requirements

placed on the model world are that the evolution to (K÷, B÷, B, L+) be
determined by clearing of competitive spot markets for labor, corporate
bonds, government bonds, corporate equity and goods, and that the price

expectations on which the value of the firm depends be "rational." The
general notion of rational expectations, attributed to Muth (1961), here

encompasses two properties: Expectations are correct, and they are

-9-

determinate, in the sense that they are governed by knowledge of the

economic structure and the current state of the economy. For rational
expectations to make sense, there must be an appropriate degree of
determinacy of the model as a whole, including its expectations-forma-

tion. Solving the model involves showing that the endogenous variables,
including prices and expectations, can be expressed as stationary fu.nc-

tions of the state variables, K, B, and

given the known path of

L. Properly, there should also be a demonstration that the proposed
equilibrium path of prices is at least locally unique--otherwise, why
should the economic agents pick the required expectations-forming rule?

My previous paper described an equilibrium path of the economy
sketched out above.

(I did not succeed in demonstrating local unique-

ness.) The neutrality result concerning the rate of tax on corporate
distributions followed from the conclusion that the valuation function on
the equilibrium path is given by

(1)

V(K, B) = (1

-

t)d(F(K÷,

L÷) -

wL - B

+ K÷)

The objective of the owners of the firm is to set employment together

with K+, B+ and D to maximize (1-t)D + V(K÷, B+). If we substitute
for D in the objective function, using accounting relationship (2)

among the outlays by the firm, B+ drops out.

(2)

DF(K,L)-wL-B+K+dB-K

Maximizing values of the other variables are independent of t, while
the financial structure of the firm is indeterminate.

-10-

Indeterminacy of financial structure corresponds to indeterminacy of

government tax receipts. The reason the equilibrium path of the economy's real variables and prices is nonetheless determinate is suggested by
equilibrium condition (3), which describes equality between the value of
demanded and supplied claims to future consumption:

(3) dc(d, w)L = dB÷ +

dB

+ (1 -

t)d(F÷(K, L) -

wL

-

B÷

+

K÷).

Here c(d, w) is the retirement-period consumption (which will take
place next period) demanded by a representative young person, the values

of K÷ and B+ are set by the current owners of the firm, and I have

taken for granted w =

w.

The expression on the left is the value of

claims demanded on the basis of life-cycle optimization by members of the

young generation. The first two terms on the right are the values of
bonds supplied by the firm and the government, and the third term is the
value of corporate equity. Exploiting the governmentt s budget constraint

dB =

- tD,

and the already mentioned accounting relationship (2)

between D and the other variables, allows us to write condition (3) as

(4) dcL =

- t(F

-

+
wL - B + K K÷)

(1-t)d(F÷(K÷,

L÷) -

wL

+

K÷).

Once again, B÷ has been eliminated, so the condition is independent of
corporate financial policy.

Equation (5) expresses a further reformulation of the same condition, taking advantage of Euler's theorem:

—11—

(5) dcL K÷ +

- t(P(K,

L) - wL

-

B +

K).

The left-hand side of (5) is, as before, the demand by the young genera-

tion for assets. The right-hand side, the economy's net supply of
assets, is the sum

of

the capital stock and the difference between

government bonds carried over from the past and the tax receipts that
would be generated if the corporation were to be liquidated in the

current period. The last term affects the real equilibrium path like an
anticipated tax receipt "asset" of the government, offsetting explicit

government debt. Through this relationship one obtains a clear sense of
why deficits or surpluses due to variations in corporate distributions
have no effect on the real path of the economy, even though government

debt does matter. An increase in distributions simultaneously reduces
government debt and the anticipated tax receipt asset by equal amounts.

3. Introducing Uncertainty.
There are various ways one might introduce uncertainty to this

model. Taking advantage of the framework pioneered by Kenneth Arrow (see
Arrow and Hahn (1971)), suppose that future production conditions depend
upon the particular state (for example, weather conditions) occurring.
Specifically, assume that the investment decision is fixed in the current
period, but the actual production function is determined in the next
period.

Let S stand for the set of possible states that might obtain in

the current period, S the set of possible states in the next period,
and so on. The larger dimensionality of the problem requires some new
notation. The following describes my compromise between

-12-

comprehensiveness and mnemonics. In general, variables are now understood to have a subscript to designate the state and time with which they

are associated. Thus, w., icS+, refers to the wage rate realized in
state i next period. Since the story starts with a known current
state, we can let variables with no subscript refer to the values currently realized.

I shall also assume that S is finite in each period, and that an
ordering has been agreed upon for the states in each period, so we can
use the subscript tt+f?

to

refer to the vector of values of a variable

potentially obtaining in the next period. (I make an exception for

and L÷, which keep their previous scalar interpretation.)

Thus, w

refers to the vector of wage rates presently anticipated for next period,

with components w., icS+, and has dimensionality equal to the number of

states in S÷.
The firm and the government must now specify, instead of the

single-dimensional bonds, vectors of state-specific claims. To simplify
matters, I assume that markets exist for each of the possible one-period

contingent claims. A unit of type i,

icS÷, pays one dollar next

period if state i is realized, and zero if another state is realized.
To issue a riskless bond is equivalent to selling one unit each of claims

of all types i, icS÷. The firm's bond financing is described by the

vector, B÷, the i.th component

.

.

of which, B. (1S÷), is the amount

the firm will owe its bondholders if state i is realized next period.

Instead of the single discount factor d, we now have a vector of
prices of unit claims contingent on the next period's state. Like the

discount factor d in the certainty case, the vector d is understood
as representing prices actually ruling in financial markets. (The prices

-13-

of unit contingent claims might be observable only by appropriately

packaging available financial instruments.) If e+ is the vector of
ones of appropriate dimension, the inner product

e+ •d is the price of

a riskiess bond. Since we shall want to continue to use the ordinary
subscript to refer to the state and time in which a particular variable

is realized (for example, d., icS+ is the vector of discount rates,
applicable to claims on output two periods hence, realized if state i
occurs next period), I shall use parentheses when I wish to identify a

particular element of d. Thus,

(d).,, icS÷, is a scalar, namely, the

present price of a claim to one unit if state i occurs next period.

The symbol d+ refers to the matrix of discount factor vectors, one for
each possible state that might be realized next period.

We are now in a position to use the analogues in the world of risk
to the temporary equilibrium relationships discussed earlier to explore
the question whether changes in tax receipts due to changes in corporate

distributions alter the equilibrium vector of discount factors. Of
particular importance is the valuation function for corporate equity
corresponding to (1), given by (6):

(6) V(K÷, B) = (1

-

t)d(F÷(K÷, L) -

wL - B

+

e÷K)

This is simply the value of the vector of payoffs, contingent on the
state realized, that the purchasers of the equity expect to obtain next
period in the form of distribution plus proceeds from sale of the equity
interest.

To analyze asset-market clearing in this case, it is not sufficient
to look at the aggregate value of present claims, as we did in (3) above.

-14-

We

must now look for the state-by-state equality of supplies of and

demands for contingent claims. Recall that c(w, d) is now to be
interpreted as the vector of consumption plans by the representative
young person for the retirement period, contingent on the state realized.
Asset market clearing now requires the vector equation,

(7) c(w, d)L =

=

B+B
tB

+

+ (1 -

B

+ (1 -

t)(F(K,
t)(F(K÷,

wL

L÷) -

L÷) -

-

B÷

+

eK÷)

wL + eK),

where, as before, we are taking for granted the determination of K+ and

w via other equilibrium relationships, given w and d.
In the certainty case we were able to use the government budget

constraint, d•B =

- tD,

together with the accounting relationship

between D and B, to eliminate both B and B+ from the asset
market clearing condition. Under uncertainty, the combination of these
two relationships is no longer sufficient. Whereas before, constraining
the value of the government's bond sales or purchases determined the

quantity (given d), the government now may choose among various combinations of state—contingent claims (i.e., deal in bonds of different risk

characteristics). Moreover, the same can be said of the firm. Thus, if
we take as a starting point that the government only issues riskiess
bonds (buys riskless bonds in the case of negative government debt), we
have still not pinned down temporary equilibrium because the risk characteristics of the firm's debt have not been determined.

If the corporation is restricted to riskless debt and the government
is restricted to riskiess debt at the margin, the argument goes through

-15-

much as it did in the risk-free analysis. In that case, extra bonds
issued by the corporation generate not only the exact withdrawal in value
of government bonds (as a consequence of extra taxes paid) required to
maintain financial market equilibrium, but also the matching change in

the state-by-state contingent claims. We can see this by inspection of
equilibrium condition (7). If the firm issues another unit of bonds, it

adds directly one dollar to each component of the vector, B+, of claims
supplied on the right-hand side, but subtracts an amount (1-t) from the
anticipated recovery from owning equity in each state that might occur.

If the government issues bonds delivering t in each state, the set of
financial claims supplied will continue to balance the claims demanded.

Note that the condition calls for riskiess bonds to be issued by the
corporation, but for the government to issue riskiess bonds "at the

margin." The requirement specifies the way the government must react to
variations in distribution-tax receipts. The government retains, however, freedom to set the risk characteristics of what we may call its basic
debt issue, which we might specify as the debt issued if there were no

corporate distributions in the period. The total value of the debt
issued is determined by the budget constraint (which could itself be
lifted by addition of, say, lump-sum taxes to the fiscal repertoire).

This freedom cannot, however, be unpredictably exercised. In order
for the the agents of the model to be able to formulate rational expectations, the risk characteristics of the basic government debt issue must
be specified in advance (for example, by a formula relating to the

characteristics defining the different states of the world). This is a
distinct addition to the model introduced by the extension to uncertain-

ty. In the certainty case the government was wholly predictable because

-16-

it had no degree of freedom within the budget constraint. Uncertainty

brings with it a range of options in each situation. Government policy
will influence the course of the model economy (because the overlapping

generations are, by assumption, not linked through bequests). In this
case, the main effect of policy is to influence the choice among risky

alternatives. It might be interesting to explore the question of optimal
fiscal policy in this model; however, for present purposes, the point to
stress is the requirement for predictability, involving pre-specification
of the characteristics of the basic debt and the rule for responding at
the margin to variations in distribution-tax receipts.

The latter requirement has thus far been spelled out for the case in

which the corporation issues only riskiess debt. However, we can readily
formulate a more general rule relating private and marginal public debt
to preserve the property of the model whereby the firm's financial policy
has no real effect.

The investment and employment decisions in the model are essentially

determined by the path of w and d, wages and contingent dollar-claim

prices. Suppose we had a path of w and d such that (7) is continually satisfied when the firm is restricted to riskiess debt and the

government to riskless debt at the margin. Then equilibrium condition
(7) provides us with a general condition on government finance that

assures that the path is unaffected by other choices of private financial
behavior, namely,

(8)

B = c(w,d)L

-

(1-t)(F÷(K÷,L)

-

wL

-

e÷K÷)

-

tB

—17—

In

words, in order for corporate financial policy to have no real effect,

government policy must be effectively to issue basic debt, consisting of

a pre-determined package of contingent claims, c(w,d)L -

w+L÷

+

e+K÷),

(1-t)(F÷(K÷,L÷)

and to purchase tB÷, i.e., a fraction t, of the

bonds issued by the firm. The requirement (7) of equilibrium implies
that if any other government policy is followed, private financial policy
will have real effects, and hence further restrictions on behavior are
required to close the model.

4. Concluding Remarks.
With respect to the narrow question whether the neutrality results
obtained earlier in an all certainty model carry over to a world of

uncertainty, the analysis yields a clear conclusion. Uncertainty introduces degrees of freedom to government choices that must be balanced by

restrictions. In particular, if corporate distributions are not to have
real effects, the government must use the distribution-tax proceeds to
purchase the debt of the distributing firm (or, equivalently, buy back a
set of government-issued contingent claims to generate the same effect on

the supply of each type in the market). As I have suggested in the
introductory section of this paper, there is an economic rationale for

such a policy on the part of the government. It really is the same
policy that we would expect shareholders to follow in rebalancing their

portfolios following a distribution. The distribution by the corporation
changes the characteristics of the equity claim. The portfolio can be
restored to its pre-distribution characteristics by using the dividend to

buy the firm's bonds. When we recognize that the government is an

—18—

implicit equity owner, by virtue of the distribution tax, the behavior
required for neutrality seems reasonable.

However, it is hard to imagine any actual government carrying out

this program. The systems used to account for government are typically
weak in the dimension of measuring either government liabilities to make
future payments or government claims to payment of taxes in the future

already established by existing policies. To take an example, existing
accounting conventions in the United States record the loss in tax
revenue due to contributions to tax—favored retirement plans, and make no
allowance for the resulting increase in the present value of future

liabilities implied by the same transaction (Kotlikoff (1984) develops
this general theme more fully).

Unfortunately for the model described here, if the government does
not follow the specified behavior, incremental distribution—tax revenues

will have real effects. The problem this presents is not simply to
describe these effects, but rather to understand how it is that equilib—

rium is determined at all. For the argument that corporate distributions
are not determined in the model holds generally——it is simply a consequence of price—taking by private agents in financial markets. As a

result, corporate distributions cannot be predicted. If an unpredictable
aspect of the model has real consequences, how can agents have "rational

expectations?" Thus I conclude this paper on a note of puzzlement.

—19.-

References

Arrow, Kenneth J. and F. H. Hahn (1971), General Competitive Analysis,

San Francisco: Holden—Day.
Bradford, David F. (1981), "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a
Tax on Corporate Distributions," Journal of Public Economics,
XV, pp. 1—22.

Bradford, David F., and the U. S. Treasury Tax Policy Staff (1984),

Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform, Arlington, VA: Tax Analysts.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1984), "Taxation and Savings: A Neoclassical
Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, XXII (December),
pp. 1576—1629.

Modigliani, F. and N. H. Miller (1958), "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of Investment," American Economic
Review, XLVIII (June), pp. 261—297.

Muth, J. (1961), "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price
Movements," Econometrica, XXIX, pp. 315—335.

