                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                IMMIGRATION, JOBS AND EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION:
                           EVIDENCE FROM EUROPE

                                         Francesco D'Amuri
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                        Working Paper 17139
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17139


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We are indebted to Anna Salomons for providing data and guidance necessary to construct task variables.
We thank Paul Gaggl for excellent assistance in research and editing. William Ambrosini and Chad
Sparber provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Francesco D'Amuri and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Immigration, Jobs and Employment Protection: Evidence from Europe
Francesco D'Amuri and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 17139
June 2011
JEL No. J24,J61,J62

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we analyze the effect of immigrants on native jobs in fourteen Western European countries.
We test whether the inflow of immigrants in the period 1996-2007 decreased employment rates and/or
if it altered the occupational distribution of natives with similar education and age. We find no evidence
of the first but significant evidence of the second: immigrants took "simple" (manual-routine) type
of occupations and natives moved, in response, toward more "complex" (abstract-communication)
jobs. The results are robust to the use of an IV strategy based on past settlement of different nationalities
of immigrants across European countries. We also document the labor market flows through which
such a positive reallocation took place: immigration stimulated job creation, and the complexity of
jobs offered to new native hires was higher relative to the complexity of destructed native jobs. Finally,
we find evidence that the occupation reallocation of natives was significantly larger in countries with
more flexible labor laws. This tendency was particularly strong for less educated workers.


Francesco D'Amuri
Economic Research and International Relations
Bank of Italy
Via Nazionale 91
00184, Rome
Italy
francesco.damuri@bancaditalia.it.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1        Introduction

The net flow of immigrants into Western Europe during the decade preceding the great
recession (1996-2007) was very large. Considering 14 countries1 the percentage of foreign-
born, shown in Figure 1, increased by more than 4 percentage points from less than 8% of
the population in 1996 to more than 12 % in 2007. By comparison, in the US, the presence
of foreign-born increased by a smaller percentage of the population (3%), going from 10.6%
of the total in 1998 to 13.6% in 2007.
        Extensive literature has analyzed the labor market eﬀect of immigrants in US and in other
countries with large immigration flows, such as Canada and Australia.2 With some disagree-
ment, researchers have emphasized two facts. First, immigration is relatively common among
workers with very high education levels (college or higher).3 These types of immigrants may
compete with highly educated natives but may also have positive productivity eﬀects, so
their overall wage impact on native workers is likely to be positive. Second, among workers
in the intermediate to low range of education, immigrants tend to be concentrated among
those with very low schooling levels. They also tend to take manual and routine occupations
(e.g. in construction and in the personal-household services sectors), which usually require
manual and physical skills rather than communication and interactive abilities. This may
generate strong competition for the least educated natives (e.g. Borjas (2003), Borjas and
Katz (2007)). However, the fact that natives are employed in larger numbers in occupations
that are diﬀerent from those taken by immigrants (Ottaviano and Peri (2011)) and the fact
that they tend to upgrade their jobs, in response to immigration (Peri and Sparber (2009)),
taking on more complex and communication-intensive tasks and leaving manual tasks to im-
migrants, protects them from such competition. Hence, even for the group of less educated
native workers, several economists do not find any significant wage eﬀects of immigrants (e.g.
Card and Shleifer (2009), Ottaviano and Peri (2011)).
        As far as European labor markets are concerned, economists have analyzed the impact of
immigrants in specific countries (see for instance Dustmann et al. (2008) for the UK, Glitz
    1
        Namely Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom.
  2
    See for instance Longhi et al. (2005) for a summary and meta-analysis of the literature on the wage eﬀect
of immigrants.
    3
      This is not only true for US immigrants but also for immigrants to European countries. See for instance
Docquier et al.’s (2010) data and empirical analysis that emphasize this fact.



                                                      2
(2011) for Germany and González and Ortega (2008) for Spain) using frameworks similar to
those applied to the United States. Often those types of analyses are forced to use variation
(of immigrants and labor market outcomes) across regions within a country. Hence, they are
subject to the concern, put forward in several studies (e.g. Borjas et al. (1996)), of identifying
an attenuated wage eﬀect relative to the possible national eﬀect. With the notable exception
of Angrist and Kugler (2003), we are not aware of any study that analyzes the impact of
immigration on European Labor markets considering evidence from all (or most) Western
European economies. In this paper, we fill this gap by analyzing how immigration aﬀects net
employment and job specialization of natives and how these eﬀects vary across EU countries.
   We use the European Labor Force survey to analyze the labor market eﬀects of immig-
rants, exploiting the variation of immigration rates across 14 EU countries over the recent
decade. Besides a large panel variation in the inflow of immigrants, European countries also
provide large variation in the institutional characteristics of their labor markets. These rich
sources of additional variation allow us to address a host of novel questions: Are some coun-
tries better equipped to absorb immigrants? Is the response of native workers to immigrants,
in terms of occupational mobility, stronger in countries with more flexible labor markets?
Are these diﬀerences particularly relevant for some groups of workers?
   In the broader picture, this paper also contributes to the understanding of the determin-
ants of a shift in demand and supply of productive tasks in Europe. In the recent decades,
an increase in employment within jobs requiring the use of complex and abstract skills, and
a decrease in employment within manual-routine type jobs has been documented for many
developed countries. In particular, these phenomena have been observed in the US (Acemo-
glu and Autor, 2010) as well as in Europe (Goos et al., 2009). In a search for common global
tendencies, that oﬀer explanations for the aforementioned trends, most of the economic re-
search (as summarized in Acemoglu and Autor (2010)) has focused on two factors: the eﬀect
of technology and the eﬀect of oﬀ-shoring. On one hand, information and communication
technologies have increased the productivity of complex-abstract jobs, while substituting for
routine manual (and routine non-manual) tasks. On the other, the internationalization of
production has allowed the relocation of simple and manual phases of production abroad,
but not (yet) the relocation of complex tasks. These two factors aﬀected the demand for
these tasks in developed countries.
   In this paper we explore another dimension that may have produced a shift in the supply


                                                3
of tasks in rich countries: the increase in the immigrant labor force, especially from less
developed countries. Our hypothesis is that the inflow of these immigrants has increased
the supply of manual-physical skills in rich economies, but also shifted native workers to
more complex tasks. Hence, immigration has been an additional cause for the increase in
employment in cognitive and complex tasks by native workers.
   Our empirical strategy consists of considering diﬀerent skill cells (represented by com-
binations of education and age in each country) across European countries. Each of them,
in the tradition of Borjas (2003), is a diﬀerentiated labor market (mobility of natives across
countries is small in Europe). Within each of them we consider a partition of productive
tasks into “complex” tasks (abstract and cognitive) and “simple” tasks (routine and manual
based). Such a partition follows the literature on the eﬀect of information technology on the
demand for productive tasks (e.g. Autor et al. (2003)) and the literature on “oﬀ-shorability”
of tasks (e.g. Crinò (2009) and Blinder (2006)). We consider this partition as relevant also
in determining the relative specialization of native and immigrant workers. Jobs that can
be easily codified, that are manual and repetitive in nature, are considered “simple” and
may be easily taken by foreign-born workers who may have more limited native language
skills and not know the intricacy of the culture, social norms and institutions of the host
country. If this is the case then an inflow of immigrants in a cell (labor market) increases the
supply of “simple” productive tasks in that cell. As we will show in a model of occupational
choice, natives, who have a comparative advantage in communication-abstract tasks, would
in response specialize in more “complex” tasks.
   Using this structure we can then identify whether immigration has been a force promoting
the specialization of native workers in Europe toward abstract-complex occupations and
away from manual-routine ones. At the same time we can check whether such a shift in the
occupational distribution of natives took place with a net increase, decrease or no change in
employment for natives. To establish whether the increased specialization of natives, which
correlates with the inflow of immigrants, was actually caused by them we use an instrumental
variable approach. Our instrument, inspired by Altonji and Card (1991) and Card (2001),
is based on the fact that the share of foreign-born in 1990 within each European country,
by country of origin, is a predictor of their subsequent flows into EU countries. Assuming
that shift in demand for foreign labor taking place between 1996 and 2007 does not vary
systematically with foreigners’ settlements in 1990, the instrument is correlated with relative


                                               4
task supply only through its eﬀect on the supply of immigrants. We also control for factors
that proxy shifts in the relative demand for complex-abstract tasks which may be country
or skill-specific.
    Our main empirical findings are three. First, according to results obtained using our
preferred specification (2SLS estimates with country by education and education by year fixed
eﬀects), immigrants flows do not cause a decrease in natives employment rates, but rather
increase them; moreover, higher immigration pushes natives to occupations with higher skill
contents: a doubling of the immigrants’ share in a labor market (defined by skill-country cells)
increases natives’ specialization in complex skills by 6%. Second, we document that such a
positive reallocation takes place through an increase in the average complexity of jobs oﬀered
to new hires relative to separations. Third, we split countries in two groups, those with strong
employment protection laws (EPL) and those with weak employment protection. We then
allow the response of net employment and specialization of natives to diﬀer across groups.
We find that the natives’ positive reallocation towards complex jobs triggered by migration
is more intense in less protected markets, in particular for workers with low education.
This implies that in countries with high EPL, less educated workers tend to remain in
simple-manual occupations that suﬀer much more the wage competition of immigrants, while
in countries with low EPL the mechanisms of upgrading natives’ occupations moves less
educated workers away from immigrants’ wage competition.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sections 2 and 3 respectively define a
theoretical model of immigration and natives’ specialization and discuss the identification
strategy. Section 4 describes the datasets and the task variables. Results of the empirical
analysis on immigration and natives’ employment rates and occupations are reported in Sec-
tion 5, Section 6 analyzes the impact of immigrants separately on new hiring and separations
of natives, while Section 7 investigates how labor market institutions aﬀect the extent of the
occupational adjustment. Section 8 concludes the paper.


2     The Model

2.1    Relative Demand of Tasks

We consider that each labor market (country) is divided into cells of workers with diﬀering
observable skills, experience and education. Similarly to Katz and Murphy (1992), Ottaviano


                                               5
and Peri (2011) and Peri and Sparber (2009), we use a categorization that distinguishes
between two education groups, those with secondary education or less and those with some
tertiary education and more. These two groups are clearly diﬀerentiated for the type of
jobs/production tasks that they perform. Within each group we consider five age sub-
groups. As in Borjas (2003) and Ottaviano and Peri (2011), each of these skill groups
provides labor services that are somewhat diﬀerentiated because they use diﬀerent vintages
of technology and have had diﬀerent labor market experiences. Hence the structure of
competition-substitutability within a schooling group is diﬀerent from that across groups. We
capture this production structure by combining diﬀerent skill cells in a multi-stage nested
Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) production function. In particular, output is
produced using capital and labor; labor is a CES aggregate of labor services from workers
in diﬀerent education groups and, in turn, each of those groups is a CES composite of labor
services of workers with diﬀerent ages. Such a structure imposes specific restrictions on
the cross-cell elasticities. We follow the well established practice of grouping skills that are
harder to substitute into the outer groups, increasing substitutability as we progress into the
inner nests. Card and Shleifer (2009) and Goldin and Katz (2007) argue that the split into
two schooling groups is the one preferred by the data and most of the literature organizes
the experience groups into bins of five or ten years. Our choice of nesting structure follows
their lead. Furthermore, the particular order of nesting does not matter for our results as
long as education-age cells are imperfectly substitutable groups of workers. For each country
 in year  we represent the production function as follows:

                                                      1−
                                           =                                        (1)


                                       "                   −1
                                                                      #      
                                        X                   
                                                                            −1

                               =                                             (2)
                                         

                              "                                 #      
                               X                      −1
                                                       
                                                                      −1

                  =                              for each    (3)
                              

 ,    and  are respectively output, total factor productivity, services of physical
capital and the aggregate labor services in country  and year .  is the composite
labor input from workers with the same level of education “”.  is the compos-
ite input from workers of education “” and age “”. The parameters  capture the


                                                      6
relative productivity of each skill group within the labor composite. Notice that the relative
productivity of education groups  is allowed to vary across countries and over time
and the relative productivity of age groups  also varies by education, country and
time. The elasticities   and   regulate substitutability between labor services of
workers with diﬀerent education and age level.
   The observable characteristics are education and age of a worker. We use the index 
(= ) to identify each education-age cell. We consider these characteristics as given
at a point in time. In each skill-cell  we separate the labor services supplied as complex
tasks () and those supplied as simple tasks () and consider those inputs as imperfect
substitutes, also combined in a CES.
                              ∙      −1
                                                             ¸ 
                                                        −1 −1
                                                        
                       =    + (1 −   )     for each   

 and  are the amount of “simple” (manual, routine) and “complex” (abstract,
communication, mental) services supplied by the skill group  in country  and year . The
coeﬃcient   determines the relative productivity of simple tasks in the cell and the elasticity
 determines the substitutability between the two types of tasks in the cell. We call  the
compensation for one unit of service of complex work, and  the compensation for one
unit of service of simple work. This allows us to derive the relative demand for complex and
simple services in skill group  by equating the ratio of their marginal productivity to the
ratio of their compensations:
                                             µ                 ¶ µ        ¶−
                                           1 −            
                                         =                                                                (4)
                                                              

The relative supply, the relative compensation and potentially the relative productivity of
simple and complex services vary with skill, country and year, hence the subscripts. Through-
out the remainder of the theory section we omit the                  subscripts and we will re-introduce
them when describing the empirical specification.


2.2   Relative Supply of tasks

As in Peri and Sparber (2009), we assume that native and immigrant workers divide their
labor endowment ( = 1) between simple and complex tasks in order to maximize their utility.
Here, diﬀerently from Peri and Sparber (2009), we allow utility to depend positively on labor
wage and negatively on a stigma associated with simple working tasks. Hence, individuals


                                                       7
of similar skill , if natives or immigrants, may have diﬀerent productivity in simple and
complex tasks as well as diﬀerent degrees of “dislike” (stigma) for earning as simple manual-
routine workers. The utility  for individuals of type , with  =  indicating domestic
and  =  denoting foreign-born workers, is given by the following expression:


                             = ( ) κ  + (1 −  )   −  ( ) κ                                            (5)
                                 |             {z              } |        {z     }
                                              Wage Income                                   Stigma

       The first part is the wage income. Each individual of type  has some task-specific ability
κ and  and, by allocating  units of labor to simple tasks and 1 −  units to complex
tasks, produces  = ( ) κ units of simple service and  = (1 −  )  of complex service
(with   1), compensated respectively at rate  and  per unit.4 However, the part of
income earned doing simple tasks does not convey the full utility of income as it may have
some stigma, disutility or penalty attached, represented by the second term in  . People
may dislike doing manual jobs, or the status in society of these jobs may be low, or there may
be some dislike of circumstances connected with the manual part of the job (being outside,
uncomfortable, etc.). We model this stigma-disutility as an “iceberg” cost on the part of the
income that is earned doing the simple tasks, with   between 0 and 1, as the parameter
that captures the intensity of such psychological cost/dislike. The second part of the utility
is essentially the equivalent amount of income that a person would give up in order to be
able to do a “complex” rather than a “simple” job.
       Maximizing (5) with respect to  we obtain the individual relative supply of tasks for
type :

                                         µ        ¶        µ            ¶        µ        ¶    1
                                                  1−         1          1−              1−
                                     =                                                                                        (6)
                                                            1 −                  κ
       In this simplified model each native supplies ( ,  ) task units and each immigrant
supplies ( ,  ) so that members from each group will choose a common combination of
tasks (empirically an occupation). Each group will choose a new combination of tasks if
their relative compensation changes. The relative supply of complex tasks increases with the
relative compensation   and it increases with the relative ability in complex tasks of
the group, κ  as well as with its dislike for manual-routine services                               1
                                                                                                      1−    The aggregate task
   4
       The assumption of   1 implies an internal solution: all individuals do at least some of each tasks. This
means that when a person spends almost the whole day doing only complex tasks (e.g. writing a complex
paper) it is eﬃcient to spend a little time doing simple tasks (such as cleaning up the desk).


                                                                 8
supply for native and foreign workers in skill , country  and year , will equal the product
                                                                                                    
of individual task supply and total labor supply. This implies                                  =      (by multiplying
numerator and denominator by employment in the cell).
       Finally aggregating immigrants and natives we obtain the aggregate relative supply of
tasks in cell   .
                                     +                               
                                   =         =  ( ) ·    + (1 −  ( )) ·                                                    (7)
                                     +                               
       The term  ( ) =  ( +  ) ∈ (0 1) is the share of simple tasks supplied by foreign-
born workers, and is a simple monotonically increasing transformation of the foreign-born
share of less educated workers,  =  ( +  ).5 Hence, the aggregate relative supply of
tasks in the economy is a weighted average of each group’s relative supply, and the weights
are closely related to the share of each group in employment.


2.3       Equilibrium Results

Substituting (6) for natives and immigrants in (7) and equating relative supply with relative
demand (expressed by (4)) one can solve for the equilibrium relative compensation of tasks:
                                           ⎡ ⎛              ⎞⎤− 1
                    ∗    µ      ¶ (1−)                        (1−)+
                         1 −  (1−)+ ⎣  ⎝           ⎠⎦
                       =                                                           (8)
                   ∗                      κ − κ +
                                                                                    +
                        ³            ´
The function        
                    κ     κ   is a weighted average of the relative task abilities and of simple
job aversion among natives and immigrants. More specifically,
   ³         ´ ∙         ³ ´ 1 ³        ´                   ³ ´ 1 ³         ´  ¸(1−)
                        1−     1   1−                   1−     1    1−
κ  κ    =  ( ) · κ        1−      + (1 −  ( )) · κ       1−             . The
        ³           ´
term κ  κ   depends negatively on  and positively on κ and  , as indicated by
the signs in equation (8).
       By substituting the equilibrium wage into the aggregate relative supply for domestic
workers, we find their equilibrium relative provision of tasks (Equation (9)).

                                                                                    ⎡  ⎛          ⎞⎤− 1        
         ∗      µ          ¶            µ        ¶    1    µ            ¶                         (1−)+ 1−
                  1−        (1−)+              1−          1         1−        
                                                                                    ⎣ ⎝     ⎠⎦
         ∗ =
                                           κ                 1 −               κ − κ +
                                                                                                                               (9)
                                                                                            +

The equilibrium expression (9) is the basis for the empirical analysis. In particular, based
on its logarithmic derivative of (9), the model predicts a positive impact of the share of
                                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                                      
foreign-born,  , on the relative supply of complex tasks of natives,                                  ∗ .
                                                                                                      
   5
       Specifically: 0 ( )  0, (0) = 0 and (1) = 1


                                                                     9
3     Empirical implications and identifying assumptions

Expression (9) holds for each skill-country-year cell; taking the logarithm of both sides of
the equation and explicitly writing the subscripts in the variables for each skill-country-time
group we approximate the equilibrium condition to the following empirically implementable
condition:

                             µ        ¶
                                 
                        ln                    =  · ln( ) +  +  +         (10)
                                    
             
The term        is the measure of relative complex versus simple tasks provided by home-born
workers in the specific cell. This relative supply is responsive to the relative compensation
of tasks, which in turn depends on the share of immigrants (ln( ), in logarithm) in the
                            ³         ´
                    1         ln κ
cell and  ≡ − (1−)+ 1−    ln      0. The country by education eﬀect  captures
                                                                                         ³ ´
the unobservable relative productivity and simple-job aversion for natives, 1−  1
                                                                                      ln κ   and
       ³     ´                                   ³         ´                    µ          ¶
         1                               1        ln κ             1           ln κ
1− ln 1− and for immigrants − (1−)+ 1−             and − (1−)+ 1−     
                                                                                           . These
                                                                                             κ

features of the native and immigrants population depend on the skill group and on the
country, but not on the year. A certain country, due to its laws and institutions selects
immigrants with certain productivity and preference characteristics (by skill group) relative
to natives. This, however, changes only slowly with time and we assume that it is constant
over the considered period. The education by time eﬀects  absorb the variation of
                                                       ³    ´
                                               
the relative productivity and eﬃciency term (1−)+ ln 1−
                                                              The relative productivity of
simple and complex tasks may evolve over time. For instance, a common complex-biased
technological progress that aﬀects college educated workers more than less educated ones over
the considered years would be captured by these eﬀects. The term  is an idiosyncratic
random shock (or measurement error) with average 0 and uncorrelated with the explanatory
variables. Our main interest is in estimating  Our model predicts a positive value of , as a
larger share of immigrants would increase returns for complex tasks relative to simple tasks
and hence push natives to specialize further into those tasks with potential productivity and
wage gains. The magnitude of that eﬀect is an empirical question.


3.1   Discussion of Endogeneity

Once we control for the cell-specific selection and for the technological factors, we are as-
suming that the remaining variation over time in the share of immigrants across cells within


                                                          10
country-year is driven by the exogenous variation of immigrant supply. In particular, in
the OLS estimates we are assuming that, after controlling for the fixed eﬀects, the whole
variation of  is exogenous. Residual correlation could still be present if, for example,
skill upgrading is taking place among native workers of a particular country, irrespective
of immigration. This would determine the excess demand for unskilled workers and, thus,
attract immigrants. We deal with this potential bias emerging from reverse causality in two
ways.
       First, in all specifications we define  as the share of foreign born individuals on total
population (rather than employment) within each cell. Immigrant population is by and large
determined by factors in the sending countries, the costs of migration, as well as immigra-
tion laws. Of course, employment opportunities (driven by labor demand conditions) aﬀect
immigration choices and hence the whole population in a cell may still depend on unob-
served labor demand shocks. Hence we also include country by education and education by
year fixed eﬀects, capturing systematic diﬀerentials across cells in relative Complex/Simple
task demand driven by technology (education by year) and country-specificity (country by
education).
       Second, we also address the potential omitted variable bias with an instrumental variable
strategy.6 In particular, from IPUMS-I (2010) we downloaded micro-data from national
Censuses 1990-1991, for seven of the fourteen countries included in the ELFS (Austria,
France, Greece, Italy,7 Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom). For that year, we computed
the population of immigrants by area of origin (using nine large geographic groups8 ) in each
country-education-age cell and the native population in each of those cells. We have then used
the data on yearly immigration flows into OECD countries by country of origin from Ortega
and Peri (2011). Those data, described in detail in Ortega and Peri (2011), were collected
from several sources (OECD, UN) and report the total gross inflow of migrants from any
country into OECD countries. Based on these gross flows, we construct yearly net inflows
by attributing a 40% re-migration rate to immigrants. Further, for each year within the
   6
       This strategy has evolved as a favorite one in this literature since its first use by Altonji and Card (1991).
   7
       For Italy we used 2001 data, the first ones providing all necessary information. Nevertheless, for this
country ELFS data are available starting with 2005 and not with 1996, so that the shares are still calculated
according to the distribution of immigrants taking place 4 years before the estimation interval starts.
   8
     The groups of origin of immigrants are: North Africa, Other Africa, North America, Central and South
America, Middle East and Central Asia, South and Eastern Asia, Eastern Europe, Western Europe, Oceania.




                                                          11
period 1996-2007 and the seven EU countries in our sample, we break net immigration rates
down by the nine areas of origin mentioned above. Multiplying the resulting origin-specific
growth rates by the 1991 stock of immigrants in each education-age-country cell allows
us to infer origin-cell-specific stocks of immigrants at an annual frequency. We aggregate
across countries of origin, in order to impute the total stock of immigrants at the education-
age-country level for each year within the period 1996-2007. Finally, we obtain shares of
immigrants on the cell-year level by representing the imputed population of immigrants as
a fraction of the total population, assuming that the number of natives remained at its 1991
level. This method implies that the variation in shares obtained across cells and years is only
driven by the initial cell composition of immigrants by origin and the variation in inflows
across origin groups in Europe over time. If a country had a lot of young and highly educated
Algerians in 1991 (rather than, say, young and less educated Filipinos) and Algerians turned
out to increase their immigration rates more than Filipinos in the considered period, the first
country would obtain a larger group of educated young immigrants as of 2007 relative to the
second.
   The underlying exclusion assumption is that, while immigrants of certain origins tend to
settle where historical communities of similar origin already are, in order to exploit networks
and supply of ethnic public goods, the 1991 distribution of immigrants by origin is unrelated
to changes in labor demand during the 1996-2007 period. The instrument turns out to be
fairly strong (first stage statistics are reported in Table A5 of the appendix). In particular
the F-test of the constructed IV for the whole sample is around 69 when considering men
and women and 58 when considering men only. Such strong correlation is a sign that the
composition of immigrants and the subsequent flows by origin work as strong predictor of
the increase in immigrants in a cell. This shows that the network of previous immigrants
reduces costs of settling and finding a job for new immigrants of similar origin.
   Since we can only calculate the initial 1991 shares of immigrants on a subset of 7 out of 14
countries, we analyze three alternative specifications for our main regressions. First, based
on all the 14 countries, we estimate equation (10) using OLS with fixed eﬀects. Second, we
restrict the OLS analysis to the sample of 7 countries for which we have the instruments,
and finally, we employ the 2SLS strategy outlined above for this subset of countries.




                                              12
3.2      Empirical Implementation

Our empirical analysis consists of four parts. First, after a brief introduction of our data
in Section 4, we begin by analyzing the impact of immigration on natives’ employment
rates in Section 5.1. While this is of interest in itself, it also complements the subsequent
analysis of relative skill eﬀects, based on equation (10). In the second part, we continue
by quantifying the adjustment in the distribution of skills across diﬀerent types of workers,
which is potentially triggered by immigrants’ flows (Section 5.2). As a preliminary step,
we separately investigate the eﬀects of immigration on the total amount of “complex” as
well as “simple” tasks performed by native workers. We do so by estimating two models,
akin to equation (10), with ln ( ) and ln ( ) as the respective dependent variables.
The aim is to gauge the impact of immigration on the numerator and the denominator of
the left hand side of equation (10) in isolation. This decomposition helps us to understand
whether a potential relative reallocation takes place with a net increase or a net decrease in
the intensity with which native workers perform the two respective types tasks.
      In order to check whether the regularities found for the composite “complex” and “simple”
task measures are also present at a more disaggregate level, we run separate regressions for
each of the underlying basic task components.9 As an additional robustness check we further
estimate the impact of immigration on alternative measures of “complex” and “simple” task
intensity taken from Goos et al. (2009).
      We conclude the second part by estimating the impact of immigration on relative task
levels (our main specification, equation (10)), in order to empirically test the equilibrium
conditions (equation (9)) derived from the model outlined in Section 2.
      The third part (Section 6) outlines our approach to investigate the labor market flows
behind the potential task adjustment in response to immigrant inflows. In particular, we
inquire whether native workers’ labor reallocation takes place through systematic changes in
the hiring (job creation) or separation (job destruction) margin.
      Finally, in Section 7, we test whether country-level labor market policies, in particular
employment protection laws, are fostering or discouraging a potentially favorable skill real-
location. The process we envision is a dynamic shift of native workers across occupations.
Thus, the ease of transition between jobs within a particular country is potentially a crucial
component in determining the strength of this channel.
  9
      See Section 4.1 for details on the construction of our skill measures.



                                                        13
4         Data and descriptive statistics

The main dataset we use is the harmonized European Labour Force Survey (ELFS), which
homogenizes and groups together country specific surveys at the European level (see EURO-
STAT (2009)). We restrict our analysis to the period 1996-2007 since before 1996 data on
the place of birth of individuals are absent for most countries in the survey. We restrict our
analysis to the working age population (age 15-64) of Western European countries only.10
The data include information on the occupation, working status and demographic charac-
teristics of the individuals. Unluckily the ELFS does not include any information on their
wages. We dropped observations with missing data on education, age or country of birth,
which are fundamental for our empirical analysis. Only in 16 out of 168 (14 countries × 12
years) country-year cells one of these variables, fundamental for our analysis, was completely
missing and we had to drop it.11
         In line with previous literature, we classify as immigrants all individuals born in any
country (both EU or non-EU) outside the considered one. We do not use the first year of data
(1995) since in that year the country of birth variable was missing in 4 out of 14 countries.
In Figure 1 we show the evolution of the share of foreign born on the aggregate population
of the sample countries during the 1996-2007 period analyzed here. In this figure, we pool
data from all countries except Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and United Kingdom, for which
data are missing for one or more years. The share of foreign born in the total population
increased by more than 4 percentage points from below 8% in 1996 to 12.3% in 2007. This
increase was, on average, rather evenly distributed across educational levels (as one can see
from Figure A1 in the Tables and Figures appendix).
         In the empirical analysis, for each year between 1996 and 2007, we aggregate the indi-
vidual data to the country-level, two educational levels (upper secondary education or less
and strictly more than upper secondary education) and five ten-year age-classes covering
individuals between 15 and 64 years of age. Our analysis includes both women and men,
and as a robustness check we also show the results of the specifications including only men.
    10
         We include Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Nether-
lands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom. We could not include Germany since main variables,
including place of birth, were missing for most years.
  11
     See Table A1 of the Tables and Data appendix for the full list of country/years. The table illustrates
missing values as well as the subset of cells included in the 2SLS specifications.




                                                      14
4.1      Task variables

To test the predictions of the model in Section 2, especially the equilibrium condition (10),
we need indicators of the intensity of skills supplied in each job over time. Following Peri
and Sparber (2009) and considering occupations as capturing the diﬀerent types of jobs per-
formed, we use the O*NET data from the US Department of Labor (version 11, available at
http://www.onetcenter.org/). This survey, started in 2000 (when it replaced the Dictionary
of Occupational Titles, DOT ), assigns values summarizing the importance of several diﬀerent
abilities to each of 339 Occupations (according to the Standard Occupation Classification,
SOC). We use 78 of these tasks to construct our measures of skill-intensity for each occupa-
tion. As the scale of measurement for the task variables is arbitrary, we convert the values
into the percentile of the task intensity in the 2000 distribution of occupations. We create
five abilities’ measures: communication, complex, mental, manual and routine. For example,
skills used to construct the communication category include, among others, oral comprehen-
sion, oral communication and speech clarity; manual dexterity and reaction time are among
the skills used to construct the manual category and so on. Table A2 of the appendix in-
cludes the full list of the skills/tasks measures employed to construct each of the indicators.
When we consider only two broad groups, complex and simple, the communication, complex
and mental skills are included in the complex group, while manual and routine form the
simple one. In some of the empirical specifications, we also use the alternative abstract and
routine classifications employed by Goos et al. (2009) as a robustness check.12
      For each indicator, we merge occupation-specific values to individuals in the 2000 Census
using the SOC codes. Then, using the Goos et al. (2009) crosswalk, we collapse the more
detailed SOC codes into 21 2-digit occupations classified according to the International Stand-
ard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) which is the classification used by the ELFS. We
aggregate the scores (between 0 and 1) for each of the task intensity measures as a weighted
average of the SOC occupations into the ICSCO one. The weights used are the share of
workers for each SOC occupation in the total of the ISCO grouping, according to the 2000
US Census. To give an idea of the indicators, the ISCO occupation “corporate managers”
that gets a score of 0.79 in communication skills indicates that 79% of all workers in the US
in 2000 were using communication skills less intensively than corporate managers. Table A3
of the appendix shows the score for each of the ability indexes in the 21 occupations provided
 12
      These measures employ a diﬀerent set of skills and are normalized with zero mean and unitary variance.



                                                     15
by the ELFS. For example, Drivers and mobile plant operators is the occupation with the
highest manual ability intensity, while it is the second to last occupation when considering
complex abilities. On the other hand, Corporate Managers are highly ranked among complex,
mental and communication skills while being relatively less intensive in manual and routine
abilities. In Table A4 we report simple correlations between each of the ability measures and
some dummies that capture specific education or age level groups consistent with our cell
partition in the empirical analysis. Two patterns emerge clearly in the correlations between
observable skills and complex/simple tasks. First, there is a strong positive (negative) cor-
relation between the high education dummy and complex (simple) abilities. The schooling
level aﬀects the relative productivity in the two tasks and hence it is very important to
control for it. Second, manual and routine abilities are positively correlated with young age
dummies, while the opposite is true for more sophisticated skills such as complex, mental
and communication skills. Those skills exhibit a negative correlation with the lowest age
level dummy (15-24), turning positive and then reaching a maximum with the age-dummy
35-44 to decrease afterward. These patterns are not surprising and they emerge even when
considering alternative skill definitions taken from Goos et al. (2009).
       Looking at the aggregate European data shows patterns consistent with the idea that
immigrants and natives specialize in diﬀerent production tasks and this specialization in-
creased over time. Figure 2, for instance, shows the evolution of the relative intensity of
complex versus non-complex tasks for the average European Worker throughout the period
1996-2007, split by native and foreign-born workers.13 While the average native worker (as
inferred from their occupational distribution) increasingly specialized in complex production
tasks, the average immigrant worker experienced the opposite trend. Immigrants’ specializ-
ation remained almost unchanged, slightly moving toward more manual-routine jobs. Such
a pattern would be hard to explain as consequence of a demand shock for relative tasks. In
that case the trend would be common to the two types of workers. The divergent evolution,
to the contrary, suggests that there is an increasing specialization, along the lines of com-
parative advantages, between the two groups. It also implies that recent immigrants have
been taking much more manual-intensive jobs than natives, possibly because their schooling
is lower or because their countries of origin have not provided them with complex skills. Fig-
  13
       Relative intensity of complex versus non-complex tasks is the ratio of the two intensities, where the former
is equal to the average intensity in complex, mental and communication tasks, while the latter is the average
intensity in manual and routine tasks. See Section 4 for details.


                                                         16
ure 3 illustrates additional stylized evidence supporting the model in Section 2. It shows the
correlation between the relative complex/non-complex task specialization of native workers
across cells (age-education groups across EU countries) and the share of immigrants. The
picture shows a positive and significant correlation between the share of immigrants and the
specialization of natives in complex tasks. According to an OLS regression, a 10 percentage
point increase in the share of immigrants within the total population of similarly skilled indi-
viduals is associated with a 4 percentage point increase in relative complex/non-complex task
intensity. This coeﬃcient is significant at the 10% level with a standard error of 0.219. To
give an idea of the magnitude, this 10 percentage point increase in the share of immigrants
would be associated with a change in complex/non-complex task intensity slightly bigger
than the diﬀerence between United Kingdom (54.6) and Italy (50.9) in 2007.


5     Main Empirical results

5.1   Immigrants and Employment rates of Natives

Before estimating equation (10), we estimate a similar specification to inquire whether im-
migration had a net impact on the employment rates of natives across skill groups. As
mentioned before, the employment eﬀects of immigration are relevant in itself. Furthermore,
an increase in relative skill complexity in equation (10) could either be driven by the destruc-
tion of “simple” jobs for a given number of “complex” ones or, alternatively, by a favorable
reallocation of native workers toward relatively more “complex” jobs. In the former case,
the set of workers losing their “simple” job (without getting a more “complex” one instead)
would certainly suﬀer from immigration. Quite contrarily, in the latter case, the group of
native workers who are aﬀected by immigration might very well be equally or even better
oﬀ, as they transition to an occupation characterized by more “complex” tasks.
    Considering diﬀerent education-age skill cells in European countries as separate labor
markets, we estimate the following equation:

                           µ               ¶
                               
                                             =  ln( ) +  +  +     (11)
                                
where (  ) is the employment-population ratio for natives and ln( ) is the
logarithm of the share of foreign-born workers in the education-age group , living in country
 in year ;  and  are sets of country-education and education-year fixed eﬀects,


                                                         17
capturing demand changes common to education groups over time and demand diﬀerences
across countries. Finally,  is an idiosyncratic random shock. Table 1 reports the estimates
of the coeﬃcient  for diﬀerent specifications of equation (11). The first three columns show
the results when both women and men are included in the sample, while columns four to
six show the results when only men are included. In each case, we estimate the equation
in three diﬀerent ways. In a first specification (columns 1 and 4) we estimate equation
(11) using OLS and the whole group of fourteen countries analyzed in this study. In the
second set of OLS estimates (columns 2 and 5) we restrict the sample to 7 countries for
which national census data allow us to construct the initial shares of immigrants for year
1991, necessary to compute the shift-share instrument introduced in Section 3.1. Finally, in
columns 3 and 6, we estimate the equation via 2SLS on the same subset of countries using
the imputed shares of immigrants as IV. We also diﬀerentiate among rows. In the first row
we report the estimates for equation (11), assessing the average impact of immigration on
natives’ employment rates. In the second and third row we estimate the age specific impact
by interacting the explanatory variable ln( ) with a dummy equal to one for cells in the
age class 15-40 (young) and another equal to one in the age class 41-64 (old), respectively.
Finally in the fourth and fifth row we estimate education specific eﬀect by interacting the
same explanatory variable with dummies for Low and High education levels. Underneath the
estimated coeﬃcients we report robust standard errors clustered by education-age-country
cells in order to allow for within-cell correlation over time, as certainly some autocorrelation
can be present in yearly data.
   The estimated coeﬃcients of Table 1 are consistently positive and significant across all
specifications, and they range between +0.243 and +0.463. These estimates imply that a
one per cent increase in the foreigners’ share of the population within the cell is associated
with an increase in the native employment/population ratio around 0.3 per cent of its initial
value. The OLS estimates, in spite of the dummies controlling for education-specific demand
shifts and for country-specific determinants may still contain some demand-driven spurious
correlation. However the 2SLS estimates (e.g., column 3) show that our estimates are con-
sistent with a causal eﬀect of immigration equal to 0.37% on the employment/population
ratio of native workers (0.28% on native males). No significant diﬀerences emerge between
estimated coeﬃcients when considering the whole sample versus the restricted one or when
using 2SLS instead of OLS. The impact on the employment rate, however, looks somewhat


                                               18
smaller when considering male workers only. The inflow of immigrants could be complement-
ary in particular to the employment opportunities of women, partly for labor market reasons
(specialization as described in this paper), partly for the reasons described in Tessada and
Cortes (2011) and due to the fact that some services, provided by immigrants, substitute for
the house-work of women and allow them to supply more labor on the market.
       Interesting results come when we allow the employment eﬀect of immigrants to diﬀer
across groups. Higher elasticities are estimated for young workers and more educated workers
(especially when including women in the sample). While the point estimates are suggestive
of these tendencies the standard errors are too large to find significant diﬀerences among the
group-specific coeﬃcients. In general, however, immigration seems to stimulate employment
growth in the considered European countries.


5.2       Immigrants’ and natives’ specialization

To inquire into the eﬀects of immigration on task specialization of natives, the heart of our
paper, we implement a series of specifications, following the structure of (10) and, in general,
estimate the coeﬃcient   from the following type of regression:


                         ln () =   · ln( ) +  +  +                  (12)

       The coeﬃcient   , once we control for country-education and education-year fixed
eﬀects ( and  ), identifies the impact of immigration on the intensity of a certain
“Skill” supplied by a native worker. A positive and significant value of   implies that
an increase in immigrants in the cell pushes natives to use a particular “Skill” (perform
skill-specific tasks) more intensively relative to cells with smaller inflows of immigrants. We
estimate equation (12) for the five diﬀerent skill measures (introduced in Section 4.1) that
we also aggregate to construct average indexes for the “complex” (mental, complex and
communication skills) and “simple” (manual and routine) content of each occupation. As a
further robustness check we also use the “abstract” and “routine” measures, employed by
Goos et al. (2009) which are based directly on the ISCO occupational classification. These
last indicators are defined by a diﬀerent classification of skills and are normalized with zero
mean and unitary variance.14 In Table 2 we report OLS and 2SLS (columns 3 and 6) results,
  14
       Given the presence of negative values for these indicators we do not estimate equation (12) in logs but in
levels.



                                                        19
based on the shift-share IV strategy described above.15 Robust standard errors, clustered on
education-age-country, are reported underneath the estimates. As in Table 1, the first three
columns are estimated on the whole sample, while columns 4 to 6 include men only.
      The estimates of Table 2 are very consistent across specifications, samples and task
definitions. First, for all the estimates higher shares of immigrants in a cell are associated
with higher intensity of complex tasks performed by native workers. Using our task measures,
the estimated elasticity is between 0.047 and 0.054 for communication tasks and between
0.045 and 0.056 for complex tasks, while it is slightly higher (0.06 to 0.081) for mental ones.
These elasticities imply that a doubling of the share of immigrants in a cell (say from 2
to 4% of employment) is associated with an increase in the supply of the relevant tasks by
natives between 4.5 and 8.1%. When considering “simple” skill measures, the eﬀects are
usually smaller and more imprecisely estimated: for “manual” tasks, the elasticity is not
significantly diﬀerent from zero in the OLS estimates, while it is marginally significant and
equal to 0.065 only in the 2SLS ones. A similar picture emerges for “routine” tasks, with
an elasticity of 0.036 (smaller than for complex tasks) using the OLS estimates, increasing
to 0.067 for the 2SLS specification. When considering the alternative Goos et al. (2009)
definitions, we find positive and significant (in most cases) elasticities for abstract tasks,
while for routine tasks the coeﬃcient estimates are negative and are not statistically diﬀerent
from zero. While there is no overwhelming evidence of a reduction in the supply of “simple”
skills by natives in response to immigration, there is clear evidence of a robust increase in
complex skill supply. Our model has implications for the relative supply of those skills.
      Table 3 reports the estimates of the coeﬃcient  from regression (10), the empirical im-
plementation of the equilibrium derived in Section 2. This coeﬃcient shows the impact of
immigrants on the relative task supply, defined as the ratio between the average of complex
skills (abstract, complex and communication) and the average of non-complex skills (manual
and routine). In the first row, we show a set of estimates for the average elasticity across
the usual 6 diﬀerent specifications, all workers versus only men and OLS on the complete
sample, OLS and 2SLS on the sub-sample for which the instrument is available. Our point
estimates are very precise, strongly significant, and range between 0.052 and 0.061; the only
exception is the 2SLS estimate for the sample including men only, which is positive but non
significantly diﬀerent from zero. This confirms that, in relative terms, native workers increase
 15
      For the first-stage statistics see Table A5 of the Table appendix.



                                                       20
their supply of complex skills that are complementary to those supplied by immigrants, pre-
valently manual-routine. When checking for possible diﬀerent elasticities of immigration for
individuals of diﬀerent age, we find no substantial diﬀerences between the parameters estim-
ated for young/old workers, ranging between 0.05 and 0.06 in both cases. When restricting
the sample to men, we find a slightly greater elasticity for young compared to old workers,
but we remain reassured by the stability of parameter estimates. When considering native
workers diﬀering in their educational level, we find higher elasticities for workers with low
education, but this pattern is evident only when using the full sample including both women
and men. Let us emphasize that the task response of natives to immigration estimated here
has been convincingly documented by Peri and Sparber (2009) for US workers. In that case
the authors only consider less educated workers (of both sexes) and use an IV method. Hence,
they obtain a coeﬃcient comparable with the one estimated in the fourth row, column 3 of
Table 3. Interestingly, while we estimate a significant eﬀect in both cases, the magnitude of
Peri and Sparber’s (2009) coeﬃcient (in the range of 0.30-0.35) is much larger than the one
estimated in this paper. Namely, the coeﬃcient estimated using immigration across states
in the US is 5 to 6 times larger than the one estimated for Europe. Such a quantitative
diﬀerence can have important implications in evaluating the impact of immigration on nat-
ive wages. More interestingly, the reason for such a diﬀerence can be a large diﬀerential
in employment protection laws that prevent the same amount of occupational mobility in
Europe. Thus, we use cross-European diﬀerences to emphasize this point in the Section 7.
   Overall, the main result of this section is that, employing 6 specifications, diﬀering for the
estimating sample and the econometric technique adopted, we find strong empirical support
for the idea that an increase of the immigrants’ share on population pushes native workers
to move to occupations requiring a relatively higher complexity. The results presented in
Section 5.1 also show that this positive reallocation did not take place at the expense of
the total number of jobs available for natives. To the contrary, occupational mobility and
employment growth seem to take place at the same time. Hence, the results imply that, on
average, natives move to occupations with a larger content of “complex” tasks and about
the same content of “manual-routine” tasks. A larger supply of “manual-routine” tasks from
immigrants produces higher demand for “complex” tasks from natives and, on average, they
increase their supply of those.
   In the next two sections we will explore the channels through which positive labor realloc-


                                              21
ation is taking place, and we will also assess the role of country-level labor market institutions
in helping, preventing or accommodating such a reallocation.


6      The role of labor market flows

While our model is static and provides predictions on the task supply and on the employment
of a representative agent, it is also interesting (and feasible with our data) to empirically
decompose the relevance of hiring and separations in producing the aggregate eﬀect. The
current economic literature on migration focusses only on the impact of immigration on
the employment levels and wages of native workers. In this section, however, we depart
somewhat from this literature as well as our model. In particular, we try to discover the
channels through which the empirically significant labor reallocation found in the previous
section takes place. The increase in the relative intensity of “complex” skills of jobs held by
natives and the increase of their net employment could be obtained because of eﬀects on one
or more of the following margins:

     i) Immigrants could induce more hiring, particularly concentrated in occupations requir-
       ing relatively complex skills

    ii) Immigrants could induce fewer separations particularly in occupations requiring relat-
       ively complex skills

    iii) Immigrants could induce more job to job transitions from less complex to more complex
       jobs.

     With the dataset at hand, we are able to analyze the impact of immigration on the first
two types of flows. This is because, in the survey, each respondent is asked about his/her
labor market state and occupation a year before the survey, in case this status has changed
during the last year. This information allows us to define two binary variables, “hiring” and
“separations”. The “hiring” (“separations”) variable is equal to one if the individual was not
employed (was employed) in year  − 1 and is employed (is not employed) in year  and zero
otherwise. We then compute the hiring (separation) rate for each country-age-education-year
cell as the ratio between the total number of hires (separations) and the population within
the cell in each year. Moreover, as we know the occupation currently held by the individual
(and the one previously held if the worker does not have a current job) we can also compute

                                               22
the average relative complexities of hiring and separations. Unfortunately, since respondents
are asked about their occupation last year only if they do not have a current one, job to
job transitions cannot be analyzed. We estimate the impact of immigration on labor market
flows estimating a set of four equations identical to equation (10) and (11), but having,
respectively, as dependent variables: hiring and separation rates (rather than employment
rates), and average complexity of hiring and separations (rather than of total employment).
As in the previous empirical analysis we estimate these equations both on the whole sample
(column 1 to 3) and on men only (column 4 to 6); moreover, we run the regressions using
OLS on all the 14 countries (column 1 and 4), or on the restricted sample of 7 countries for
which we are able to calculate the shift-share instrument (column 2 and 5) or using 2SLS as
the estimation method on the restricted sample (column 3 and 6).
   An interesting pattern emerges across specifications and it is particularly clear when
considering our preferred specification, namely the 2SLS estimation with all workers, reported
in column 3 of Table 4. One way to summarize the pattern is as follows: an increase in
immigration alters the quantity and the quality of the transitions into and out of employment.
In our 2SLS specification, we find a marginally significant impact of foreign-born inflows
in stimulating hiring and no impact at all on separation rates, as previously defined. In
particular, an increase of immigrants by 1% of their share has a positive impact of 0.42%
on the hiring rate of native workers while it has no impact at all on the separation rates
for natives. Hence, in net terms, immigration encourages new hires of natives and this may
be one channel for the positive employment eﬀect found in Table 1. At the same time,
for a given size of the flows (into and out of employment) an increase in the number of
immigrants within a cell is associated with an increase in the average relative complexity
of jobs oﬀered to new hires. The estimate for this elasticity is between to 0.081 (significant
at the 1% level) based on the OLS estimates and 0.119, still significant at the 1% level,
when considering the 2SLS estimates. Estimates are similar, but lower in magnitude, when
employing the sample including men only. When considering the separation margin, the eﬀect
of immigrants on the relative complexity of separations also has a positive sign. However,
for the sample pooling women and men together, the elasticities’ estimates are 30 to 40%
smaller compared to hiring (with an eﬀect between 0.05 and 0.07) while, when using the
male-only sample, coeﬃcient estimates are very close to zero, ranging from 0.007 to 0.01,
and are not statistically significant. These results are thus coherent with the overall labor


                                             23
reallocation process described in the previous section, also providing additional details on
the channels through which this process operates. The magnitude of labor market flows
into and out of employment is mainly aﬀected by immigrants via an increase in hiring, and
a substantial skill upgrading is obtained because the relative complexity of the new hires
increases with immigration while the relative complexity of separations is less aﬀected by
immigration. Unfortunately, due to data limitations we cannot look at job to job transitions,
another important margin of labor reallocation.


7         Diﬀerences across Labor Market Institutions

The positive reallocation of natives toward more complex skills could be slowed by rigid
labor markets. Labor markets with strong employment protection may reduce mobility in
and out of employment, they may also keep workers within the boundaries of narrowly
defined occupations as workers’ protection (via collective contracts) is defined in terms of a
specific occupation. Hence, labor market institutions can aﬀect both the job creation margin
and the occupational mobility margin of natives in response to immigrants. More flexible
labor markets could facilitate immigrants’ absorption, facilitating the job upgrading and job
creation, and thereby easing productive specialization of natives (Angrist and Kugler, 2003).
         To check for this possibility, we re-estimate equations (10) and (11) interacting the main
explanatory variable ( ), the logarithm of the share of immigrants in the total population,
with several country-level indicators of employment protection legislation (EPL). In partic-
ular, we adopt six diﬀerent rankings based on EPL measures and we construct a dummy
(that we interact with ( )) capturing whether the country has a high or low level of EPL.
The first two measures of EPL are based on two ad hoc employer surveys conducted by the
European Commission in 1989 and 1994, respectively (European-Commission, 1991, 1995).
These indicators are based on the share of employers claiming that restrictions on hiring and
firing were very important in the relevant year. We also use an aggregate OECD indicator
summarizing EPL in the 1990s based on averages of specific scores that classify countries
along the following dimensions: (i) strictness of employment protection for regular employ-
ment, (ii) norms concerning temporary employment, and (iii) rules on collective dismissals.16
Finally, we use each of these last three elementary measures. The six diﬀerent indicators
provide a robustness check for the results to the type of EPL index used and also to the
    16
         OECD (1999), for details see pp. 64-68.


                                                   24
countries included in the comparative analysis, since such indexes are not available for some
of the countries included this study.17 For each indicator, we define a country as a “high
EPL” one when its strictness in the labor laws is higher than the weighted average of the
surveyed countries. Similarly, “Low EPL” corresponds to a value of the strictness index
below the weighted average. As in the previous sections, we run both OLS and 2SLS regres-
sions estimated both on the whole sample and including men only. For simplicity, we report
main results for two indicators only: the EC89 and the OECD aggregate index. Evidence
emerging when using the other indicators (which is available upon request) is very similar18 .
First of all, we assess the impact of immigration on employment rates (equation (11), Table
5). Irrespective of the specification adopted and of the sample used for estimation, the es-
timates for  (the elasticity of natives’ employment rates with respect to immigrants’ share
in the population) for countries with below-average EPL are always greater than the ones
for countries with above-average EPL. However, due to the size of the standard errors, such
diﬀerences in the parameter estimates are often not statistically significant. This result is
particularly strong when we consider the OECD measure of EPL and the preferred 2SLS
estimation. In that case, the positive employment eﬀect of immigration is much stronger
when estimated for countries with low EPL relative to those with high EPL. The diﬀerence
is significant at standard confidence levels. As for the diﬀerential impact of immigration on
employment rates of specific groups, there seems to be a similar eﬀect for both the more and
less educated natives, who are much more responsive to immigration in countries with low
EPL.
       Even more interesting is the extent of labor reallocation toward complex occupations
in response to increased immigration (equation (10)). As illustrated in Table 6, we find
two very clear patterns. First, across specifications, the positive reallocation of natives
toward “complex” tasks is stronger in countries with low levels of EPL. The preferred 2SLS
estimates, using alternatively the EC89 index and the OECD aggregate one, we find that
low EPL countries show coeﬃcient estimates in a range between 0.123 and 0.129 (always
significant at the 1% confidence level). The estimated coeﬃcients are considerably smaller
(ranging between 0.032 and 0.056) for high EPL countries, with the diﬀerence between the
  17
       European Commission indicators are not available for Austria, Denmark and Finland; Luxembourg is
absent in OECD indexes as well.
  18
     Using the EC89 index the countries with high EPL are: Spain, Greece, Italy and Portugal. Luxembourg
is missing and the other countries are classified as low EPL.



                                                     25
coeﬃcients being statistically significant at 1% when considering results obtained using the
EC89 indicator. Results are even stronger when looking at the same estimates obtained on
the sample including only men (not reported and available upon request).
    Another particularly interesting exercise is the assessment of diﬀerential interactions
between EPL and the extent of specialization among subgroups of workers, defined alternat-
ively by age or education. When interacting ( ) with two age-specific dummies, we find
patterns similar to the ones found at the aggregate level: estimated elasticities are greater for
low EPL countries than for high EPL ones, both when considering young and old workers,
with diﬀerences between coeﬃcient estimates being statistically significant at least at 5% in
most specifications. According to our preferred 2SLS estimates, in countries with low EPL
young and old workers alike respond to the inflow of immigrants with an elasticity of relo-
cation to “complex” jobs ranging between 0.12 and 0.16. To the contrary, in countries with
high EPL that elasticity is never larger than 0.059. Considering workers of diﬀerent schooling
levels it is interesting to notice that the change in specialization in response to immigrants
is particularly strong for less educated workers in countries with low EPL. The response of
less educated workers in flexible labor markets is 0.12% for each 1% increase in the share of
immigrants, while in more rigid markets this value is equal to 0.06% at most. Diﬀerently,
for highly educated workers the point estimates do not show a clear pattern between high
and low EPL countries. In particular when considering the sample including both women
and men, the estimated elasticities for highly educated workers are never diﬀerent from zero
at standard confidence levels both for high and low EPL countries. When looking at es-
timates obtained on the men only sample, parameter elasticities are positive and significant
only for low EPL countries, but the diﬀerence between low and high EPL countries is never
statistically significant.
    These patterns support an interesting regularity. Namely, we find that more “protected”
workers in more rigid labor markets, when confronted with shocks such as the inflow of
immigrants, are less able to respond and adjust. This may result in a less favorable impact of
migration. This idea has been previously proposed in order to explain the high and persistent
unemployment in Europe (vis-a-vis America) following the oil shocks of the seventies (e.g.
?). We argue that in a fast changing labor market, also due to the inflow of immigrants,
strong EPL’s limit the response of natives.
    Moreover, these results, which hold across a number of specifications and indicators, con-


                                               26
firm the analysis of Angrist and Kugler (2003), who find that low labor market flexibility can
reduce gains from immigration and worsen its employment eﬀects. Our model and explana-
tion provides a reason for this. Countries in which native workers respond to a lesser extent
to immigration forgo some of the eﬃciency gains as well as the positive complementarity ef-
fect of immigration. Moreover, less educated workers, who are more vulnerable to foreigners,
being specialized in manual-routine tasks, are those who can potentially gain the most from
the positive job reallocation brought about by migration. Stricter EPL, preventing such a
reallocation, is thus particularly harmful for them.


8    Conclusions

In the last fifteen years, the labor markets of most developed countries have experienced a
secular increase in the number of jobs requiring more abstract and complex skills relative to
manual and routine skills. At the same time, Europe has been experiencing an unpreced-
ented increase in its immigrant population during the same period. Most of the economics
literature has focused on demand side factors explaining shifts in task demand: technolo-
gical change and the eﬀects of oﬀ-shoring and trade (Acemoglu and Autor, 2010). In this
paper we combine evidence on task changes and on immigration to analyze a supply factor,
namely the role of immigration, in determining such a change in the occupational structure
of natives. Our idea, summarized in a simple analytical framework, is that immigrants tend
to be specialized in occupations requiring mainly non-complex and routine skills. Immig-
rant inflows thus tend to reduce the supply of complex relative to non complex skills at the
economy level and increase the return to the first type of skills. This creates an incentive
for native workers to move to occupations requiring relatively more abstract/complex skills.
This intuition is confirmed by the empirical analysis conducted on European Labour Force
Survey data. This result withstands a number of robustness checks, carried out using dif-
ferent skill indicators, estimation methods, sample definitions, and, most significantly, it is
robust to the use of credible instrumental variables. We also document the labor market
flows through which such a positive reallocation took place: immigration stimulated hiring,
and a substantial skill upgrading was obtained because the complexity of jobs oﬀered to new
hires was higher relative to the one of separations. Finally, this positive reallocation process
is stronger in relatively flexible labor markets, and in those markets is particularly promin-
ent for less educated workers. By moving to complex jobs, natives protect their wages from

                                              27
immigrant competition and take advantage of the creation of those jobs that complement
the manual tasks provided by immigrants. Letting this mechanism work may benefit less
educated natives, in particular through more job-creation (new hires) in those occupations.
Strong protection of labor hurts this mechanism and reduces labor markets’ ability to absorb
immigrants through occupational upgrading of natives.




                                            28
References

Acemoglu, A. and D. Autor (2010). Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Em-
  ployment and Earnings. NBER Working Papers (16082).

Altonji, J. G. and D. Card (1991). The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
  of Less-skilled Natives. In J. Abowd and R. B. Freeman (Eds.), Immigration, Trade, and
  the Labor Market. The University of Chicago Press.

Angrist, J. D. and A. D. Kugler (2003). Protective or counter-productive? Labour market
  institutions and the eﬀect of immigration on EU natives. Economic Journal 113 (488),
  F302—F331.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003). The Skill Content Of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1279—
  1333.

Blinder, A. S. (2006). Preparing America’s Workforce: Are We Looking in the Rear-View
  Mirror? Princeton University WP (67).

Borjas, G. J. (2003). The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining The Im-
  pact Of Immigration On The Labor Market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4),
  1335—1374.

Borjas, G. J., R. B. Freeman, and L. Katz (1996). Searching for the Eﬀect of Immigration
  on the Labor Market. American Economic Review 86 (2), 246—51.

Borjas, G. J. and L. F. Katz (2007). The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the
  United States. In Mexican Immigration to the United States, NBER Chapters, pp. 13—56.
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Card, D. (2001). Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Market Impacts of
  Higher Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics (19(1)), 22—64.

Card, D. and A. Shleifer (2009). Immigration and Inequality. American Economic Re-
  view 99 (2), 1—21.

Crinò, R. (2009). Service Oﬀshoring and the Skill Composition of Labor Demand. IAE
  WP (802).

                                           29
Docquier, F., c. Özden, and G. Peri (2010). The Wage Eﬀects of Immigration and Emigration.
  NBER Working Papers 16646, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Dustmann, C., T. Frattini, and I. Preston (2008). The eﬀect of immigration along the
  distribution of wages. CReAM Discussion Paper Series 0803, Centre for Research and
  Analysis of Migration (CReAM), Department of Economics, University College London.

European-Commission (1991). European economy, March.

European-Commission (1995). European economy (3).

EUROSTAT (2009). EU Labour Force Survey database. User guide.

Glitz, A. (2011). The Labour Market Impact of Immigration: A Quasi-Experiment Exploiting
  Immigrant Location Rules in Germany. Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2007). The Race between Education and Technology: The
  Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Diﬀerentials, 1890 to 2005. NBER Working Papers
  12984, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

González, L. and F. Ortega (2008). How Do Very Open Economies Absorb Large Immigration
  Flows? Recent Evidence from Spanish Regions. Economic Reports 06-08, FEDEA.

Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2009). The Polarization of the European Labor
  Market. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings (99), 58—63.

IPUMS-I (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version 6.0. Min-
  nesota Population Center, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

Katz, L. and K. Murphy (1992). Change in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply or Demand
  Factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics (107), 35—78.

Longhi, S., P. Nijkamp, and J. Poot (2005). A meta-analytic assessment of the eﬀect of
  immigration on wages. Journal of Economic Surveys 19 (3), 451—477.

OECD (1999). Employment Protection and Labour Market Performance. Employment
  Outlook - 1999 .

Ortega, F. and G. Peri (2011). The Aggregate Eﬀects of Trade and Migration: Evidence
  from OECD Countries. Technical Report 5604, IZA.

                                           30
Ottaviano, G. and G. Peri (2011). Rethinking the Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages. Journal
  of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Peri, G. and C. Sparber (2009). Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics (1(3)), 135—169.

Tessada, J. and P. Cortes (2011). Low-Skilled Immigration and the Labor Supply of Highly
  Skilled Women. Forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.




                                          31
                                                              Tables
                             Table 1: The effect of Immigrants on Native Employment
          Units of Observations are eight education-by-age cells in 14 EU countries in each year, 1996-2007

 Dependent variable: log(employment rate of natives)
 Specification                              1            2          3         4                                  5          6
 Sample                                           Women and men                                              Men only
 Method of Estimation                  OLS, Full       OLS,       2SLS,    OLS, Full                           OLS,       2SLS,
                                        Sample       Restricted Restricted Sample                            Restricted Restricted
                                                      Sample     Sample                                       Sample     Sample

                                                 0.371             0.367           0.373      0.287      0.276       0.28
 ln(fj,c,t)
                                              [0.077]***        [0.088]***      [0.084]*** [0.081]*** [0.092]*** [0.078]***

                                                 0.429             0.426           0.463      0.347      0.339      0.382
 ln(f j,c,t)*Young
                                              [0.080]***        [0.090]***      [0.072]*** [0.084]*** [0.095]*** [0.064]***

                                                 0.353             0.341           0.379      0.259      0.243      0.285
 ln(f j,c,t)*Old
                                              [0.064]***        [0.072]***      [0.074]*** [0.066]*** [0.073]*** [0.063]***

                                                 0.379             0.371           0.365      0.284             0.269      0.263
 ln(f j,c,t)*Low Edu
                                              [0.086]***        [0.098]***      [0.093]*** [0.092]***         [0.103]** [0.086]***

                                                 0.305             0.335            0.44      0.305      0.332      0.421
 ln(f j,c,t)*High Edu
                                              [0.088]***        [0.102]***      [0.097]*** [0.084]*** [0.096]*** [0.102]***

 Sample                                           Full          Restricted      Restricted        Full        Restricted    Restricted
 Obs                                              1517            740             740             1506          738           738
 Fixed effects
 Country by education                             Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Education by year                                Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of Employment/Population for the native population in the cell (equation 11 of section
5.1). The main explanatory variable (row 1) is the log of the share of immigrants in the cell. In rows 2 and 3 it is interacted with
Young/Old dummies, in rows 4 and 5 it is interacted with High/Low education dummies. In parenthesis we report the
heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country-education-age level. First-stage statistics for the shift share
instrument are reported in table A5 of the appendix. The restricted sample is the one including only countries for which it is possible
to construct the instrument.
***=significant at 1%; **=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.


                                                                   32
                          Table 2: The Effect of Immigrants on Task Performance of Natives
               Units of Observations are eight education-by-age cells in 14 EU countries in each year, 1996-2007
 Specification                                1            2          3                4               5                                  6
 Sample                                            Women and Men                                    Men only
                                                        OLS,       2SLS,                            OLS,                              2SLS,
                                            OLS      Restricted Restricted           OLS       Restricted                           Restricted
 Method of Estimation                                 Sample      Sample                         Sample                              Sample
                                                                       Communication Tasks
                                           0.047         0.05       0.054            0.047          0.045                              0.018
                                        [0.011]*** [0.013]***   [0.018]***      [0.016]***      [0.018]**                             [0.017]
                                                                            Mental Tasks
                                            0.06         0.063      0.081            0.056         0.055                               0.054
                                        [0.012]*** [0.014]***   [0.019]***      [0.011]***     [0.012]***                           [0.013]***
 Complex tasks
                                                                          Complex Tasks
                                           0.045         0.047      0.056            0.045          0.044                              0.036
                                        [0.010]*** [0.011]***   [0.015]***      [0.010]***     [0.010]***                           [0.012]***
                                                                 Abstract Tasks (Goos et al 2009)
                                           0.998         0.926      1.177            1.438           1.35                              1.504
                                         [0.434]**    [0.479]*    [0.827]       [0.529]***      [0.580]**                             [1.104]
                                                                           Manual Tasks
                                           0.027         0.028      0.065            0.018          0.018                              0.063
                                          [0.023]      [0.027]   [0.029]**         [0.024]        [0.027]                            [0.028]**
                                                                           Routine Tasks
 Non complex tasks                         0.036         0.037      0.067            0.028          0.027                              0.061
                                         [0.016]**   [0.018]**  [0.023]***        [0.017]*        [0.018]                           [0.022]***
                                                                 Routine Tasks (Goos et al. 2009)
                                           -0.46        -0.469     -0.158           -0.584         -0.573                              0.446
                                          [0.350]      [0.394]    [0.546]          [0.447]        [0.497]                             [0.870]
 Sample                                     Full     Restricted  Restricted           Full      Restricted                           Restricted
 Obs                                        1517          740        740             1506            738                                738
 Fixed effects
 Country by education                       Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes
 Education by year                          Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes
Note: Each coefficient in the table is estimated in a separate regression (equation 12, see section 5.2 for details). The dependent variable is the
logarithm of task intensity performed by native workers in all the equations but those using the Goos et al. (2009) measures, estimated in levels since
the corresponding values can be negative. The main explanatory variable is described in the first cell of the row. In parenthesis we report the
heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country-education-age level. First-stage statistics for the shift share instrument are
reported in table A5 of the appendix. The restricted sample is the one including only countries for which it is possible to construct the instrument.
***=significant at 1%; **=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.
                                                                          33
                             Table 3: The Effects of Immigrants on Relative Task Performance of Natives
                    Units of Observations are eight education-by-age cells in 14 EU countries in each year, 1996-2007

Dependent variable: log(Relative complex/simple task intensity)
Column                                   1              2                             3                  4                    5                      6
Sample                                           Women and men                                                              Men only
                                                      OLS,                         2SLS,                                    OLS,                   2SLS,
                                       OLS         Restricted                   Restricted             OLS              Restricted              Restricted
Method of Estimation                                 Sample                       Sample                                  Sample                  Sample
                                       0.054          0.057                        0.061               0.054                0.052                  0.024
ln(fj,c,t)
                                    [0.013]***     [0.015]***                   [0.018]***          [0.020]***           [0.023]**                [0.020]
                                       0.055          0.056                        0.061               0.074                0.07                   0.054
ln(f j,c,t)*Young
                                    [0.013]***     [0.015]***                   [0.017]***          [0.015]***          [0.016]***              [0.019]***
                                       0.053          0.057                        0.061               0.044                0.042                  0.026
ln(f j,c,t)*Old
                                    [0.013]***     [0.015]***                   [0.018]***          [0.013]***          [0.014]***                [0.017]
                                        0.06          0.063                        0.062               0.052                0.049                  0.013
ln(f j,c,t)*Low edu
                                    [0.015]***     [0.016]***                   [0.020]***           [0.023]**            [0.025]*                [0.021]
                                        0.01          0.006                        0.052               0.065                0.07                   0.113
ln(f j,c,t)*High edu
                                      [0.018]        [0.022]                      [0.035]           [0.019]***          [0.022]***              [0.038]***
Sample                                  Full        Restricted                   Restricted             Full             Restricted              Restricted
Obs                                    1508            740                          740                 1497                 738                    738
Fixed effects
Country by education                    Yes            Yes                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes
Education by year                       Yes            Yes                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes
Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of the relative task intensity (equation 10 of section 3). The main explanatory variable (row 1) is the log of the share
of immigrants in the cell. In rows 2 and 3 it is interacted with Young/Old dummies, in rows 4 and 5 it is interacted with High/Low education dummies. In
parenthesis we report the heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country-education-age level. First-stage statistics for the shift share instrument
are reported in table A5 of the appendix. The restricted sample is the one including only countries for which it is possible to construct the instrument.
***=significant at 1%; **=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.




                                                                               34
                    Table 4: The Effect of Immigrants on employment flows and their task intensity
             Units of Observations are eight education-by-age cells in 14 EU countries in each year, 1996-2007

Dependent variable: log of the variable specified in the header
Column                                   1                2                 3                4           5                                6
Sample                                          Women and men                                        Men only
                                                        OLS,             2SLS,                         OLS,                            2SLS,
                                       OLS           Restricted      Restricted            OLS     Restricted                        Restricted
                                                      Sample           Sample                        Sample                           Sample
Dep. Variable                                                                  Hirings rate
                                       0.174            0.196             0.419           -0.094      -0.048                            0.131
ln(fj,c,t)
                                      [0.191]          [0.216]         [0.244]*          [0.183]     [0.202]                           [0.246]
Dep. Variable                                           Hirings' relative complex/non complex skill intensity
                                       0.081            0.085             0.119            0.054       0.051                           0.072
ln(fj,c,t)
                                    [0.018]***      [0.020]***       [0.026]***        [0.019]***   [0.021]**                        [0.031]**
Dep. Variable                                                                Separations rate
                                       0.042            0.064            -0.008           -0.108      -0.093                           -0.173
ln(fj,c,t)
                                      [0.065]          [0.072]          [0.080]          [0.076]     [0.084]                         [0.082]**
Dep. Variable                                        Separations' relative complex/non complex skill intensity
                                       0.051            0.058             0.074            0.007       0.002                             0.01
ln(fj,c,t)
                                    [0.015]***      [0.017]***       [0.023]***          [0.016]     [0.018]                           [0.030]

Sample                                       Full           Restricted        Restricted           Full           Restricted         Restricted
Obs                                          1508             740               740                1497             738                738
Fixed effects
Country by education                         Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
Education by year                            Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes

Note: Each coefficient in the table is estimated in a separate regression. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the variable specified in the
header (see section 6 for details). In parenthesis we report the heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country-education-age
level. First-stage statistics for the shift share instrument are reported in table A5 of the appendix. The restricted sample is the one including only
countries for which it is possible to construct the instrument. ***=significant at 1%; **=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.




                                                                         35
                 Table 5: The Effect of Immigrants on native employment, by EPL levels
                 Dependent variable: log(employment rate) in the edu-age cell; all workers
                 Column                     1          2             3            4           5               6
                   EPL MEASURE                       EC89                                  OECD
                                                     OLS,         2SLS,                     OLS,           2SLS,
                         Method            OLS    Restricted Restricted        OLS       Restricted      Restricted
                                                    Sample       Sample                    Sample         Sample
                               *Low
                                EPL       0.449      0.413         0.451       0.517        0.573           1.584
                                        [0.173]** [0.189]** [0.223]** [0.170]*** [0.237]**               [0.393]***
                  ln(fj,c,t)
                               *High
                                EPL       0.335      0.323         0.289       0.292        0.294           0.269
                                       [0.046]*** [0.047]*** [0.050]*** [0.044]*** [0.046]***            [0.081]***
                               *Low
                                EPL       0.453      0.423         0.53         0.52        0.573           1.954
                 ln(fj,c,t)*           [0.148]*** [0.161]** [0.165]*** [0.151]*** [0.207]***             [0.592]***
                   Young       *High
                                EPL       0.425      0.446         0.386        0.47        0.478           0.471
                                       [0.049]*** [0.054]*** [0.058]*** [0.051]*** [0.053]***            [0.092]***
                               *Low
                                EPL       0.382      0.347         0.464       0.492        0.561            2.14
                 ln(fj,c,t)*           [0.125]*** [0.134]** [0.178]** [0.134]*** [0.200]***              [0.714]***
                    Old        *High
                                EPL       0.341      0.335         0.279       0.337        0.343           0.335
                                       [0.057]*** [0.064]*** [0.063]*** [0.053]*** [0.055]***            [0.080]***
                               *Low
                                EPL       0.469      0.427         0.411       0.571        0.631            1.67
                 ln(fj,c,t)*            [0.196]** [0.215]*       [0.238]* [0.196]*** [0.275]**           [0.457]***
                  Low edu      *High
                                EPL       0.335      0.321         0.282       0.289        0.291           0.255
                                       [0.050]*** [0.051]*** [0.054]*** [0.048]*** [0.050]***            [0.091]***
                               *Low
                                EPL       0.322      0.322         1.094       0.271        0.32            1.068
                 ln(fj,c,t)*            [0.159]** [0.173]*       [0.574]* [0.137]** [0.182]*              [0.589]*
                 High edu      *High
                                EPL       0.343      0.354         0.353       0.347        0.35            0.374
                                       [0.096]*** [0.101]*** [0.118]*** [0.092]*** [0.094]***            [0.115]***
                    Obs                    930        620           620        1407          740             740
                 Fixed effects
                 Country by
                 education                 Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes
                 Education by year         Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes

Note: Each coefficient in the table is estimated from equation 11 (see section 7 for details). The dependent variable is the logarithm
of Employment/Population for the native population in the cell. The main explanatory variable (row 1) is the log of the share of
immigrants in the cell, by EPL level. In rows 2 and 3 it is further interacted with Young/Old dummies, in rows 4 and 5 it is
interacted with High/Low education dummies. In parenthesis we report the heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at
the country-education-age level. First-stage statistics for the shift share instrument are reported in table A5 of the appendix.
Luxembourg is never included in EPL rankings. EC89 does not rank Austria, Denmark and Finland. See text (section 7) and OECD
(1999, pp. 64-68) for details on the EPL indexes.
***=significant at 1%; **=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.




                                                                 36
               Table 6: The Effect of Immigrants on Task Performance of natives, by EPL levels
                Dependent variable: relative complex/non complex skill intensity (all workers)
                Column                                     1             2           3           4           5           6
                EPL MEASURE                                          EC89                                 OECD
                Estimates                                OLS          OLS           IV        OLS          OLS          IV
                                       *Low EPL          0.095        0.097       0.129       0.057        0.069       0.123
                                                     [0.023]*** [0.025]*** [0.038]*** [0.020]*** [0.025]*** [0.043]***
                        ln(fj,c,t)
                                       *High EPL         0.032        0.029       0.032       0.052        0.052       0.056
                                                     [0.008]*** [0.008]*** [0.010]*** [0.016]*** [0.017]*** [0.018]***
                P value ftest Low EPL=high EPL          0.0118       0.0098      0.0112      0.8614       0.5789      0.1254
                                       *Low EPL          0.096        0.097        0.12       0.055        0.073       0.148
                                                     [0.023]*** [0.024]*** [0.034]*** [0.018]*** [0.027]*** [0.046]***
                   ln(fj,c,t)* Young
                                       *High EPL         0.042        0.034       0.036        0.05        0.051       0.059
                                                     [0.012]*** [0.011]*** [0.012]*** [0.015]*** [0.015]*** [0.017]***
                P value ftest Low EPL=high EPL          0.0376       0.0209      0.0141      0.8359       0.4557      0.0558
                                       *Low EPL          0.102        0.105       0.129       0.051        0.078       0.162
                                                     [0.026]*** [0.027]*** [0.037]*** [0.017]*** [0.029]** [0.055]***
                     ln(fj,c,t)* Old
                                       *High EPL         0.033        0.029        0.03       0.052        0.052       0.057
                                                     [0.008]*** [0.008]*** [0.010]*** [0.015]*** [0.016]*** [0.018]***
                P value ftest Low EPL=high EPL          0.0128       0.0097       0.009      0.9683       0.4389      0.0615
                                       *Low EPL          0.111        0.113       0.124       0.069        0.087       0.112
                                                     [0.024]*** [0.025]*** [0.040]*** [0.021]*** [0.024]*** [0.042]***
                  ln(fj,c,t)* Low edu
                                       *High EPL         0.034         0.03       0.032       0.055        0.056       0.058
                                                     [0.009]*** [0.008]*** [0.010]*** [0.018]*** [0.018]*** [0.020]***
                P value ftest Low EPL=high EPL          0.0033       0.0029      0.0224       0.614       0.2914      0.2221
                                       *Low EPL         -0.004       -0.008       0.205       0.001       -0.009       0.188
                                                       [0.034]      [0.036]      [0.226]     [0.028]      [0.038]     [0.217]
                 ln(fj,c,t)* High edu
                                       *High EPL         0.023         0.02       0.028        0.02         0.02       0.037
                                                      [0.013]*      [0.013]      [0.030]    [0.012]*      [0.013]     [0.032]
                P value ftest Low EPL=high EPL          0.4188        0.435      0.4012      0.4848       0.4306      0.4493
                Obs                                       929          619         619        1397          738         738
                Fixed effects
                Country by education                      Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
                Education by year                         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Note: Each coefficient in the table is estimated in a separate regression. The dependent variable is the logarithm of Complex relative to
Simple task intensity performed by native workers. The main explanatory variable (row 1) is the log of the share of immigrants in the cell, by
EPL level. In rows 2 and 3 it is further interacted with Young/Old dummies, in rows 4 and 5 it is interacted with High/Low education
dummies. In parenthesis we report the heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the country-education-age level. First-stage
statistics for the shift share instrument are reported in table A5 of the appendix. Luxembourg is never included in EPL rankings. EC89 does
not rank Austria, Denmark and Finland. See text (section 7) and OECD (1999, pp. 64-68) for details on the EPL indexes.
***=significant at 1%; **=significant at 5%, **=significant at 1%.




                                                                     37
Figures

                                                                    Figure 1: Immigrants as percentage of the European Population
                                                       .12
             Share of foreign born's on total population
          .08       .09         .1         .11




                                                             1995                      2000                            2005         2010
                                                                                                       Year


   Source: Authors’ calculations on EULFS data. It does not include countries for which one or more years of data are missing
                                                                                (Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and United Kingdom).




                                                                                                  38
                                                                              Figure 2
                                                  Relative productive tasks, Natives and Foreign-Born in Europe
 Complex/non complex relative task intensities
.44          .46            .48             .5




                                                 1995                 2000                     2005                        2010
                                                                                   Year
                                                                       Home born               Foreign born



                                                                Authors’ calculations on EULFS data.
                                           It does not include countries for which one or more years of data are missing
                                                         (Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and United Kingdom).




                                                                                39
                                                       Figure 3
                      Relative productive tasks and the share of immigrants in Western Europe,
                                       Education-Age-Country cells, 1996-2007
                     .55
     C/NC relative task intensities
         .45         .4   .5




                                      0         .05               .1               .15            .2
                                                  Foreign born's share on population
                                          Point values             Fitted values (weighted OLS)




                                   Note: Authors’ calculations on EULFS data.
Fitted values estimated from a weighted OLS regression of relative task intensities (Complex/Non Complex) on the
share of foreign born population and a constant with standard errors clustered at the country level. The estimated
  coefficient for immigrants’ share is equal to 0.398 significant at the 10 per cent with a standard error of 0.219.




                                                              40
                                                                    Tables and Figures Appendix

                                          .13                  Figure A1: Immigrants by education in Europe
Share of foreign born's on total population
 .08     .09      .1     .11      .12




                                                1995                         2000                              2005                    2010
                                                                                              Year
                                                                           Low education                         High education


                                                                   Source: Authors’ calculations on EULFS data.
                                                       It does not include countries for which one or more years of data are missing
                                                                     (Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and United Kingdom).




                                                                                            41
Table A1: Countries and years included in the analysis, Those in Bold are also included in the 2SLS regressions

             Data                                            EULFS
                                                                                                              Shift
                                                            Year                                              Share
           Country   1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Tot                           IV
           Austria     1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                            12
          Belgium      1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                             0
          Denmark      1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                             0
            Spain     1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1   12                            12
           Finland     1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                             0
           France      1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                            12
            Grece      1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                            12
           Ireland     0    0    0    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    0    0   7                             0
            Italy      0    0    0   0    0    0    0    0    0    1    1    1    3                             3
         Luxembourg 1      1    0    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1   11                             0
         Netherlands   1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1  12                             0
           Norway      1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1   1    1    1   12                             0
          Portugal     1    1    1    1   1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1   12                            12
           United
          Kingdom      1    1    0    1   1    1    1    1    1    1    1    1   11                             11
              Tot        12     12    10     13    13     13        13   13   13    14     13     13   152      74

       Note: 0 denotes a country/year not included in the empirical analysis (16 out of 168) since one of the main variables
                               (education, age, country of birth, occupation) is completely missing.
                 For the Shift-share IV, 0 denotes a country not included since Census data were not available.




                                                               42
                                   Table A2
                 Skill’s composition in terms of abilities/tasks
Complex tasks / mental skills (C )                       Simple skills (S)
                  Communication                                                  Manual
                 Oral Comprehension                                       Arm-Hand Steadiness
                   Oral Expression                                          Auditory Attention
                    Speech Clarity                                           Control Precision
                 Speech Recognition                                          Depth Perception
               Written Comprehension                                       Dynamic Flexibility
                 Written Expression                                         Dynamic Strength
                                                                            Explosive Strength
                      Complex                                                Extent Flexibility
          Coaching and Developing Others                                        Far Vision
 Communicating with Persons Outside Organization                             Finger Dexterity
       Communicating with Supervisors, Peers                                 Glare Sensitivity
   Coordinating the Work and Activities of Others                        Gross Body Coordination
           Developing and Building Teams                                 Gross Body Equilibrium
        Developing Objectives and Strategies                                Hearing Sensitivity
Estimating the Quantifiable Characteristics of Products                     Manual Dexterity
   Guiding, Directing, and Motivating Subordinates                       Multilimb Coordination
       Identifying Objects, Actions, and Events                                Near Vision
  Interpreting the Meaning of Information for Others                           Night Vision
 Judging the Qualities of Things, Services, or People                       Peripheral Vision
       Making Decisions and Solving Problems                                   Rate Control
 Performing for or Working Directly with the Public                           Reaction Time
               Processing Information                                      Response Orientation
      Provide Consultation and Advice to Others                             Sound Localization
   Resolving Conflicts and Negotiating with Others                      Speed of Limb Movement
            Selling or Influencing Others                                        Stamina
                 Thinking Creatively                                          Static Strength
            Training and Teaching Others                                      Trunk Strength
      Updating and Using Relevant Knowledge                            Visual Color Discrimination
                                                                            Wrist-Finger Speed
                       Mental
                 Category Flexibility                                            Routine
                Deductive Reasoning                                Controlling Machines and Processes
                Flexibility of Closure                             Documenting/Recording Information
                   Fluency of Ideas                                   Handling and Moving Objects
                 Inductive Reasoning                           Monitor Processes, Materials, or Surroundings
                Information Ordering                              Monitoring and Controlling Resources
               Mathematical Reasoning                             Performing General Physical Activities
                    Memorization
                   Number Facility
                      Originality
                  Perceptual Speed
                 Problem Sensitivity
                 Selective Attention
                  Spatial Orientation
                  Speed of Closure
                    Time Sharing
                    Visualization
This table reports skill and tasks intensities used to construct each of our broad skill measures.
                                 See text (section 4.1) for details.

                                                          43
                                                        Table A3
                                          The skill content of each occupation
                                                                    Manual   Mental   Communic. Routine  Complex
                                                                   Score Rk Score Rk Score Rk Score Rk Score Rk
Corporate managers                                                  27   18  80     3  79    5  47    13  83    3
Managers of small enterprises                                       16   20  69     8  92    1  50    12  97   1
Physical, mathematical and engineering professionals                34   15  85     1  56   10  34    17  63    9
Lifescience and health professionals                                46   12  82     2  86    2  75     6  89    2
Other professionals                                                 34   14  61     9  67    8  42    14  74   5
Physical, mathematical and engineering associate prof.              36   13  77     5   48  13  39    16  61   10
Life science and health associate professionals                     63    8  72     7  81    4  82     4  71    6
Other associate professionals                                       15   21  72     6  74    7  27    19  67   7
Office clerks                                                       29   17  47   13   59    9  33    18  44   14
Customer service clerks                                             29   16  77     4  81    3  19    20  46   13
Personal and protective service workers                             59   10  50   12   51   12  51    11  54   11
Models, salesperson and demonstrators                               18   19  59   10   77    6  15    21  66    8
Extraction and building trades workers                              62    9  57   11   55   11  90     1  80    4
Metal, machinery and related tradework                              84    3  42   15    19  19  75     7  30   17
Precision, handicraft, craft printing and related trade workers     68    6  35   18   26   15  64    10  35   16
Other craft and related trade workers                               74    5  18   21    9   21  83     3  22   21
Stationary plant and related operators                              65    7  27   19   23   18  86     2  40   15
Machine operators and assemblers                                    82    4  36   17   16   20  77     5  30   18
Drivers and mobile plant operators                                  88    1  38   16   24   16  69     9  28   20
Sales and service elementary occupations                            55   11  25   20    35  14  42    15  28   19
Laborers in mining, construction,manufacturing and transport        87    2  46   14   24   17  73     8  49   12
                            Source: authors’ calculations on O*NET and 2000 US census.
           For each occupation, the score is equal to the percentile along the distribution of skill intensities.
               To give an idea of the indicators, a score of 79 in "communication skills" for "corporate
               managers" indicates that 79% of all workers in US in 2000 were using "communication
                                  skills" less intensively than "corporate managers".




                                                                  44
                                                       Table A4
                                 Correlations between skill intensities, age and education
                             Goos et al (2009)                                Our definition
                                                                                            Non Complex
                                                                 Complex ( C)                                  (C/NC)
                                                                                               (NC)
                            Abstract       Routine
                                                       Mental Communication Complex Manual Routine Relative
              Aged 15-24     -0.470          0.296     -0.310       -0.344       -0.333       0.313    0.174   -0.343
              Aged 25-34      0.028         -0.025      0.136        0.056        0.062       0.023    0.000   0.087
              Aged 35-44      0.145         -0.073      0.142        0.135        0.156      -0.047    0.010   0.125
              Aged 45-54      0.168         -0.088      0.082        0.107        0.103      -0.101   -0.040    0.095
              Aged 55-64      0.122         -0.109     -0.076        0.032       -0.005      -0.197   -0.155    0.021

             High edu       0.869     -0.891     0.740         0.715         0.613    -0.837 -0.796          0.793
 Source: authors calculations on ELFS data. The table reports simple correlations between skills intensities, age and education.




                                                                 Table A5
                                                First stage statistics for the instruments
                                 Column                            1                     2
                                                            Women and men            Men only
                                               Coeff              0.99                 1.050
                                  ln(f j,c,t)  Std error      [0.033]***            [0.033]***
                                               Ftest             69.27                 58.08
                                               Coeff             1.035                 1.058
                                  ln(f j,c,t)*
                                   Young
                                               Std error      [0.026]***            [0.027]***
                                               Ftest             533.80               515.20
                                               Coeff             0.899                 0.954
                                  ln(f j,c,t)*
                                     Old
                                               Std error      [0.022]***            [0.025]***
                                               Ftest             756.82               590.91
                                               Coeff             1.052                 1.113
                                  ln(f j,c,t)*
                                  Low edu
                                               Std error      [0.029]***            [0.032]***
                                               Ftest             390.03               319.71
                                               Coeff             0.688                 0.708
                                  ln(f j,c,t)*
                                  High edu
                                               Std error      [0.030]***            [0.036]***
                                               Ftest            1305.09               986.67

 This table reports the first stage statistics for the shift-share instrument. We calculate immigrants' distribution across countries
and cells for year 1991. The instrument is then obtained multiplying, for each year and country of origin, this fixed distribution by
                the total growth in the stock of immigrants from that country of origin (see section 3.1 for details).




                                                                   45
