                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     AN ESTIMATION OF ECONOMIC MODELS WITH RECURSIVE PREFERENCES

                                          Xiaohong Chen
                                           Jack Favilukis
                                        Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                        Working Paper 17130
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17130


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (Chen and Ludvigson) and
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (Ludvigson). We are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Richard Blundell,
Darrel Duffie, Lars Hansen, Monika Piazzesi, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Gianluca Violante, Motohiro
Yogo, Stanley Zin, and to seminar participants at NYU, UC Berkeley, the University of Chicago, the
June 2007 SED annual meetings, the July 2007 NBER Summer Institute Methods and Applications
for Dynamic, Stochastic General Equilibrium Models Workshop, and the September 2007 CMU Conference
in honor of Hansen-Singleton 1982 paper for helpful comments. We also thank Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
for help with the stockholder consumption data. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the
authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Xiaohong Chen, Jack Favilukis, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Estimation of Economic Models with Recursive Preferences
Xiaohong Chen, Jack Favilukis, and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 17130
June 2011
JEL No. E21,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents estimates of key preference parameters of the Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and
Weil (1989) (EZW) recursive utility model, evaluates the model's ability to fit asset return data relative
to other asset pricing models, and investigates the implications of such estimates for the unobservable
aggregate wealth return. Our empirical results indicate that the estimated relative risk aversion parameter
ranges from 17-60, with higher values for aggregate consumption than for stockholder consumption,
while the estimated elasticity of intertemporal substitution is above one. In addition, the estimated
model-implied aggregate wealth return is found to be weakly correlated with the CRSP value-weighted
stock market return, suggesting that the return to human wealth is negatively correlated with the aggregate
stock market return.


Xiaohong Chen                                        Sydney C. Ludvigson
 Department of Economics Yale University             Department of Economics
Box 208281                                           New York University
New Haven, CT 06520-8281                             19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
xiaohong.chen@yale.edu                               New York, NY 10002
                                                     and NBER
Jack Favilukis                                       sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
London School of Economics
Department of Finance
Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
jack.favilukis@gmail.com
1         Introduction
A large and growing body of theoretical work in macroeconomics and finance models the
preferences of economic agents using a recursive utility function of the type explored by
Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989).1 One reason for the growing interest in
such preferences is that they provide a potentially important generalization of the standard
power utility model first investigated in classic empirical studies by Hansen and Singleton
(1982, 1983). The salient feature of this generalization is a greater degree of flexibility
as regards attitudes towards risk and intertemporal substitution. Specifically, under the
recursive representation, the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion need not equal the inverse
of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), as it must in time-separable expected
utility models with constant relative risk aversion. This degree of flexibility is appealing
in many applications because it is unclear why an individual’s willingness to substitute
consumption across random states of nature should be so tightly linked to her willingness to
substitute consumption deterministically over time.
        Despite the growing interest in recursive utility models, there has been a relatively small
amount econometric work aimed at estimating the relevant preference parameters and assess-
ing the model’s fit with the data. As a consequence, theoretical models are often calibrated
with little econometric guidance as to the value of key preference parameters, the extent to
which the model explains the data relative to competing specifications, or the implications
of the model’s best-fitting specifications for other economic variables of interest, such as the
return to the aggregate wealth portfolio or the return to human wealth. The purpose of this
study is to help fill this gap in the literature by undertaking a semiparametric econometric
evaluation of the Epstein-Zin-Weil (EZW) recursive utility model.
        The EZW recursive utility function is a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggre-
gator over current consumption and the expected discounted utility of future consumption.
This structure makes estimation of the general model diﬃcult because the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution is a function of the unobservable continuation value of the fu-
ture consumption plan. One approach to this problem, based on the insight of Epstein and
    1
        See for example Attanasio and Weber (1989); Campbell (1993); Campbell (1996); Tallarini (2000);
Campbell and Viceira (2001) Bansal and Yaron (2004); Colacito and Croce (2004); Bansal, Dittmar, and
Kiku (2009); Campbell and Voulteenaho (2005); Gomes and Michaelides (2005); Krueger and Kubler (2005);
Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008); Kiku (2005); Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009); Campanale,
Castro, and Clementi (2006); Croce (2006); Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005); Croce, Lettau, and
Ludvigson (2010); Hansen and Sargent (2006); Piazzesi and Schneider (2006).



                                                    1
Zin (1989), is to exploit the relation between the continuation value and the return on the
aggregate wealth portfolio. To the extent that the return on the aggregate wealth portfolio
can be measured or proxied, the unobservable continuation value can be substituted out of
the marginal rate of substitution and estimation can proceed using only observable variables
(e.g., Epstein and Zin (1991), Campbell (1996), Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003)).2
Unfortunately, the aggregate wealth portfolio represents a claim to future consumption and
is itself unobservable. Moreover, given the potential importance of human capital and other
unobservable assets in aggregate wealth, its return may not be well proxied by observable
asset market returns.
       These diﬃculties can be overcome in specific cases of the EZW recursive utility model.
For example, if the EIS is restricted to unity and consumption follows a loglinear vector time-
series process, the continuation value has an analytical solution and is a function of observable
consumption data ( e.g., Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008)). Alternatively, if consumption and
asset returns are assumed to be jointly lognormally distributed and homoskedastic (e.g., At-
tanasio and Weber (1989)), or if a second-order linearization is applied to the Euler equation,
the risk premium of any asset can be expressed as a function of covariances of the asset’s
return with current consumption growth and with news about future consumption growth
(e.g., Restoy and Weil (1998), Campbell (2003)). In this case, the model’s cross-sectional
asset pricing implications can be evaluated using observable consumption data and a model
for expectations of future consumption.
       While the study of these specific cases has yielded a number of important insights, there
are several reasons why it may be desirable to allow for more general representations of
the model, free from tight parametric or distributional assumptions. First, an EIS of unity
implies that the consumption-wealth ratio is constant, contradicting statistical evidence that
it varies over time.3 Moreover, even first-order expansions of the EZW model around an
   2
       Epstein and Zin (1991) use an aggregate stock market return to proxy for the aggregate wealth return.
Campbell (1996) assumes that the aggregate wealth return is a portfolio weighted average of a human capital
return and a financial return, and obtains an estimable expression for an approximate loglinear formulation
of the model by assuming that expected returns on human wealth are equal to expected returns on financial
wealth. Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) follow Campbell’s approach to estimate the model using
household level consumption data.
   3
     Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) argue that a cointegrating residual for log consumption, log asset wealth,
and log labor income should be correlated with the unobservable log consumption-aggregate wealth ratio,
and find evidence that this residual varies considerably over time and forecasts future stock market returns.
See also recent evidence on the consumption-wealth ratio in Hansen, Heaton, Roussanov, and Lee (2007)
and Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan (2007).


                                                      2
EIS of unity may not capture the magnitude of variability of the consumption-wealth ratio
(Hansen, Heaton, Roussanov, and Lee (2007)). Second, although aggregate consumption
growth itself appears to be well described by a lognormal process, empirical evidence suggests
that the joint distribution of consumption and asset returns exhibits significant departures
from lognormality (Lettau and Ludvigson (2009)). Third, Kocherlakota (1990) points out
that joint lognormality is inconsistent with an individual maximizing a utility function that
satisfies the recursive representation used by Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989).
   To overcome these issues, we employ a semiparametric technique that allows us to conduct
estimation and evaluation of the EZW recursive utility model without the need to find
a proxy for the unobservable aggregate wealth return, without linearizing the model, and
without placing tight parametric restrictions on either the law of motion or joint distribution
of consumption and asset returns, or on the value of key preference parameters such as the
EIS. We present estimates of all the preference parameters of the EZW model, evaluate
the model’s ability to fit asset return data relative to competing asset pricing models, and
investigate the implications of such estimates for the unobservable aggregate wealth return
and human wealth return.
   To avoid using a proxy for the return on the aggregate wealth portfolio, we explicitly
estimate the unobservable continuation value of the future consumption plan. By assuming
that consumption growth falls within a general class of stationary, dynamic models, we may
identify the state variables over which the continuation value is defined. The continuation
value is still an unknown function of the relevant state variables, however, thus we estimate
the continuation value function nonparametrically. The resulting empirical specification for
investor utility is semiparametric in the sense that it contains both the finite dimensional
unknown parameters that are part of the CES utility function (risk aversion, EIS, and
subjective time-discount factor), as well as the infinite dimensional unknown continuation
value function.
   Estimation and inference are conducted by applying a profile Sieve Minimum Distance
(SMD) procedure to a set of Euler equations corresponding to the EZW utility model we
study. The SMD method is a distribution-free minimum distance procedure, where the
conditional moments associated with the Euler equations are directly estimated nonpara-
metrically as functions of conditioning variables. The “sieve” part of the SMD procedure
requires that the unknown function embedded in the Euler equations (here the continuation
value function) be approximated by a sequence of flexible parametric functions, with the
number of parameters expanding as the sample size grows (Grenander (1981)). The un-


                                              3
known parameters of the marginal rate of substitution, including the sieve parameters of the
continuation value function and the finite-dimensional parameters that are part of the CES
utility function, may then be estimated using a profile two-step minimum distance estima-
tor. In the first step, for arbitrarily fixed candidate finite dimensional parameter values, the
sieve parameters are estimated by minimizing a weighted quadratic distance from zero of the
nonparametrically estimated conditional moments. In the second step, consistent estimates
of the finite dimensional parameters are obtained by solving a suitable sample minimum
distance problem such as GMM, with plugged in estimated continuation value function.
Motivated by the arguments of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), our approach allows for
possible model misspecification in the sense that the Euler equation may not hold exactly.
   We estimate two versions of the model. The first is a representative agent formulation,
in which the utility function is defined over per capita aggregate consumption. The second
is a representative stockholder formulation, in which utility is defined over per capita con-
sumption of stockholders. The definition of stockholder status, the consumption measure,
and the sample selection follow Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), which uses the Consumer Expen-
diture Survey (CEX). Since CEX data are limited to the period 1982 to 2002, and since
household-level consumption data are known to contain significant measurement error, we
follow Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) and generate a longer time-series of
data by constructing consumption mimicking factors for aggregate stockholder consumption
growth.
   Once estimates of the continuation value function have been obtained, it is possible to
investigate the model’s implications for the aggregate wealth return. This return is in general
unobservable but can be inferred from the model by equating the estimated marginal rate of
substitution with its theoretical representation based on consumption growth and the return
to aggregate wealth. If, in addition, we follow Campbell (1996) and assume that the return
to aggregate wealth is a portfolio weighted average of the unobservable return to human
wealth and the return to financial wealth, the estimated model also delivers implications for
the return to human wealth.
   Using quarterly data on consumption growth, assets returns and instruments, our empir-
ical results indicate that the estimated relative risk aversion parameter is high, ranging from
17-60, with higher values for the representative agent version of the model than the represen-
tative stockholder version. The estimated elasticity of intertemporal substitution is above
one, and diﬀers considerably from the inverse of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. This
estimate is of particular interest because the value of the EIS has important consequences


                                               4
for the asset pricing implications of models with EZW recursive utility. For example, if
consumption growth is normally distributed, it is straight forward to show that the price-
consumption ratio implied by EZW recursive utility is increasing in expected consumption
growth only if the EIS is greater than one. In addition, when relative risk aversion exceeds
unity, the price-consumption ratio will be decreasing in the volatility of consumption growth
only if the EIS exceeds one.
   We find that the estimated aggregate wealth return is weakly correlated with the CRSP
value-weighted stock market return and much less volatile, implying that the return to human
capital is negatively correlated with the aggregate stock market return. This later finding
is consistent with results in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), discussed further below.
In data from 1952 to 2005, we find that an SMD estimated EZW recursive utility model
can explain a cross-section of size and book-market sorted portfolio equity returns better
than the time-separable, constant relative risk aversion power utility model and better than
the Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) -scaled consumption CAPM model, but not as well as
empirical models based on financial factors such as the Fama and French (1993) three-factor
model.
   Our study is related to recent work estimating specific asset pricing models in which
the EZW recursive utility function is embedded. Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007) and
Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007) estimate models of long-run consumption risk, where the
data generating processes for consumption and dividend growth are explicitly modeled as
linear functions of a small but very persistent long-run risk component and normally distrib-
uted shocks. These papers focus on the representative agent formulation of the model, in
which utility is defined over per capita aggregate consumption. In such long-run risk models,
the continuation value can be expressed as a function of innovations in the explicitly im-
posed driving processes for consumption and dividend growth, and inferred either by direct
simulation or by specifying a vector autoregression to capture the predictable component.
Our work diﬀers from these studies in that our estimation procedure does not restrict the
law of motion for consumption or dividend growth. As such, our estimates apply generally
to the EZW recursive preference representation, not to specific asset pricing models of cash
flow dynamics.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the model
we estimate. Section 3 describes the empirical procedure; Section 4 describes the data.
Empirical results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 investigates the implications of our
estimates for the return to aggregate wealth, and the return to human wealth. Section 7


                                             5
concludes.


2     The Model
Let {F }∞
         =0 denote the sequence of increasing conditioning information sets available to
a representative agent at dates  = 0 1 . Adapted to this sequence are consumption
sequence { }∞                                                            ∞
              =0 and a corresponding sequence of continuation values { }=0 . The date
 consumption  and continuation value  are in the date  information set F (but are
typically not in the date  − 1 information set F−1 ). Sometimes we use  [·] to denote
[·|F ], the conditional expectation with respect to information set at date .
    The Epstein-Zin-Weil objective function is defined recursively by

                              £                                ¤ 1
                           = (1 − ) 1− + {R (+1 )}1− 1−                     (1)

                                           ¡ £ 1− ¤¢ 1−
                                                       1
                               R (+1 ) =  +1 |F                                 (2)
where +1 is the continuation value of the future consumption plan. The parameter 
governs relative risk aversion and 1 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution over
consumption (EIS). When  = , the utility function can be solved forward to yield the
familiar time-separable, constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) power utility model
                                         "∞                #
                                           X +   1−
                                  =                |F                            (3)
                                           =0
                                                  1 − 

where  ≡ 1−  (1 − ) 
    As in Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), the utility function may be rescaled and expressed
as a function of stationary variables:
                        "            ½ µ           ¶¾1− # 1−
                                                            1

                                       +1 +1
                    = (1 − ) +  R                                                    (4)
                                       +1 
                        ⎡            ( "µ                              ⎤ 1−
                                                           ¶1− #) 1−
                                                                          1
                                               ¶1− µ              1−
                                          +1        +1
                    = ⎣(1 − ) +                                    ⎦ 
                                          +1         

The intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (MRS) in consumption is given by
                                            ⎛                 ⎞−
                                µ       ¶−      +1 +1
                                   +1     ⎝ ³  +1 
                      +1 =                                ´⎠                        (5)
                                            R   +1 +1
                                                     +1 


                                              6
The MRS is a function of R (·), itself a function of the continuation value-to-consumption
         +1
ratio,   +1
                 where the latter is referred to hereafter as the continuation value ratio.
     Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) show that the MRS can be expressed in an alternate form
as                                     ( µ      ¶− ) 1−
                                                      1−
                                                          ½        ¾ −
                                           +1               1      1−
                               +1   =                                                      (6)
                                                          +1
where +1 is the return to aggregate wealth, where aggregate wealth represents a claim
to future consumption. This return is in general unobservable, but some researchers have
undertaken empirical work using an aggregate stock market return as a proxy, as in Epstein
and Zin (1991). A diﬃculty with this approach is that +1 may not be well proxied by
observable asset market returns, especially if human wealth and other nontradable assets are
quantitatively important fractions of aggregate wealth. Alternatively, approximate loglinear
formulations of the model can be obtained by making specific assumptions regarding the
relation between the return to human wealth and the return to some observable form of asset
wealth. For example, Campbell (1996) assumes that expected returns on human wealth
are equal to expected returns on financial wealth. Since the return to human wealth is
unobservable, however, such assumptions are diﬃcult to verify in the data. Consequently,
we work with the formulation of the MRS given in (5), with its explicit dependence on the
continuation value of the future consumption plan.
     The first-order conditions for optimal consumption choice imply that  [+1 +1 ] = 1,
for any traded asset indexed by , with a gross return at time  + 1 of +1 . Using (5), the
first-order conditions take the form
                       ⎡             ⎛                 ⎞−        ⎤
                          µ      ¶−     +1 +1
                       ⎢    +1
                     ⎣            ⎝ ³ +1 
                                                     ´ ⎠ +1 − 1⎥
                                                                   ⎦ = 0                      (7)
                                     R   +1 +1
                                                  +1 


Since the expected product of any traded asset return with +1 equals one, the model
implies that +1 is the stochastic discount factor (SDF), or pricing kernel, for valuing any
traded asset return.
     Equation (7) is a cross-sectional asset pricing model; it states that the risk premium
on any traded asset return +1 is determined in equilibrium by the covariance between
returns and the stochastic discount factor +1 . Notice that, compared to the CRRA model
where consumption growth is the single risk factor, the EZW model adds a second risk
factor
³       for explaining
               ³         the cross-section of asset returns, given by the multiplicative term
                           ´´−
  +1 +1      +1 +1
  +1 
            R +1           .

                                                      7
   The moment restrictions (7) are complicated by the fact that the conditional mean is
taken over a highly nonlinear
                        ³        function
                                    ´     of the conditionally expected value of discounted
                          +1 +1
continuation utility, R +1  . However, both the rescaled utility function (4) and the
Euler equations (7) depend on R . Thus, equation (4) can be solved for R , and the solution
plugged into (7). The resulting expression, for any observed sequence of traded asset returns
{+1 }
         =1 , takes the form
      ⎡             ⎛                                ⎞−              ⎤
    ⎢ µ  ¶− ⎜       +1 +1            ⎟                            ⎥
    ⎢    +1  ⎜       +1               ⎟                            ⎥
  ⎢        ⎜½ ∙                  ¸¾  1 ⎟                   +1 − 1⎥ = 0    = 1   (8)
    ⎣       ⎝   ³ ´1−               1− ⎠                            ⎦
                1  
                  
                         −  (1  − )

The moment restrictions (8) form the basis of our empirical investigation.

                                                        +1
2.1       A nonparametric specification of              +1

To avoid having to find a proxy for the return on the aggregate wealth portfolio, we explicitly
                                                     +1
estimate the unobservable continuation value ratio   +1
                                                          .   To do so, we assume that consump-
tion growth falls within a general class of stationary, dynamic models, thereby allowing us
to identify the state variables over which the continuation value ratio is defined. Several ex-
amples of this approach are given in Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008). Here, we assume that
consumption growth is a possibly nonlinear function of a hidden first-order Markov process
 that summarizes information about future consumption growth. Let lower case letters
denote log variables, e.g., ln (+1 ) ≡ +1  As a special case, consumption growth may be a
linear function of a hidden first-order Markov process 

                                +1 −  =  +  + C²+1                                  (9)

                                     +1 =  + D²+1                                     (10)

where ²+1 is a (2 × 1) i.i.d. vector with mean zero and identity covariance matrix I and
C and D are (1 × 2) vectors. Notice that this allows shocks in the observation equation
(9) to have arbitrary correlation with those in the state equation (10). The specification
(9)-(10) nests a number of stationary univariate representations for consumption growth,
including a first-order autoregression, first-order moving average representation, a first-order
autoregressive-moving average process, or  (1 1), and . The asset pricing lit-
erature on long-run consumption risk restricts to a special case of the above, where the


                                               8
innovations in (9) and (10) are uncorrelated and  is close to unity (e.g., Bansal and Yaron
(2004)).
   More generally, we can allow consumption growth to be a potentially nonlinear function
of a hidden Markov process  :

                                   +1 −  =  ( ) + +1                                           (11)
                                       +1 =  ( ) + +1                                           (12)

where  ( ) and  ( ) are no longer necessarily linear functions of the state variable  , and
+1 and +1 are i.i.d. random variables that may be correlated with one another.
   In either case, given the first-order Markov structure, expected future consumption
growth is summarized by the single state variable   implying that  also summarizes
                                           
the state space over which the function    
                                                is defined. Notice that while we use the first-order
Markov assumption as a motivation for specifying the state space over which continuation
utility is defined, as discussed below, the econometric methodology itself leaves the law of
motion of the consumption process unspecified.
   There are two remaining complications that must be addressed before estimation can be
undertaken. First, without placing tight parametric restrictions on the model, the continua-
                                                                                                            
tion value ratio is an unknown function of the relevant state variables. Thus, we estimate                  
nonparametrically. Second, the state variable  that is taken as the input of the unknown
function is itself unobservable and must be inferred from consumption data. In the Appen-
dix, we provide assumptions under which the first-order Markov structure in either (9)-(10)
or (11)-(12) implies that the information contained in  is summarized by the lagged con-
                        −1                                                                     
tinuation value ratio   −1
                               and current consumption growth           −1
                                                                             .   It follows that   
                                                                                                        may be
                                            2
modeled as an unknown function  : R → R of the lagged continuation value ratio and
consumption growth:                             µ               ¶
                                                  −1 
                                         =                                                             (13)
                                                  −1 −1
Observe that if the innovations in (9) and (10) are positively correlated,  may display neg-
                                           ³           ´
ative serial dependence, and we expect 1 −1    
                                              −1 −1
                                                          0, where 1 (·) denotes the partial
derivative of  with respect to its first argument. In addition, although the linear specifi-
cation (9)-(10) implies that  is a monotonic function of both arguments, if the stochastic
process is nonlinear in  , as in (11)-(12), the function  can take on more general functional
forms, potentially displaying nonmonotonicity in both its arguments.
   To summarize, the asset pricing model we shall entertain in this paper consists of the
conditional moment restrictions (8), subject to the nonparametric specification of (13). Our

                                                    9
model is semiparametric in the sense that it contains both finite dimensional and infinite
dimensional unknown parameters. Let δ ≡ (  )0 denote any vector of finite dimensional
parameters in D, a compact subset in R3 , and  : R2 → R denote any real-valued Lipschitz
continuous functions in V, a compact subset in the space of square integrable functions (with
respect to some sigma-finite measure). For each  = 1  , denote
                                         ⎛                                                        ⎞−
                                                                  ³        ´
                          µ          ¶− ⎜            +1 +1
                                                                                    ⎟
                              +1       ⎜                                       ⎟
   (z+1  δ  ) ≡                   ⎜½ ∙                                ¸¾  1 ⎟                     +1 − 1
                                       ⎝   n ³            ´o1−               1− ⎠
                                           1     −1   
                                           
                                                     
                                                 −1 −1
                                                                  −   (1 − )

where z+1 is a vector containing all the strictly stationary observations, including consump-
tion growth rate and return data. We define δ  ≡ (      )0 ∈ D and  ≡  (z ; δ  ) ≡
 (·; δ ) ∈ V as the solutions to
                                                    "                                   #
                                                     X
                    (·; δ) = arg inf                      ( {  (z+1  δ  )|F })2 
                                              ∈V
                                                      =1
                                                    "                                            #
                                                     X
                              δ  = arg min                 ( {  (z+1  δ  (·; δ))|F })2 
                                             ∈D
                                                       =1

We say that the model (8) and (13) is correctly specified if

                           {  (z+1  δ    (· δ  ))|F } = 0            = 1                    (14)


3     Empirical Implementation
This section presents the details of our empirical procedure. The general methodology is
based on estimation of the conditional moment restrictions (14), except that we allow for
the possibility that the model could be misspecified.
    The potential role of model misspecification in the evaluation of empirical asset pricing
models has been previously emphasized by Hansen and Jagannathan (1997). As Hansen
and Jagannathan stress, all models are approximations of reality and therefore potentially
misspecified. The estimation procedure used here explicitly takes this possibility into ac-
count in the empirical implementation. In the application of this paper, there are several
possible reasons for misspecification, including possible misspecification of the arguments in
the continuation value-consumption ratio function  , which could in principal include more


                                                             10
lags, and misspecification of the arguments of the CES utility function, which could in prin-
cipal include a broader measure of durable consumption or leisure. More generally, when we
conduct model comparison in Section 5, we follow the advice of Hansen and Jagannathan
(1997) and assume that all models are potentially misspecified.
       Let w be a  × 1 observable subset of F .4 Equation (14) implies

                          {  (z+1  δ    (· δ  ))|w } = 0            = 1                     (15)

Denote

 (w  δ  ) ≡ {(z+1  δ  )|w } (z+1  δ  ) = ( 1 (z+1  δ  )    (z+1  δ  ))0  (16)

For any candidate value δ ≡ (  )0 ∈ D, we define  ∗ ≡  ∗ (z  δ) ≡  ∗ (· δ) ∈ V as the
solution to
                               ∗ (· δ) ≡ arg inf  [(w  δ  )0 (w  δ  )]                             (17)
                                                 ∈V

It is clear that  (z  δ  ) =  ∗ (z  δ  ) when the model (15) is correctly specified. We say
the model (15) is misspecified if

                                 min inf  [(w  δ  )0 (w  δ  )]  0
                                  ∈D  ∈V

       We estimate the possibly misspecified model (15) using a profile semiparametric minimum
distance procedure, which consists of two steps; see e.g., Andrews (1994), Newey (1994),
Chen, Linton, and van Keilegom (2003) and Chen (2007). In the first step, for any candidate
value δ ≡ (  )0 ∈ D, the unknown function  ∗ (· δ) is estimated using the sieve minimum
distance (SMD) procedure developed in Newey and Powell (2003) and Ai and Chen (2003)
(for correctly specified model) and Ai and Chen (2007) (for possibly misspecified model).
In the second step, we estimate the finite dimensional parameters δ by solving a suitable
   4                                                                                                      −1
       If the model of consumption dynamics specified above were literally true, the state variables      −1   and
 
−1    (and all measurable transformations of these) are suﬃcient statistics for the agents information set
F . However, the fundamental asset pricing relation  [+1 +1 − 1]  which includes individual asset
returns, is likely to be a highly nonlinear function of the state variables. In addition, one of these state
                                       −1
variables is the unknown function,     −1    and as such it embeds the unknown sieve parameters. These facts
make the estimation procedure computationally intractable if the subset w , over which the conditional
                                         −1
mean (w  δ  ) is taken, includes    −1 .   Fortunately, the procedure can be carried out on an observable
                                                                  −1
measurable function w of F , which need not contain             −1 .   A consistent estimate of the conditional
mean (w  δ  ) can be obtained using known basis functions of observed conditioning variables in w .
                                         
We take this approach here, using       −1    and several other observable conditioning variables as part of the
econometrician’s information w .

                                                           11
sample GMM problem. Notice that the estimation procedure itself leaves the law of motion
of the data unspecified.5


3.1        First-Step Profile SMD Estimation of  ∗ (· δ)
For any candidate value δ = (  )0 ∈ D, an initial estimate of the unknown function
 ∗ (· δ) is obtained using the profile sieve minimum distance (SMD) estimator, described
below. In practice, this is achieved by applying the SMD estimator at each point in a 3-
dimensional grid for δ ∈ D. The idea behind the SMD estimator is to choose a flexible
approximation to the value function  ∗ (· δ) to minimize the sample analog of the minimum
distance criterion function (17). The procedure has two essential parts. First, we replace the
conditional expectation (w  δ  ) with a consistent nonparametric estimator (to be speci-
fied later). Second, although the value function  ∗ (· δ) is an infinite-dimensional unknown
function, we approximate it by a sequence of finite-dimensional unknown parameters (sieves)
 (· δ), where the approximation error decreases as the dimension  increases with the
sample size  . For each δ ∈D, the function  (· δ) is estimated by minimizing a sam-
ple (weighted) quadratic norm of the nonparametrically estimated conditional expectation
functions.
   Estimation in the first profile SMD step is carried out by implementing³        the following
                                                                                          ´
algorithm. First, the ratio  is treated as unknown function  =  ∗ −1  
                                                                             −1 −1
                                                                                      ; δ  , with
                                                     0
the initial value for         at time  = 0 denoted      , taken as a unknown scalar parameter to be
                                                     ³0
                                                                     ´
                                                     ∗    −1  
estimated Second, the unknown function              −1  −1 ; δ is approximated by a bivariate
sieve function
               µ              ¶                        
                                                       X            µ           ¶
             ∗   −1                                               −1 
                         ; δ ≈  (· δ) = 0 (δ) +      (δ)              
                 −1 −1                             =1
                                                                      −1 −1

where the sieve coeﬃcients {0  1    } depend on δ, but the sieve basis functions
{ (· ·) :  = 1   } have known functional forms that are independent of δ; see the
Appendix for a discussion of the sieve basis
                                         ³ functions ´   (· ·). To provide a nonparamet-
                                           
ric estimate of the unknown function  ∗ −1     ; δ ,  must grow with the sample
                                             −1 −1

size to insure consistency of the method.6 We are not interested in the sieve parameters
   5
       The estimation procedure requires stationary ergodic observations but does not restrict to linear time
serires specifications or specific parametric laws of motion of the data.
   6
     Asymptotic theory only provides guidance about the rate at which  must increase with the sample
size  . Thus, in practice, other considerations must be used to judge how best to set this dimensionality. The


                                                       12
(0  1    )0 per se, but rather in the finite dimensional parameters δ, and in the dy-
namic behavior of the continuation value and the marginal rate of substitution, all of which
depend on those parameters. For the empirical application below, we set  = 9 (see the
Appendix for further discussion), leaving 10 sieve parameters to be estimated in  ∗ , plus the
                0
initial value   0
                      The total number of parameters to be estimated, including the three finite
dimensional parameters in δ, is therefore 14.                        n      o
    Given values      { }
                       0
                       0
                          , 
                           =1 , { (·)}
                                         =1 and data on consumption    
                                                                       −1
                                                                                 , the function
                                         n o                                =1

   is used to generate a sequence         that can be taken as data to be used in the
                                                      =1
estimation of (17).
    Implementation of the profile SMD estimation requires a consistent estimate of the con-
ditional mean function (w  δ  ) which can be consistently estimated via a sieve least
squares procedure. Let {0 (w )  = 1 2   } be a sequence of known basis functions (in-
cluding a constant function) that map from R into R. Denote  (·) ≡ (01 (·)   0 (·))0
                              ¡                      ¢0
and the  ×  matrix P ≡  (w1 )    (w ) . Then
                                Ã                                    !
                                  X
                 b
                 (w  δ  ) =     (z+1  δ  ) (w )0 (P0 P)−1  (w)               (18)
                                            =1

is a sieve least squares estimator of the conditional mean vector (w δ  ) = {(z+1  δ  )|w =
w} (Note that  must grow with the sample size to ensure that (w  δ  ) is estimated
consistently). We form the first-step profile SMD estimate b (·) for  ∗ (·) based on this
estimate of the conditional mean vector and the sample analog of (17):

                                              1    X
                                                   
                          b (· δ) = arg min            b   δ  )0 (w
                                                         (w             b   δ  )                 (19)
                                               =1

See the Appendix for a detailed description of the profile SMD procedure.
    As shown in the Appendix, an attractive feature of this estimator is that it can be
implemented as an instance of GMM with a particular weighting matrix W given by
                                                                  −1
                                               W = I ⊗ (P0 P)         

The procedure is equivalent to regressing each   on the set of instruments  (·) and taking
the fitted values from this regression as an estimate of the conditional mean, where the
bigger is  , the greater is the number of parameters that must be estimated, therefore the dimensionality
of the sieve is naturally limited by the size of our data set. With  = 9, the dimension of the parameter
                         0
vector, α along with     0 ,   is 11, estimated using a sample of size  = 213. In practice, we obtained very
similar results setting  = 10; thus we present the results for the more parsimonious specification using
 = 9 below.

                                                          13
particular weighting matrix gives greater weight to moments that are more highly correlated
with the instruments  (·). The weighting scheme can be understood intuitively by noting
that variation in the conditional mean is what identifies the unknown function  ∗ (· δ).


3.2     Second-Step GMM Estimation of δ
Once an initial nonparametric estimate b (· δ) is obtained for  ∗ (· δ), we can estimate the
finite dimensional parameters δ  consistently by solving a suitable sample minimum distance
problem, for example by using a Generalized Method of Moments (GMM, Hansen (1982))
estimator. An advantage of this two-step approach is that the second-stage estimation need
not be based on the sample SMD criterion, i.e.,
                            1X
                               
                        min       b   δ b (· δ))0 (w
                                  (w                  b   δ b (· δ))
                        ∈D 
                              =1

which would give greater weight to moments that are more highly correlated with the in-
struments  (·). Such a weighting scheme is required to identify the unknown function
 ∗ (· δ), but is not required for pinning down the finite dimensional preference parameters
δ  . We discuss this further below.
   Notice that if the number of test asset returns  ≥ 3, consistent estimation of δ =
(  )0 could in principal be based on the unconditional population moments implied by
(15):
                      {  (z+1  δ    ∗ (· δ  ))} = 0     = 1  
More generally, minimum distance estimation of δ  based on the moment conditions (15)
could be conducted using any subset of the conditioning variables that make up the econo-
metrician’s information set w , as long as the number of moment conditions is at least as
large as the number of finite dimensional parameters to be estimated. Let the conditioning
variables used in the second-step estimation of δ  be denoted x , where x is a  × 1 vector
that could include a constant. We estimate δ  by minimizing a GMM objective function:
                    b
                    δ = arg min  (δ)                                                       (20)
                                 ∈D
                           h                   i0   h                       i
               (δ) = g (δ b (· δ) ; y ) W g (δb (· δ) ; y )                    (21)
                                                           ¡                              ¢0
where W is a positive, semi-definite weighting matrix, y ≡ z0 +1  z02  x0  x01 denotes
the vector containing all observations in the sample of size  and
                                              1X
                                                 
                             b           
                      g (δ  (· δ) ; y ) ≡       (z+1  δ b (· δ)) ⊗ x              (22)
                                               =1

                                                     14
are the sample moment conditions associated with the  × 1 -vector of population uncon-
ditional moment conditions:

                      {  (z+1  δ    ∗ (· δ )) ⊗ x } = 0    = 1          (23)

    Observe that b(· δ) is not held fixed in the second step, but instead depends on δ
Consequently, the second-step GMM estimation
                                        ³ ´     of δ plays an important role in determining
                                            b 
the final estimate of  (·), denoted b · δ
    In the empirical implementation, we use two diﬀerent weighting matrices W to obtain
the second-step GMM estimates of δ. The first is the identity weighting matrix W = I; the
second is the inverse of the sample second moment matrix of the  asset returns upon which
                                                                              P
the model is evaluated, denoted G−1                                         1
                                      (i.e., the ( )th element of G is   =1   for
  = 1  )
    To understand the motivation behind using W = I and W = G−1
                                                              to weight the second-
step GMM criterion function, it is useful to first observe that, in principal, all the parameters
of the model (including the finite dimensional preference parameters), could be estimated in
one step by minimizing the sample SMD criterion:

                                     1X
                                        
                               min         b   δ  )0 (w
                                           (w             b   δ  )                  (24)
                             ∈D 
                                       =1


However, the two-step profile procedure employed here has several advantages for our appli-
cation. First, we want estimates of standard preference parameters such as risk aversion and
the EIS to reflect values required to match unconditional moments commonly emphasized
in the asset pricing literature, those associated with unconditional risk premia. This is not
possible when estimates of δ and  () are obtained in one step, since the weighting scheme
inherent in the SMD procedure (24) emphasizes conditional moments, placing greater weight
on moments that are more highly correlated with the instruments. Second, both the weight-
ing scheme inherent in the SMD procedure (24) and the use of instruments  (·) eﬀectively
change the set of test assets, implying that key preference parameters are estimated on lin-
ear combinations of the original portfolio returns. Such linear combinations often bear little
relation to the original test asset returns upon which much of the asset pricing literature
has focused. They may also imply implausible long and short positions in the original test
assets and do not necessarily deliver a large spread in unconditional mean returns. These
concerns can be alleviated by estimating the finite dimensional parameters in a second step,
using the identity weighting matrix W = I along with x = 1  an  × 1 vector of ones..

                                                       15
   We also use W = G−1
                     along with x = 1 . Parameter estimates computed in this
way have the advantage that they are obtained by minimizing an objective function that is
invariant to the initial choice of asset returns (Kandel and Stambaugh (1995)). In addition,
the square root of the minimized GMM objective function has the appealing interpretation
as the maximum pricing error per unit norm of any portfolio of the original test assets, and
serves as a measure of model misspecification (Hansen and Jagannathan (1997)). We use
this below to compare the performance of the estimated EZW model to that of competing
asset pricing models.


3.3    Decision Interval of Household
We model the decision interval of the household at fixed horizons and measure consumption
and returns over the same horizon. In reality, the decision interval of the household may
diﬀer from the data sampling interval. If the decision interval of the household is shorter
than the data sampling interval, the consumption data are time aggregated. Heaton (1993)
studies the eﬀects of time aggregation in a consumption based asset pricing model with
habit formation, and concludes, based on a first-order linear approximation of the Euler
equation, that time aggregation can bias GMM parameter estimates of the habit coeﬃcient.
The extent to which time aggregation may influence parameter estimates in nonlinear Euler
equation estimation is not generally known.
   In practice, it is diﬃcult or impossible to assess the extent to which time aggregation
is likely to bias parameter estimates, for several reasons. First, the decision interval of the
household is not directly observable. Time aggregation arises only if the decision interval
of the household is shorter than the data sampling interval. Recently, several researchers
have argued that the decision interval of the household may in fact be longer than the
monthly, quarterly, or annual data sampling intervals typically employed in empirical work
(Gabaix and Laibson (2002), Jagannathan and Wang (2007)). In this case, time aggregation
is absent and has no influence on parameter estimates. Second, even if consumption data
are time aggregated, its influence on parameter estimates is likely to depend on a number
of factors that are diﬃcult to evaluate in practice, such as the stochastic law of motion for
consumption growth, and the degree to which the interval for household decisions falls short
of the data sampling interval.
   If time-aggregation is present, however, it may induce a spurious correlation between
the estimated error terms over which conditional means are taken (  (z+1  δ    (· δ  ))


                                               16
above), and the information set at time  (w ) in the first-step profile estimation of  ∗ (· δ).
Therefore, as a precaution, we conduct our empirical estimation using instruments at time 
that do not admit the most recent lagged values of the variables (i.e., using two-period lagged
instruments instead of one-period lagged instruments). The cost of doing so is that the two-
period lagged instruments may not be as informative as the one-period lagged instruments;
this cost is likely to be small, however, if the instruments are serially correlated, as are a
number of those employed here (see the next section).


4       Data
A detailed description of the data and our sources is provided in the Appendix. Our aggregate
data are quarterly, and span the period from the first quarter of 1952 to the first quarter of
2005.
    The focus of this paper is on testing the model’s theoretical restrictions for a cross-section
of asset returns. If the theory is correct, the cross-sectional asset pricing model (7) should be
informative about the model’s key preference parameters as well as about the unobservable
continuation value function. Specifically, the first-order conditions for optimal consumption
choice place tight restrictions both across assets and over time on equilibrium asset returns.
Consequently, we study a cross-section of asset returns known to deliver a large spread in
mean returns, which have been particularly challenging for classic asset pricing models to
explain (Fama and French (1992) and Fama and French (1993)). These assets include the
three-month Treasury bill rate and six value-weighted portfolios of common stock sorted into
two size quantiles and three book value-market value quantiles, for a total of 7 asset returns.
All stock return data are taken from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth web page (URL provided
in the appendix), created from stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ.
    To estimate the representative agent formulation of the model, we use real, per-capita
expenditures on nondurables and services as a measure of aggregate consumption. Since
consumption is real, our estimation uses real asset returns, which are the nominal returns
described above deflated by the implicit chain-type price deflator to measure real consump-
tion. We use quarterly consumption data because it is known to contain less measurement
error than monthly consumption data.
    We also construct a stockholder consumption measure to estimate the representative
stockholder version of the model. The definition of stockholder status, the consumption
measure, and the sample selection follow Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), which uses the Consumer


                                                17
Expenditure Survey (CEX). Since CEX data are limited to the period 1980 to 2002, and since
household-level consumption data are known to contain significant measurement error, we
follow Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) and generate a longer time-series of
data by constructing consumption mimicking factors for aggregate stockholder consumption
growth. The CEX interviews households three months apart and households are asked to
report consumption for the previous three months. Thus, while each household is interviewed
three months apart, the interviews are spread out over the quarter implying that there will
be households interviewed in each month of the sample. This permits the computation
of quarterly consumption growth rates at a monthly frequency. As in Malloy, Moskowitz,
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009), we construct a time series of average consumption growth for
stockholders from  to  + 1 as
                                        1 X +1
                                              
                                                  
                                         =1 
       
where +1 is the quarterly consumption of household  for quarter t and  is the number
of stockholder households in quarter . We use this average series to form a mimicking factor
for stockholder consumption growth, by regressing it on aggregate variables (available at
monthly frequency) and taking the fitted values as a measure of the mimicking factor for
stockholder consumption growth.
   Mimicking factors for stockholder consumption growth are formed for two reasons. First,
the household level consumption data are known to be measured with considerable error,
mostly driven by survey error. To the extent that measurement error is uncorrelated with
aggregate variables, the mimicking factor will be free of the survey measurement error present
in the household level consumption series. Second, since the CEX sample is short (1982
to 2002), the construction of mimicking factors allows a longer time-series of data to be
constructed. The procedure follows Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009). We
project the average consumption growth of stockholders on a set of instruments (available
over a longer period) and use the estimated coeﬃcients to construct a longer time-series of
stockholder consumption growth, spanning the same sample as the aggregate consumption
data. As instruments, we use two aggregate variables that display significant correlation
with average stockholder consumption growth: the log diﬀerence of industrial production
growth, ∆ ln( ), and the log diﬀerences of real services expenditure growth, ∆ ln ( ).
The regression is estimated using monthly data from July 1982 to February 2002, using the
average CEX stockholder consumption growth rates. The fitted values from these regressions
provide monthly observations on a mimicking factor for the quarterly consumption growth of


                                             18
stockholders. The results from this regression, with Newey and West (1987) -statistics, are
reported in Table 1. Average stockholder consumption growth is positively related to both
the growth in industrial production, and to the growth in expenditures on services. Each
variable has a statistically significant eﬀect on average stockholder consumption growth,
though the 2 statistics are modest. The modest 2 statistics are not surprising given the
substantial amount of measurement error in household-level consumption data (comparable
2 values can be found in Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009)).
       For the subsequent empirical analysis, we construct a quarterly measure of the stock-
holder consumption growth mimicking factor by matching the fitted values for quarterly
consumption growth over the three consecutive months corresponding to the three months
in a quarter (e.g., we use the observation on fitted consumption growth from March to Jan-
uary in a given year as a measure of first quarter consumption growth in that year). We
refer the reader to Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) and Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2009) for further details on the CEX data and the construction of mimicking factors.
    The empirical procedure also requires computation of instruments to estimate the con-
                           b   δ b (· δ)) These instruments,  (w ), are known basis
ditional moment functions (w
functions (including a constant function) of conditioning variables, w . We include lagged
consumption growth in w , as well as three variables that have been shown elsewhere to have
significant forecasting power for excess stock returns and consumption growth in quarterly
data.7 Two variables that have been found to display forecasting power for excess stock
returns at a quarterly frequency are the “relative T-bill rate” (which we measure as the
three month Treasury-bill rate minus its 4-quarter moving average), and the lagged value
of the excess return on the Standard & Poor 500 stock market index (S&P 500) over the
three-month Treasury bill rate (see Campbell (1991), Hodrick (1992), Lettau and Ludvig-
son (2001a)). We denote the relative bill rate  and the excess return on the S&P
500 index,  .8 We also use the proxy for the log consumption-wealth ratio studied in
(Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)) to forecast returns.9 This proxy is measured as the coin-
   7
       The importance of instrument relevance in a GMM setting (i.e., using instruments that are suﬃciently
correlated with the included endogenous variables) is now well understood. See Stock, Wright, and Yogo
(2002) for a survey of this issue. No formal test of instrument relevance has been developed for estimation
involving an unknown function. Thus we choose variables for w that are known to be strong predictors of
asset returns and consumption growth in quarterly data.
   8
     We focus on these variables rather than some others because, in samples that include recent data, they
drive out many of the other popular forecasting variables for stock returns, such as an aggregate dividend-
price ratio, earnings-price ratio, term spreads and default spreads (Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)).
   9
     This variable has strong forecasting power for stock returns over horizons ranging from one quarter to

                                                     19
tegrating residual between log consumption, log asset wealth, and log labor income and is
          .10 Lettau and Ludvigson (2004) find that quarterly consumption growth is
denoted d
predictable by one lag of wealth growth, a variable that is highly correlated with  ,
and results
         h (not reported) confirm that
                                    i it is also predictable by one lag of  . Thus, we
                                              0
                  −1
use w = d                          
                                                   We note that consumption growth—often thought to
be nearly unforecastable—displays a fair amount of short-horizon predictability in the sample
used here: a linear regression of consumption growth on the one-period lagged value w and
a constant produces an  −statistic for the regression in excess of 12.11
    Since the error term   (z+1  δ    ) is orthogonal to the information set w , any mea-
surable transformation of w ,  (w ), can be used as valid instruments in the first-step
estimation of  . We use power series as instruments, where the specification includes a
constant, the linear terms, squared terms and pair-wise cross products of each variable in
w , or 15 instruments in total.


5      Empirical Results

5.1      Parameter Estimates
                                                                       ³           ´
The shape of our estimated continuation value ratio function  =  −1   
                                                                          −1 −1
                                                                                     can be
                          ³ ´
                              b as a function of −1  holding fixed current consumption
illustrated by plotting b · δ                  −1
           
growth,   −1
               .   Figures 1 and 2 plot this relation for each estimation described above, using
aggregate consumption (Figure 1) or the stockholder mimicking factor as a measure of stock-
                                                            −1
holder consumption (Figure 2). For these plots,             −1
                                                                   varies along the horizontal axis, with
 
−1
       alternately held fixed at its median, 25th, and 75th percentile values in our sample.
    We draw several conclusions from the figures. First, the estimated continuation value-
consumption ratio function is nonlinear; this is evident from the curved shape of the functions
and, especially in Figure 2, from the finding that the shape depends on where in the domain
several years. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) report that this variable also forecasts returns on portfolios
sorted by size and book-market ratios.
  10
     See Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2004) for further discussion of this variable
and its relation to the log consumption-wealth ratio. Note that standard errors do not need to be corrected for
pre-estimation of the cointegrating parameters in d
                                                     , since cointegrating coeﬃcients are “superconsistent,”
converging at a rate faster than the square root of the sample size.
  11
     As recommended by Cochrane (2001), the conditioning variables in w are normalized by standardizing
and adding one to each variable, so that they have roughly the same units as unscaled returns.



                                                       20
space the function is evaluated. Notice that the the serial dependence of b is negative
in both figures. Such a pattern is possible under the functionally non-linear state space
model (11)-(12). But negative serial dependence can arise even in the linear state space
model if the innovation in the observation equation (9) is correlated with the innovation
in the state equation (10). Second, the estimated continuation value ratio is increasing in
current consumption growth, in both the representative agent (Figure 1) and representative
stockholder (Figure 2) versions of the model. The estimated relation is, however, nonlinear
in consumption growth, a finding that is especially evident in Figure 2.
   Table 2 presents estimates of the model’s preference parameters δ = (  )0 . The
subjective time-discount factor, , is close to one in each estimation, with values between
0.99 and 0.999, depending on the measure of consumption and the weighting matrix employed
in the second step (W = I or W=G−1
                                 ). The estimated relative risk aversion parameter 
ranges from 17-60, with higher values for the representative agent version of the model than
the representative stockholder version. For example, using aggregate consumption data,
estimated risk aversion is around 60, regardless of which estimation is employed in the
second step (W = I or W=G−1
                          ). By contrast, estimated risk aversion is either 20 or 17
when we use the stockholder mimicking factor as a measure of stockholder consumption.
The finding that estimated risk aversion is higher for the model with aggregate consumption
than for that with stockholder consumption is consistent with results in Malloy, Moskowitz,
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009), who focus on the special case of the EZW utility model in
which the EIS, 1 is unity. In this case, the pricing kernel simplifies to an expression that
depends only on the expected present value of long horizon consumption growth.
   The estimated value of  is less than one, indicating that the EIS is above one and con-
siderably diﬀerent from the inverse of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. The results are
similar across estimations. The EIS is estimated to be between 1.667 and 2 in the representa-
tive agent version of the model, and between 1.11 and 1.47 in the representative stockholder
version of the model. The estimates for this parameter are in line with those reported in
Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007) who estimate a model of long-run consumption risk
with EZW utility. In theoretical work, Bansal and Yaron (2004) have emphasized the im-
portance of EZW preferences with an EIS 1, in conjunction with a persistent component
of consumption growth, to explain the dynamics of aggregate stock market returns.
   The estimation procedure allows for model misspecification, in that the moment condi-
tion may not be exactly satisfied. In this event, the parameters estimated are pseudo-true
parameters. The implementation itself is aﬀected by the allowance for misspecification in


                                              21
the computation of standard errors. In the class of semiparametric models considered here
Ai and Chen (2007) prove that, when the model is misspecified, as long as the pseudo-true
parameter values are unique and are in the interior of the parameter space, the estimator is
still root- asymptotically normally distributed, centered at the psuedo-true parameter val-
ues, except that the asymptotic variance now includes extra terms that would be zero under
correct specification. Due to the complication of the asymptotic variance expressions under
misspecification, we compute block bootstrap estimates of the finite sample distributions of
b
δ.
       In the bootstrap, the sieve parameters         0
                                                      0
                                                         ,    { }
                                                                                              b   δ  ),
                                                                   =1 , the conditional mean (w
and the finite dimensional parameters δ = (  )0 are all estimated for each simulated
realization.12 The procedure is highly numerically intensive, and takes several days to run
on a workstation computer, thus limiting the number of bootstrap simulations that can
be feasibly performed. We therefore conduct the two-step  estimation on 100 block
bootstrap samples. The resulting confidence regions are wide, a finding that may in part
be attributable to the small number of bootstrap iterations. Even with the large confidence
regions, however, in the representative agent formulation of the model we can always reject
the hypothesis that  = . Moreover, the 95% confidence region for  is moderate and
contains only values below one, or an EIS above one.

5.1.1      Cyclical Properties of Estimated Pricing Kernel

Figures 3 through 5 give a visual impression of the cyclical properties of the estimated EZW
pricing kernel. For these figures, we focus on the properties of the estimated EZW model
using aggregate consumption where the weighting matrix W = I is employed in the second
stage estimation. The estimated pricing kernel, +1 , is the product of two pieces, 1+1
and 2+1 , denoted separately in the graphs:
                                                          ⎛                     ⎞−
                                         µ          ¶−         +1 +1
                                             +1         ⎝     +1 
                             +1 =                            ³               ´⎠     
                                                                  +1 +1
                                    |         {z      } R          +1 
                                             1+1    |               {z            }
                                                                     2+1

  12
       The bootstrap sample is obtained by sampling blocks of the raw data randomly with replacement and
laying them end-to-end in the order sampled. To choose the block length, we follow the recommendation
of Hall, Horowitz, and Jing (1995) who show that the asymptotically optimal block length for estimating a
symmetrical distribution function is  ∝  15 ; also see Horowitz (2003).




                                                      22
The first piece corresponds to the part of the pricing kernel that is present in the standard,
constant relative risk aversion, power utility model that arises as a special case when  = 
The second piece is an additional multiplicative piece that is present more generally when
 6=  and attributable to the recursive preference structure of the EZW utility function.
   Figure 3 plots the estimated pricing kernel +1 over time, along with real gross domestic
product (GDP) growth (top panel). Both series are five-quarter moving averages. The middle
and bottom panels plot the estimated values of 1+1 and 2+1 separately, over time. The
pricing kernel +1 has a clear countercyclical component, rising in recessions and falling
in booms. Its correlation with real GDP growth is -0.26 over our sample. Both 1+1 and
2+1 contribute to this negative correlation, but since 1+1 is much less volatile than
2+1 , the overall correlation is close to that with just 2+1 
   The cyclical properties of the pricing kernel are of interest because they determine the
cyclical properties of risk premia. Figures 4 and 5 plot an estimate of the risk premium (and
its components) over time for the aggregate stock market implied by our estimate of +1 
computed as a five quarter moving average of

                                        − (+1  +1 − +1 )
                      Risk Premium =                                      
                                                   (+1 )

where +1 denotes the return on the CRSP value-weighted stock market index, and
+1 denotes the three-month Treasury-bill rate. To give a rough idea of how the two
components of the pricing kernel contribute to its dynamic behavior, some plots also exhibit
the properties of 1+1 and 2+1 separately. In viewing these plots, the reader should keep
in mind that the two components are likely to be correlated; thus the plots do not display
orthogonal movements in 1+1 and 2+1 .
   Several aspects of Figures 4 and 5 are noteworthy. First, Figure 4 shows that the stock
market risk premium has a marked countercyclical component: it rises in recessions and falls
in expansions and has a correlation of -0.16 with a five quarter moving average of real GDP
growth. Second, the next two panels show the (negative of the) covariance between 1+1
and +1 − +1 (middle panel) and the (negative of the) covariance between 2+1
and +1 − +1 (bottom panel). The covariance with 2+1 is much larger than that
with 1+1 because the former has a much larger standard deviation. (Given our parameter
estimates, the variable in parentheses of 2+1 is raised to a large number in absolute value.)
However, both components of the pricing kernel display a countercyclical correlation with
the excess stock market return, rising in recessions and falling in expansions.
   Third, the countercyclicality of − (+1  +1 − +1 )  (+1 )  is attribut-

                                                23
able to countercyclicality in the correlation, − (+1  +1 − +1 )  (+1 ) 
but also to countercyclical heteroskedasticity in the pricing kernel and in excess returns. Fig-
ure 5 plots the five-quarter moving average of − (+1  +1 − +1 )  (+1 )
(top panel), of the standard deviation of +1 ,  (+1 ) (middle panel) and of the stan-
dard deviation of the excess return,  (+1 − +1 ). All three components rise
sharply in recessions and fall in booms. The correlation component has a correlation of -0.17
with real GDP growth, but the standard deviation of the pricing kernel is even more coun-
tercyclical, having a correlation with real GDP growth of -0.26. The correlation between the
standard deviation of excess returns and real GDP growth is -0.18.


5.2      Model Comparison
In this section we address the question of how well the EZW recursive utility model explains
asset pricing data relative to competing specifications. We use the methodology provided
by Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), which allows all stochastic discount factor models to be
treated as misspecified proxies for the true unknown SDF.
   Hansen and Jagannathan suggest that we compare the pricing errors of various candidate
SDF  () models by choosing each model’s parameters, , to minimize the quadratic form
g () ≡ { ()}0 G−1                                               0
                        (), where  () = (1 ()    ()) is the vector of the sample
                                             P
average of pricing errors (i.e.,  () = 1 =1  () − 1 for  = 1  ), and G is the
sample second moment matrix of the  asset returns upon which the models are evaluated
                                         P
(i.e., the ( )-the element of G is 1 =1   for   = 1  ). The measure of model
                                                                                          q
misspecification is then the square root of this minimized quadratic form,  ≡ g (b),    
which gives the maximum pricing error per unit norm on any portfolio of the  assets
studied, and delivers a metric suitable for model comparison. It is also a measure of the
distance between the candidate SDF proxy, and the set of all admissible stochastic discount
factors (Hansen and Jagannathan
                     q          (1997)). We refer to the square root of this minimized
quadratic form,  ≡ g (b), as the Hansen-Jagannathan distance, or HJ distance for
                             
short.
    We also compute a conditional version of the distance metric that incorporates con-
                                                       P
ditioning information  . In this case,  () = 1 =1 [(+1 () +1 − 1 ) ⊗  ] and
         P
G ≡ 1 =1 (+1 ⊗  ) (+1 ⊗  )0 . Because the number of test assets increases quickly
with the dimension of   we use just a single instrument  =   This instrument is
useful because it has been shown elsewhere to contain significant predictive power for re-


                                                24
turns on the size and book-market sorted portfolios used in this empirical study (Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001b)). We refer to the Hansen-Jagannathan distance metric that incorporates
conditioning information as the conditional HJ distance, and likewise refer to the distance
without conditioning information as the unconditional HJ distance.
       An important advantage of this procedure is that the second moment matrix of returns
delivers an objective function that is invariant to the initial choice of asset returns. The iden-
tity and other fixed weighting matrices do not share this property. Kandel and Stambaugh
(1995) have suggested that asset pricing tests using these other fixed weighting matrices can
be highly sensitive to the choice of test assets. Using the second moment matrix helps to
avert this problem.
       We compare the specification errors of the estimated EZW recursive utility model to those
of the time-separable, constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) power utility model (3) and to
two alternative asset pricing models that have been studied in the literature: the three-factor,
portfolio-based asset pricing model of Fama and French (1993), and the approximately linear,
conditional, or “scaled” consumption-based capital asset pricing model explored in Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001b). These models are both linear stochastic discount factor models
taking the form
                                                         X
                                                         
                                      +1 () = 0 +           +1                           (25)
                                                         =1

where +1 are variable factors, and the coeﬃcients 0 and  are treated as free parameters
to be estimated. Fama and French develop an empirical three-factor model ( = 3), with
variable factors related to firm size (market capitalization), book equity-to-market equity,
and the aggregate stock market. These factors are the “small-minus-big” (+1 ) portfo-
lio return, the “high-minus-low” (+1 ) portfolio return, and the market return, +1 ,
respectively.13 The Fama-French pricing kernel is an empirical model not motivated from
any specific economic model of preferences. It nevertheless serves as a benchmark because it
has displayed unusual success in explaining the cross section of mean equity returns (Fama
and French (1993), Fama and French (1996)). The model explored by Lettau and Ludvig-
son (2001b) can be interpreted as a “scaled” or conditional consumption CAPM (“scaled
  13
         is the diﬀerence between the returns on small and big stock portfolios with the same weight-
average book-to-market equity.   is the diﬀerence between returns on high and low book-to-market
equity portfolios with the same weighted-average size. Further details on these variables can be found in
Fama and French (1993). We follow Fama and French and use the CRSP value-weighted return as a proxy
for the market portfolio,  . The data are taken from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth web page (see the
Appendix).


                                                    25
CCAPM” hereafter) and also has three variable factors ( = 3), d
                                                                  d
                                                                         · ∆ log +1 , and
∆ log +1  Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) show that such a model can be thought of as a
linear approximation to any consumption-based CAPM (CCAPM) in which risk-premia vary
over time.
      To insure that the SDF proxies we explore preclude arbitrage opportunities over all assets
in our sample (including derivative securities), the estimated SDF must always be positive.
The SDF of the time-separable CRRA utility model and of the EZW recursive utility model
is always positive, thus these models are arbitrage free. By contrast, the SDFs of the linear
comparison models may often take on large negative values, and are therefore not arbitrage
free. In order to avoid comparisons between models that are arbitrage free and those that
are not, we restrict the parameters of the linear SDF to those that produce a positive SDF
in every period. Although we cannot guarantee that the linear SDFs will always be positive
out-of-sample, we can at minimum choose parameters so as to insure that they are positive
in sample, and therefore suitable for pricing derivative claims in sample.
      In practice, the set of parameters that deliver positive SDFs is not closed, so it is con-
venient to include limit points by choosing among parameters  that deliver nonnegative
SDFs. To do so, we choose the unknown parameters  = (0  1    )0 of the linear mod-
els to minimize the squared HJ distance for that model, subject to the constraint that
the SDF proxy be nonnegative in every period of our sample. In the computation of the
                                                                P
HJ distance metric, this implies that we restrict  () ≡ 1 =1 [{+1 ()}+ +1 −1 ] or
           P
 () ≡ 1 =1 [({+1 ()}+ +1 −1 ) ⊗  ], where {+1 ()}+ = max {0 +1 ()} 
      For the EZW recursive utility model, the SDF is always positive and the restriction is
nonbinding. The HJ distance for the EZW model (15) is computed by using the parameter
estimates obtained from the two-step procedure described in Section 3, for the case in which
W = G−1
      in the second step GMM estimation of the finite-dimensional parameters δ =
(  )0 . Notice that this drastically restricts the number of parameters in the EZW model
that are chosen to minimize the HJ distance. In particular, we choose only the finite-
dimensional parameters δ = (  )0 of the EZW model to minimize the HJ distance—the
parameters of the nonparametric  () function are chosen to minimize the SMD criterion (19).
Note that this places the EZW model (15) at a disadvantage because the sieve parameters of
the unknown function  () are not chosen to minimize the HJ criterion, which is the measure
of model misspecification. By contrast all of the comparison models’ parameters are chosen
to minimize the HJ criterion.14 To rank competing models, we apply an AIC penalty to the
 14
      Recall that the SMD minimization gives greater weight to moments that are more highly correlated with


                                                     26
HJ criterion of each model, for the number of free parameters  chosen to minimize the HJ
distance. The HJ distances for all models are reported in Table 3.15
   Table
     q 3 reports the measure of specification error given by the HJ distance (“HJ Dist”),
 ≡ g (b), for all the models discussed above. Several general patterns emerge from the
results. First, for both the representative agent version of the model and the representative
stockholder version of the model, the estimated EZW recursive utility model always displays
smaller specification error than the time-separable CRRA model, but greater specification
error than the Fama-French model. This is true regardless of whether the unconditional or
conditional HJ distance is used to compare models. The unconditional HJ distance for the
EZW recursive specification is 0.449, about 13 percent smaller than that of the time-separable
CRRA model, but about 26 percent larger than the Fama-French model. When models are
compared according to the conditional HJ distance, the distance metric for the recursive
model is only 15 percent larger than that of the Fama-French model. Second, the EZW
model performs better than than the scaled CCAPM: the HJ distance is smaller when models
are compared on the basis of either the unconditional or conditional HJ distance, regardless
of which measure of consumption is used.16 Third, when the representative stockholder
version of the model is estimated, the recursive utility model performs better than every
model except the Fama-French model according to both the conditional and unconditional
distance metrics. These results are encouraging for the recursive utility framework, because
they suggest that the model’s ability to fit the data is in a comparable range with other
models that have shown particular success in explaining the cross-section of expected stock
returns.
    Note that the HJ distances computed so as to insure that the SDF proxies are nonneg-
the instruments  (w ), while the HJ minimization matches unconditional moments.
  15
     The adjusted criterion function (with AIC penalty) is
                                             r
                                                     # param
                                               2 +         
                                                        
where “# param” refers to the number of free parameters  chosen to minimize the Hansen-Jagannathan
distance.
  16
     The estimated HJ distances for the linear scaled CCAPM are larger than reported in previous work
(e.g., Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b)) due to the restriction that the SDF proxy be positive. Although the
scaled CCAPM does a good job of assigning the right prices to size and book-market sorted equity returns,
its linearity implies that it can assign negative prices to some positive derivative payoﬀs on those assets.
This is not surprising, since linear models—typically implemented as approximations of nonlinear models for
use in specific applications—are not designed to price derivative claims.



                                                      27
ative, are in principle distinct from an alternative distance metric suggested by Hansen and
Jagannathan (1997), denoted “HJ+ Dist,” which restricts the set of admissible stochastic
discount factors to be nonnegative. In practice, however, the two distance metrics are quite
similar. Estimates of “HJ+ Dist” are reported in Table 4.17


5.3       Fixing the EIS = 1
Several authors have focused on the cross-sectional implications of EZW preferences when the
EIS, −1 , is restricted to unity (e.g., Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), Malloy, Moskowitz, and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2009)). Malloy et. al., conjecture that risk-aversion estimates identified
from a cross-section of returns are unlikely to be greatly aﬀected by the value of the EIS.
To investigate this possibility in our setting, we repeated our estimation fixing  = 1. The
results are presented in Table 5.
      The results are somewhat sensitive to the weighting matrix used in the second step
estimation. For example, in an estimation of the representative agent version of the model
with  = 1 and W = I , the relative risk aversion coeﬃcient  is estimated to be 20, much
lower than the value of almost 60 reached when  is freely estimated (Table 2). But when
W=G−1
    , the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion  is estimated to be 60, precisely the same
value obtained when  is left unrestricted. In addition, the HJ distance is about the same
when  = 1, equal to 0.448 compared to 0.451 when  is unrestricted (the HJ distance is
slightly smaller when  = 1 because, when  is fixed, one fewer parameter is estimated,
reducing the AIC penalty). Thus, the results using W=G−1
                                                       are largely supportive of the
conjecture of Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009). We note, however, that if
the model with  = 1 is misspecified, parameter estimates can be sensitive to the objective
function minimized, as we find here.
      We find qualitatively similar results in an estimation of the representative stockholder
version of the model. In this case, when  = 1 and W = I , the relative risk aversion
coeﬃcient  is estimated to be 20, the same value obtained when  is left unrestricted. This
is not surprising because the unrestricted value of  is already quite close to unity, equal to
0.9. On the other hand, when W=G−1
                                 ,  is estimated to be 10, considerably smaller than
 17
      Following Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), HJ+ is computed numerically as
                                (               h
                                                                                         )12
                                               X           ¡               ¢+2       i
                                                         2
                      +
                            =       max (1 )    (+1 ) − +1 − 0 +1     − 20            
                                ∈R
                                              =1

     ¡              ¢+    ©                  ª
where +1 − 0 +1 = max +1 − 0 +1  0 


                                                         28
the value of 17 estimated when  is unrestricted with a point estimate of 0.68. But the HJ
distance is 0.469 when  = 1, only slightly larger than the value of 0.463 found when  is
unrestricted. We conclude that the model’s cross-sectional performance, as measured by the
HJ distance, is not sensitive to fixing the EIS at unity.


6     The Return to Aggregate Wealth and Human Wealth
In this section, we investigate the estimated EZW recursive utility model’s implications for
the return to aggregate wealth, +1 , and the return to human wealth, denoted +1
hereafter. The return to aggregate wealth represents a claim to future consumption and is in
general unobservable. However, it can be inferred from our estimates of   bynequating
                                                                                       ³ ´o  the
marginal rate of substitution (5), evaluated at the estimated parameter values δ  b b · δ
                                                                                           b ,
with its theoretical representation based on consumption growth and the return to aggregate
wealth (6):
                               ⎛                        ⎞−    ( µ
              µ          ¶−            +1 +1                        ¶− ) 1−
                                                                               1−
                                                                                   ½        ¾ −
                  +1         ⎝        +1                      +1               1      1−
                                       ³               ´⎠     =                                 
                                 R       +1 +1                              +1
                                            +1 


    If, in addition, we explicitly model human wealth as part of the aggregate wealth portfolio,
the framework also has implications for the return to human wealth,  . We do so by
following Campbell (1996), who assumes that the return to aggregate wealth is a portfolio
weighted average of the unobservable return to human wealth and the return to financial
wealth. Specifically, Campbell starts with the relationship

                                        +1 = (1 −   ) +1 +   +1                      (26)

where   is the ratio of human wealth to aggregate wealth, and +1 is the gross simple
return on nonhuman wealth ( refers to financial asset wealth). A diﬃculty with (26) is that
the wealth shares may in principal vary over time. Campbell deals with this by linearizing
(26) around the means of   , the log return on nonhuman asset wealth, and the log return
on human wealth, assuming that the means of the latter two are the same. Under these
assumptions, an approximate expression for the log return on aggregate wealth may be
obtained with constant portfolio shares. Unfortunately, this approximation assumes that
the means of human and nonhuman wealth returns are the same. As a start, we instead
adopt the crude assumption that portfolio shares in (26) are constant:

                                         +1 = (1 − ) +1 + +1 

                                                               29
Such an assumption is presumably a reasonable approximation if portfolio shares between
human and nonhuman wealth are relatively stable over quarterly horizons. Given observa-
tions on +1 from our estimation of the EZW recursive utility model, and given a value
for , the return to human wealth, +1 , may be inferred.
   The exercise in this section is similar in spirit to the investigation of Lustig and Van
Nieuwerburgh (2008). These authors, following Campbell (1996), investigate a loglinear
version of the EZW recursive utility model under the assumption that asset returns and
consumption are jointly lognormal and homoskedastic. With these assumptions, the authors
back out the human wealth return from observable aggregate consumption data, and find
a strong negative correlation between the return to asset wealth and the return to human
wealth. Our approach generalizes their exercise in that it provides an estimate of the fully
nonlinear EZW model without requiring the assumption that asset returns and consumption
are jointly lognormal and homoskedastic. An important question of this study is whether our
approach leads to significantly diﬀerent implications for both the aggregate wealth return
and the human wealth return.
   Tables 6 and 7 present summary statistics for our estimated aggregate wealth return,
+1 and human wealth return, +1  Following Campbell (1996) and Lustig and Van
Nieuwerburgh (2008), we use the CRSP value-weighted stock market return to measure
+1 . The statistics for +1 are presented for two diﬀerent values of the share of human
wealth in aggregate wealth:  = 0333 and  = 0667. There are two diﬀerent sets of
estimates, depending on whether W = I or W = G−1
                                               in the second-step estimation of the
EZW model. Summary statistics for the W = I case are presented in Table 5, and for the
W = G−1
      case in Table 6. For comparison, summary statistics on the CRSP value-weighted
return, +1 are also presented.
   Several conclusions can be drawn from the results in Tables 6 and 7. First, the return
to aggregate wealth is always considerably less volatile than the aggregate stock market re-
turn. For example, in Table 6, the annualized standard deviation of +1 is 0.01 in the
representative agent model and 0.036 in the representative stockholder model. By contrast,
the annualized standard deviation of +1 is 0.165. Second, in the representative agent
model, the mean of +1 is less than the mean of +1 , but is larger in the repre-
sentative stockholder model. Since the mean of +1 is a weighted average of the means
of +1 and +1 , and given that the mean of +1 is 0.084, the mean of the
human wealth return can be quite small if, as in the representative agent model, the mean of
aggregate wealth is small. This is especially so when the share of human wealth takes on the


                                             30
smaller value of 0.333. Indeed, if the mean of aggregate wealth is suﬃciently small (as it is in
Table 7 where it equals 0.024), the gross return on human wealth can even be less than one,
so that the simple net return is negative. Third, the return to human wealth is a weighted
average (where the weights exceed one in absolute value) of the returns to aggregate wealth
and the return to asset wealth. Thus, unless the correlation between the stock market return
and the aggregate wealth return is suﬃciently high, the return to human wealth can be quite
volatile, especially when  is small. This occurs in the representative stockholder versions of
the model when  = 0333.
    Finally, the results show that the only way to reconcile a relatively stable aggregate
wealth return with a volatile stock market return is to have the correlation between the
human wealth return and the stock market return be negative and large in absolute value.
The correlation between +1 and +1 ranges from -0.764 in Table 7 when  = 0667,
to -0.996 in Table 8 when  = 0333 These numbers are strikingly close to those reported
in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) for the cases where the EIS exceeds one.


7     Conclusion
In this paper we undertake a semiparametric econometric evaluation of the Epstein-Zin-
Weil recursive utility model, a framework upon which a large and growing body of theoretical
work in macroeconomics and finance is based. We conduct estimation of the EZW model
without employing an observable financial market return as a proxy for the unobservable
aggregate wealth return, without linearizing the model, and without placing tight paramet-
ric restrictions on either the law of motion or joint distribution of consumption and asset
returns, or on the value of key preference parameters such as the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. We present estimates of all the preference parameters of the EZW model, eval-
uate the model’s ability to fit asset return data relative to competing asset pricing models,
and investigate the implications of such estimates for the unobservable aggregate wealth
return and human wealth return.
    Using quarterly data on consumption growth, assets returns and instruments, we find
evidence that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption diﬀers considerably
from the inverse of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, and that the EZW recursive utility
model displays less model misspecification than the familiar time-separable CRRA power
utility model. Taken together, these findings suggest that the consumption and asset return
data we study are better explained by the recursive generalization of the standard CRRA


                                              31
model than by the special case of this model in which preferences are time-separable and the
coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion equals the inverse of the EIS.
   Our results can be compared to those in the existing the literature. For example, we
find that the estimated relative risk aversion parameter ranges from 17-60, with considerably
higher values for the representative agent representation of the model than the representative
stockholder representation. These findings echo those in the approximate loglinear version of
the model where the EIS is restricted to unity, studied by Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2009). On the other hand, we find that the estimated elasticity of intertemporal
substitution is typically above one, regardless of which consumption measure is employed.
Finally, the empirical estimates imply that the unobservable aggregate wealth return is
weakly correlated with the CRSP value-weighted stock market return and only one-tenth to
one-fifth as volatile. These findings suggest that the return to human wealth must be strongly
negatively correlated with the aggregate stock market return, similar to results reported for
an approximate loglinear version of the model studied by Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2008).
   As an asset pricing model, the EZW recursive utility framework includes an additional
risk factor for explaining asset returns, above and beyond the single consumption growth risk
factor found in the time-separable, CRRA power utility framework. The added risk factor
in the EZW recursive utility model is a multiplicative term involving the continuation value
of the future consumption plan relative to its conditional expected value today. This factor
can in principal add volatility to the marginal rate of substitution in consumption, helping
to explain the behavior of equity return data (Hansen and Jagannathan (1991)). One way
this factor can be volatile is if the conditional mean of consumption growth varies over long
horizons. The estimation procedure employed here allows us to assess the plausibility of
this implication from the consumption and return data alone, without imposing restrictions
on the data generating process for consumption. The results suggest that the additional
risk factor in the EZW model has suﬃcient dynamics so as to provide a better description
of the data than the CRRA power utility model, implying that the conditional mean of
consumption growth is unlikely to be constant over time (Kocherlakota (1990)). At the
same time, the added volatility coming from continuation utility is modest and must be
magnified by a relatively high value for risk aversion in order to fit the equity return data.




                                              32
8     Appendix
This appendices consist of several parts: Appendix 1 describes the data. Appendix 2 dis-
cusses how the unknown continuation value function is approximated, including discussion
                      
of the arguments of   
                         ,   and the choice of sieve function to approximate  (·). Appendix 3
provides details of the two-step semiparametric estimation procedure, including the imple-
mentation of the SMD estimator as an instance of GMM.

                                Appendix 1: Data Description

    The sources and description of each data series we use are listed below.

AGGREGATE CONSUMPTION
Aggregate consumption is measured as expenditures on nondurables and services, excluding
shoes and clothing. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted at annual rates, in billions
of chain- weighted 2000 dollars. The components are chain-weighted together, and this
series is scaled up so that the sample mean matches the sample mean of total personal
consumption expenditures. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Economic Analysis.
    STOCKHOLDER CONSUMPTION
The definition of stockholder status, the consumption measure, and the sample selection
follow Vissing-Jorgensen (2002). Consumption is measured as nondurables and services
expenditures. Details on this construction can be found in Appendix A of Malloy, Moskowitz,
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009). We use their “simple” measure of stockholders, based on
responses to the survey indicating positive holdings of “stocks, bonds, mutual funds and
other such securities.” Nominal consumption values are deflated by the BLS deflator for
nondurables for urban households. Our source is the Consumer Expenditure Survey.

POPULATION
A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per
capita disposable income. Consumption, wealth, labor income, and dividends are in per
capita terms. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

PRICE DEFLATOR
Real asset returns are deflated by the implicit chain-type price deflator (2000=100) given for
the consumption measure described above. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of Economic Analysis.


                                                33
MONTHLY INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION INDEX
Industrial production is measured as the seasonally adjusted total industrial production
index (2002=100). Our source is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
   MONTHLY SERVICES EXPENDITURES
Measured as personal consumption expenditures on services, billions of dollars; months sea-
sonally adjusted at annual rates. Nominal consumption is deflated by the implicit price
deflator for services expenditures. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

ASSET RETURNS

   • 3-Month Treasury Bill Rate: secondary market, averages of business days, discount
     basis percent; Source: H.15 Release — Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

   • 6 size/book-market returns: Six portfolios, monthly returns from July 1926-December
     2001. The portfolios, which are constructed at the end of each June, are the inter-
     sections of 2 portfolios formed on size (market equity, ME) and 3 portfolios formed
     on the ratio of book equity to market equity (BE/ME). The size breakpoint for
     year t is the median NYSE market equity at the end of June of year t. BE/ME
     for June of year t is the book equity for the last fiscal year end in t-1 divided by
     ME for December of t-1. The BE/ME breakpoints are the 30th and 70th NYSE
     percentiles. Source: Kenneth French’s homepage, http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/
     pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.


PROXY FOR LOG CONSUMPTION-WEALTH RATIO, d
                                         
The proxy for the log consumption-wealth ratio is computed as described in Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001a).

RELATIVE BILL RATE, 
The relative bill rate is the 3-month treasury bill yield less its four-quarter moving average.
Our source is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

LOG EXCESS RETURNS ON S&P 500 INDEX:  
SPEX is the log diﬀerence in the Standard and Poor 500 stock market index, less the log
3-month treasury bill yield. Our source is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

 , , 


                                              34
The Fama/French benchmark factors, Rm, SMB, and HML, are constructed from six size/book-
to-market benchmark portfolios that do not include hold ranges and do not incur transaction
costs. Rm, the return on the market, is the value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and
NASDAQ stocks. Source: Kenneth French’s homepage,
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

         Appendix 2: Approximation to Continuation Value Function  ()

   The arguments of  (·). If the
                                ³ Markov structure
                                          ´         is linear, as in (9) and (10), we give
                                −1 
assumptions under which  =  −1  −1  First note that the dynamic system (9) and
(10) converges asymptotically to time-invariant innovations representation taking the form

                                     ∆+1 =  + b
                                                   + +1                                               (27)
                                      b+1 = b
                                              + +1                                                 (28)

where the scalar variable +1 ≡ ∆+1 − ∆b              b )+C²+1 , 
                                          +1 =  ( −             b denotes a linear least
                                                                                                           −1
squares projection of  onto ∆  ∆−1  ∆−∞ , and  ≡ (DC0 +  ) (  + CC0 )                        
where  solves
                         = ( − )2  + (D − C) (D − C)0 

(See Hansen and Sargent (2007).) The representation above shows that the state variable
                                                                                                   
b replaces  as the argument of the function over which
                                                                       
                                                                             is defined. Assume      
                                                                                                          is an
invertible function  (b
                        ). Then,                     µ        ¶
                                                  −1       
                                         b = 
                                                                   
                                                           
>From (28) we have
                                
                                   =  (b
                                        ) =  (b
                                                −1   )
                                
                                       µ     µ      ¶ ¶
                                          −1   −1
                                   =                                                                (29)
                                               −1
for some function  By inverting (27), we obtain

                                             b−1 )
                       =  (exp (∆+1 )  
                                µ   µ ∙        ¸¶         µ      ¶¶
                                                     −1   −1
                           =  exp ln                                                                  (30)
                                         −1               −1
       ³         ´    h      i                                                                ³               ´
                                                                                                  −1
where  −1
           
               b = ln −1
                        
                              −−b
                                  . Plugging (30) into (29), we have               
                                                                                    
                                                                                         =             
                                                                                                  −1 −1
                                                                                                               ,
for  : R2 → R Observe that if the innovations in (9) and (10) are positively correlated,

                                                  35


     may display negative serial dependence. The linear model implies that  is a monotonic
               
function of   −1
                   
     If the stochastic process for consumption growth is a nonlinear function of a hidden
first-order Markov process  , the function  can take on more general functional forms,
potentially displaying nonmonotonicity in both its arguments. For example, consider the
functionally non-linear state space model:

                                   +1 −  =  ( ) + +1                              (31)
                                         +1 =  ( ) + +1                            (32)

where  (+1 ) =  (+1 ) = 0, Var(+1 ) =     =  ,  (+1 +1 ) =   and
 ( ) and  ( ) are no longer necessarily linear functions of the state variable  . Harvey
(1989) shows that, under the assumption that the innovations in (31)-(32) are Gaussian, an
approximate innovations representation can be obtained by linearizing the model and then
applying a modification of the usual Kalman filter to the resulting linearized representation
                  b|−1 denote the conditional mean of   If the functions  ( ) and  ( )
of (31)-(32). Let 
                                     b|−1 , an innovations representation may be obtained
are expanded in Taylor series around 
which takes the form:
                                         ¡                                ¢
                            b+1| =  
                                          b|−1 + |−1 +1 −1 +1                     (33)
                                        ¡        ¢
                           ∆+1 =      b|−1 + +1                                      (34)
                         ¡       ¢
where +1    = ∆+1 −  b|−1 and |−1 solves a suitable recursion applied to the linearized
state space representation corresponding to the dynamic system (31)-(32):
                                   µ       n             o2     ¶
                                 2
                               e                  e
                    +1| =  |−1 − |−1  +      −1
                                                                  + 
                               e 2 +1| + 2+1 σ  +   
                           = 
      e and 
where      e are partial derivatives of  and  respectively. See Harvey (1989), Ch., 3.
   Given invertibility,
             ³           from
                         ´    either (27)-(28) or (33)-(34), we again obtain the implication
that  =  −1   , for some  : R2 → R, but unlike the case for the linear Markov
                −1 −1

model, the function  may display nonmonotonicities as well as nonlinearities. The as-
sumptions embedded in this example are meant to be illustrative: more general nonlinear
state space models and distributional assumptions are likely to produce more complicated
                                   
dynamic relationships between      
                                        and its own lagged value, as well as consumption growth.
     B-spline Approximation of  (·) We use cubic B-splines to approximate the unknown
continuation value-consumption ratio function because unlike other basis functions (e.g.,

                                                  36
polynomials) they are shape-preserving (Chui (1992)). The multivariate sieve functions
{ (· ·) :  = 1   } are implemented as a tensor product cubic B-spline taking the form:

                                       1 X
                                       X   2         ³        ´      
                      ( ) = 0 +                −  +     (    +  − )            (35)
                                       =1   =1
                                                                2       ∆2
                       +1
where  ≡     
                 ,    ≡  
                              ,  () is a B-spline of degree , and  are parameters to be
                           
estimated. The       term 2 recenter the function, which insures that the function is shape-
preserving (preserving nonnegativity, monotonicity and convexity of the unknown function
to be approximated). For consumption growth the parameters ∆2 and  are set to guarantee
that the support of  stays within the bounds [097 104] since this is the range for which
we observe variation in gross consumption growth data. This insures that as  goes from 1
to 2 ,  is always evaluated only over the support [097 104]. ∆2 fixes the support of
the spline. By shifting  and , the spline is moved on the real line.
   We use a cardinal -spline given by
                      X        µ ¶                                        µ ¶
                 1                                                               !
     () =              (−1)       [max (0  − )]−1             with     ≡            
             ( − 1)! =0                                                      ( − )!!

The order of the spline, , for our application is set to 3. For the dimensionality of the B-
spline sieve, we set 1 = 2 = 3. Because asymptotic theory only provides guidance about
the rate at which 1 · 2 + 1 must increase with the sample size  , other considerations
must be used to judge how best to set this dimensionality. The bigger are 1 and 2 , the
greater is the number of parameters that must be estimated, therefore the dimensionality
of the sieve is naturally limited by the size of our data set.
                                                           ³ With 1 = 2 = 3, the              ´0
dimension of the total unknown parameter vector, (δ ) =    0  11   1 2  00 ,
                                                        0

is 14, estimated using a sample of size  = 213. In practice, we obtained very similar results
setting 1 = 2 = 4.


            Appendix 3. Semiparametric Two-Step Estimation Procedure

   We use D ≡ [ ] × [ ] × [ ] to denote the compact parameter space for the finite-
dimensional unknown parameters δ = (  )0 , and V denotes the function space for the
infinite dimensional unknown function  (). In the application we assume that V is a Holder
ball:

        V ≡ { : (0 ∞) × (0 ∞) → (0 ∞) : kkΛ ≤   ∞}           for some   1      (36)

                                                      37
here the norm kkΛ is defined as

                                                                |1 2 ( ) − 1 2 ( )|
          ||||Λ ≡ sup |( )| + max              sup           p                             −[]
                                                                                                         ∞
                                    1 +2 =[] ()6=()                 2              2
                                                                       ( − ) + ( − )

where [] denotes the largest non-negative integer such that []  , and (1  2 ) is any pair
of non-negative integers such that 1 + 2 = [].
     For any candidate value δ = (  )0 ∈D, we define

                             ∗ (·; δ) ≡ arg inf {(w  δ  )0 (w  δ  )}
                                               ∈V

where (w  δ  )0 ≡ {(z+1  δ  )|w } = (1 (w  δ  )   (w  δ  )) and  (w  δ  ) ≡
{  (z+1  δ  )|w } for  = 1  . Next we define the pseudo true value δ ∗ = ( ∗  ∗  ∗ )0 ∈D
as
          δ ∗W ≡ arg min [ {(z+1  δ  ∗ (· δ)) ⊗ x }]0 W [ {(z+1  δ  ∗ (· δ)) ⊗ x }] 
                      ∈D

where W is some positive definite weighting matrix and x is any chosen measurable function
of w .
     We say the model is correctly specified if

                       {  (z+1  δ    ∗ (· δ )) ⊗ x } = 0            = 1                    (37)

When the model is correctly specified, we have δ ∗W = δ  and  ∗ (· δ ) =  , and these
true parameter values δ    ∗ (· δ ) do not depend on the choice of the weighting matrix
W. However, when the model could be misspecified, then the pseudo true values δ ∗W and
 ∗ (· δ ∗W ) typically will depend on the weighting matrix W.
     Two-step Semiparametric Estimation Procedure. In Step One, for any candidate value
δ = (  )0 ∈D, we estimate  ∗ (·; δ) by the sieve minimum distance (SMD) estimator
b (·; δ):
                                        1X
                                            
                    b
                     (· δ) = arg min        b   δ  )0 (w
                                               (w            b   δ  )       (38)
                                  ∈V   =1

      b   δ  )0 = (
where (w              b 1 (w  δ  )  
                                              b  (w  δ  )) is some nonparametric estimate of
(w  δ  ), and V is a sieve space that approximates V. In the application we let V be
the the tensor product B-spline (35) sieve space, which becomes dense in V as sample size
 → ∞.
     In Step Two, we estimate δ ∗W by minimizing a sample GMM objective function:
                           h                        i0 h                        i
              b
              δ W = arg min g (δ b (· δ) ; y ) W g ((δb (· δ) ; y )  (39)
                              ∈D


                                                        38
          ¡                              ¢0
where y = z0 +1  z02  x0  x01 denotes the vector containing all observations in the sam-
ple of size  , and W is a positive, semi-definite possibly random weighting matrix that
converges to W, also,

                                                      1X
                                                         
                       g (δ b (· δ) ; y ) =           (z+1  δ b (· δ)) ⊗ x                        (40)
                                                       =1

are the sample moment conditions.
   We have considered two kinds of GMM estimation of δ ∗W in Step Two: (i) GMM esti-
mation of δ ∗W using x = 1 as the instruments and W = G−1          as the weighting matrix,
                                    1
                                      P
where the ( )th element of G is  =1   for   = 1  . This leads to the GMM
estimate using HJ criterion. (ii) GMM estimation of δ ∗W using x = 1 as the instruments
and W = I as the weighting matrix, where I is the  ×  identity matrix.
   The SMD procedure in Step One has been proposed respectively in Newey and Powell
(2003) for nonparametric IV regression, and in Ai and Chen (2003) for semi/nonparametric
conditional moment restriction models. The SMD procedure needs a nonparametric estima-
    b   δ  ) for (w  δ  ). There are many nonparametric procedures such as kernel,
tor (w
local linear regression, nearest neighbor and various sieve methods that can be used to esti-
mate  (w  δ  )  = 1  . In our application we consider the sieve Least Squares (LS)
estimator. For each fixed (w  δ  ), we approximate  (w  δ  ) by
                                             
                                             X
                          (w  δ  ) ≈           (δ  )0 (w )    = 1  
                                              =1

where 0 some known fixed basis functions, and  → ∞ slowly as  → ∞ We then
estimate the sieve coeﬃcients { } simply by OLS regression:
                                                                                    
          1X                          X                                              X
             
                                                              0
    min         [  (z+1  δ  ) −      (δ  )0 (w )] [  (z+1  δ  ) −      (δ  )0 (w )]
    { } 
            =1                       =1                                            =1

                                                                              P
                                           b  (w δ  ) =
and the resulting estimator is denoted as:                                      =1   b (δ  )0 (w ). In the
following we denote:  (w) = (01 (w)  0 (w))0 and P = ( (w1 )   (w ))0 , then:
                                                                                  


                               X
                               
            b  (w δ  ) =
                                      (z+1  δ  ) (w )0 (P0 P)−1  (w)       = 1           (41)
                               =1

Many known sieve bases could be used as {0 }. In our application we take the power series
and Fourier series as the  (w). The empirical findings are not sensitive to the diﬀerent

                                                         39
choice of sieve bases, and we only report the results based on power series due to the length
of the paper.
                                                                          b  (w δ  )
   GMM Implementation of SMD Estimation. When the nonparametric estimator 
is the linear sieve estimator (41), the first step SMD estimation of  ∗ (·; δ) can be alterna-
tively implemented via the following GMM criterion (42):
                                  £               ¤0           −1 £              ¤
              b (· δ) = arg min g (δ ; y ) {I ⊗ (P0 P) } g (δ ; y )                  (42)
                             ∈V

           ¡                             ¢0
where y = z0 +1  z02  w0  w10 denotes the vector containing all observations in the
sample of size  and

                                           1X
                                              
                                       
                          g (δ ; y ) =       (z+1  δ )⊗ (w )                          (43)
                                            =1

are the sample moment conditions associated with the  × 1 -vector of population un-
conditional moment conditions:  {  (z+1  δ  ∗ (· δ))0 (w )},  = 1  ,  = 1   .




                                                   40
References
Ai, C., and X. Chen (2003): “Eﬃcient Estimation of Models with Conditional Moment Restric-
  tions Containing Unknown Functions,” Econometrica, 71, 1795—1843.

         (2007): “Estimation of Possibly Misspecified Semiparametric Conditional Moment Re-
  striction Models with Diﬀerent Conditioning Variables,” Journal of Econometrics, 141, 5—43.

Andrews, D. (1994): “Asymptotics for SEmi-parametric Econometric Models via Stochastic
  Equicontinuity,” Econometrica, 62, 43—72.

Attanasio, O., and G. Weber (1989): “Intertemporal Substitution, Risk Aversion and the
  Euler Equation for Consumption,” The Economic Journal, 99, 59—73.

Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and D. Kiku (2009): “Cointegration and Consumption Risk in
  Equity Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 1343—1375.

Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and C. T. Lundblad (2005): “Consumption, Dividends, and the
  Cross-Section of Equity Returns,” Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1639—1672.

Bansal, R., A. R. Gallant, and G. Tauchen (2007): “Rational Pessimism, Rational Exuber-
  ance, and Asset Pricing Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 1005—1033.

Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron (2007): “Risks for the Long-Run: Estimation and Infer-
  ence,” Unpublished paper, Fuqua School, Duke University.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
  Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481—1509.

Campanale, C., R. Castro, and G. L. Clementi (2006): “Asset Pricing in a General Equilib-
  rium Production Economy with Chew-Dekel Risk Preferences,” Unpublished paper, New York
  University.

Campbell, J. Y. (1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal, 101,
  157—179.

        (1993): “Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data,” American Economic
  Review, 83, 487—512.

        (1996): “Understanding Risk and Return,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(2), 298—345.

         (2003): “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance
  Vol. I-B, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, pp. 803—887. Elsevier Science B.V.,
  North Holland, Amsterdam.

                                               41
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Viceira (2001): Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-
  Term Investors. Oxford Univeristy Press, London, UK.

Campbell, J. Y., and T. Voulteenaho (2005): “Good Beta, Bad Beta,” American Economic
  Review, 94(5), 1249—1275.

Chen, X. (2007): “Large Sample Sieve Estimation of Semi-Nonparameteric Models,” in Handbook
  of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6B. North Holland, Amsterdam, The
  Netherlands.

Chen, X., O. Linton, and I. van Keilegom (2003): “Estmiation of Semiparametric Models
  when the Criterion Function is Not Smooth,” Econometrica, 71, 1591—1608.

Chui, C. (1992): An Introduction to Wavelets. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Colacito, R., and M. M. Croce (2004): “Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange
  Rate,” Unpublished paper, New York University.

Croce, M. M. (2006): “Welfare Costs and Long Run Consumption Risk in a Production Econ-
  omy,” Unpublished paper, New York University.

Croce, M. M., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2010): “Investor Information, Long-Run
  Risk and the Duration of Risky Cash Flows,” Unpublished paper, New York University.

Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
  Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937—968.

           (1991): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and
  Asset Returns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 555—576.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of
  Finance, 47, 427—465.

        (1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 33, 3—56.

           (1996): “Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing Anomalies,” Journal of Finance, 51,
  55—84.

Gabaix, X., and D. Laibson (2002): “The 6-D Bias and the Equity Premium Puzzle,” in NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual: 2002, ed. by B. Bernanke, and K. Rogoﬀ, pp. 257—312. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA.

                                                42
Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides (2005): “Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding
  the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 60(2), 869—904.

Grenander, U. (1981): Abstract Inference. Wiley Series, New York, NY.

Hall, P., J. L. Horowitz, and B. Y. Jing (1995): “On Blocking Rules for the Bootstrap with
  Dependent Data,” Biometrika, 82, 561—574.

Hansen, L. P. (1982): “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methods of Moments Estimators,”
  Econometrica, 50, 1029—54.

Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, and N. Li (2008): “Consumption Strikes Back?: Measuring Long-run
  Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 260—302.

Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, N. Roussanov, and J. Lee (2007): “Intertemporal Substitution
  and Risk Aversion,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6B.
  North Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan (1991): “Restrictions on Intertemporal Marginal Rates of
  Substitution Implied by Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 225—262.

         (1997): “Assessing Specification Errors in Stochastic Discount Factor Models,” Journal
  of Finance, 52, 557—590.

Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (2006): “Fragile Beliefs and the Price of Model Uncertainty,”
  Unpublished Paper, New York University.

        (2007): Robustness. Princeton University Press forthcoming, Princeton, NJ.

Hansen, L. P., and K. Singleton (1982): “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of
  Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 50(5), 1269—86.

         (1983): “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset
  Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 91, 249—65.

Harvey, A. C. (1989): Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter. Cam-
  bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdon.

Heaton, J. (1993): “The Interaction Between Time-Nonseparable Preferences and Time Aggre-
  gation,” Econometrica, 61(2), 353—85.

Hodrick, R. (1992): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
  Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357—386.


                                              43
Horowitz, J. L. (2003): “The Bootstrap,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. J. Heckman,
  and E. Leamer, vol. 5. Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland.

Jagannathan, R., and Y. Wang (2007): “Calendar Cycles, Infrequent Decisions and the Cross
  Section of Stock Returns,” Unpublished paper, Kellog School of Management, Northwestern
  University.

Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh (1995): “Portfolio Ineﬃciency and the Cross-Section of
  Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 50, 157—184.

Kiku, D. (2005): “Is the Value Premium a Puzzle?,” Unpublished paper, Duke University.

Kocherlakota, N. R. (1990): “Disentangling the Coeﬃcient of Relative Risk Aversion from
  the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: An Irrelevance Result,” Journal of Finance, 45(1),
  175—190.

Krueger, D., and F. Kubler (2005): “Pareto Improving Social Security Reform When Financial
  Markets are Incomplete!?,” American Economic Review, 96(3), 737—755.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001a): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected
  Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815—849.

         (2001b): “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When Risk Premia are
  Time-Varying,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(6), 1238—1287.

        (2004): “Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values: Reevaluating the Wealth Eﬀect
  on Consumption,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 276—299.

        (2009): “Euler Equation Errors,” The Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(2), 255—283.

Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “The Returns on Human Capital: Good News
  on Wall Street is Bad News on Main Street,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 2097—2137.

Lustig, H., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and A. Verdelhan (2007): “The Consumption-Wealth
  Ratio: A Litmus Test for Consumption-based Asset Pricing Models,” Unpublished paper, NYU
  Stern School.

Malloy, C. J., T. J. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2009): “Long-run Stockholder
  Consumption Risk and Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, 64, 2427—2479.

Newey, W. K. (1994): “The Asymptotic Variance of Semiparametric Estimators,” Econometrica,
  62, 1349—1382.



                                               44
Newey, W. K., and J. Powell (2003): “Instrumental Variable Estimation of Nonparametric
  Models,” Econometrica, 71, 1557—1569.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987): “A Simple, Positive Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity
  and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55, 703—708.

Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider (2006): “Equilibrium Yield Curves,” in NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual: 2006, ed. by M. W. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoﬀ. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Restoy, F., and P. Weil (1998): “Approximate Equilibrium Asset Prices,” NBER Working
  paper No. 6611.

Stock, J. H., J. H. Wright, and M. Yogo (2002): “A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak
  Identification in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
  20(4), 518—528.

Tallarini, T. D. (2000): “Risk-Sensitive Real Business Cycle Models,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 45, 507—532.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and Intertemporal Substi-
  tution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825—853.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., and O. P. Attanasio (2003): “Stock Market Participation, Intetempo-
  ral Substitution and Risk-Aversion,” American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings,
  93(2), 383—391.

Weil, P. (1989): “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 24(3), 401—421.




                                              45
                                             Figure 1
            Estimated Continuation Value-Consumption Ratio, Aggregate Consumption, W=I

                                                                                                                               C       /C at 25%
                                                                                                                                t+1     t
                                                                                                                               Ct+1/Ct at median
                                                                                                                               Ct+1/Ct at 75%

                                        1.376




                                        1.374




                                        1.372
                            Vt+1/Ct+1




                                         1.37




                                        1.368




                                        1.366




                                        1.364
                                            1.36   1.362   1.364   1.366     1.368       1.37        1.372     1.374   1.376           1.378
                                                                                         V /C
                                                                                          t   t




          Estimated Continuation Value-Consumption Ratio, Aggregate Consumption, W=(GT)-1
                                        1.9
                                                                                                                                   C     /C at 25%
                                                                                                                                    t+1     t
                                                                                                                                   Ct+1/Ct at median
                                                                                                                                   Ct+1/Ct at 75%
                                1.895




                                   1.89




                                1.885




                                   1.88
                    Vt+1/Ct+1




                                1.875




                                   1.87




                                1.865




                                   1.86




                                1.855
                                   1.855           1.86    1.865      1.87       1.875            1.88       1.885     1.89             1.895          1.9
                                                                                         Vt/Ct




Notes: The figure plots the estimated continuation value-consumption ratio against lagged values of the
continuation value with consumption growth held alternately held at the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles in the
sample. Consumption is measured as aggregate consumption, “W=” indicates the weighting matrix used in
second-step estimation. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005Q1.
                                              Figure 2
            Estimated Continuation Value-Consumption Ratio, Stockholder Consumption, W=I

                                 4.94

                                 4.93
                                                                      C   /C at 25%
                                                                       t+1    t
                                 4.92                                 Ct+1/Ct at median
                                                                      C   /C at 75%
                                                                       t+1    t
                                 4.91
                     Vt+1/Ct+1




                                  4.9

                                 4.89

                                 4.88

                                 4.87

                                 4.86


                                    4.85                       4.9                                  4.95
                                                              Vt/Ct



         Estimated Continuation Value-Consumption Ratio, Stockholder Consumption, W=(GT)-1


                                  3


                            2.95
                                                                             C    /C at 25%
                                                                              t+1    t
                                 2.9                                         Ct+1/Ct at median
                                                                             C    /C at 75%
                                                                              t+1    t
                            2.85
                     t+1
                    /C




                                 2.8
                     t+1
                    V




                            2.75


                                 2.7


                            2.65


                                 2.6
                                   2.55    2.6   2.65   2.7   2.75     2.8          2.85      2.9    2.95
                                                              Vt/Ct

Notes: The figure plots the estimated continuation value-consumption ratio against lagged values of the
continuation value with consumption growth held alternately held at the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles in the
sample. Consumption is measured as stockholder consumption, “W=” indicates the weighting matrix used
in second-step estimation. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005Q1.
                                                              Figure 3
                                       Cyclical Properties of Estimated EZW Pricing Kernel

                                                            Mt=M1,t*M2,t, GDP
                                3
                                                                                                   Corr=−0.261
                                2
          Standardized Units




                                1

                                0

                               −1
                                                                                                    recession
                               −2                                                                   M
                                                                                                    GDP
                               −3
                                1950   1960          1970              1980        1990          2000


                                                               M1,t, GDP
                                3
                                                                                                   Corr=−0.476
                                2
          Standardized Units




                                1

                                0

                               −1                                                                   recession
                                                                                                    M1
                               −2
                                                                                                    GDP
                               −3
                                1950   1960          1970              1980        1990          2000


                                                               M , GDP
                                                                 2,t
                                3
                                                                                                   Corr=−0.26
                                2
          Standardized Units




                                1

                                0

                               −1                                                                   recession
                                                                                                    M2
                               −2
                                                                                                    GDP
                               −3
                                1950   1960          1970              1980        1990          2000




Notes: The top panel of this figure plots the estimated pricing kernel, Mt=M1,t*M2,t, as the product of two
components, M1,t and M2,t, along with real gross domestic product (GDP) growth over time. M1,t
corresponds to the conventional CRRA piece, M 1,t 1   C t 1 / C t  , M2,t corresponds to multiplicative
                                                                        



                                             Vt 1 / C t 1 C t 1 / C t  
                                                                                 

piece added by EZW preferences, M 2,t 1                                        . “Corr =” indicates the correlation
                                             Vt 1 / C t 1 C t 1 / C t  
between the pricing kernel or one of its components and GDP growth. Shaded areas denote a recession as
designated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The SDF plotted is estimated using aggregate
consumption, with W=I as the weighting matrix in second-step estimation. The sample is 1952:Q1-
2005Q1.
                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                 Cyclical Properties of Market Risk Premium Implied by EZW Estimation

                                                                        −COV(M,RCRSP−Rf)/E[M] , GDP
                                       0.05
       Raw Units, 5Q moving average




                                                                                                                              Corr=−0.162




                                          0


                                                                                                                   recession
                                                                                                                   −COV(M,RCRSP−Rf)/E[M
                                                                                                                   GDP
                                      −0.05
                                          1950     1955   1960   1965   1970       1975     1980    1985    1990      1995     2000     2005


                                                                        −COV(M ,R         −R )/E[M] , GDP
                                                                               1    CRSP    f
                                       0.05
       Raw Units, 5Q moving average




                                                                                                                              Corr=−0.0757




                                          0

                                                                                                               recession
                                                                                                               −COV(M ,R        −R )/E[M
                                                                                                                         1   CRSP   f
                                                                                                               GDP
                                      −0.05
                                          1950     1955   1960   1965   1970       1975     1980    1985    1990      1995     2000     2005


                                                                        −COV(M ,R         −R )/E[M] , GDP
                                                                               2    CRSP    f
                                       0.05
       Raw Units, 5Q moving average




                                                                                                                              Corr=−0.163




                                          0

                                                                                                               recession
                                                                                                               −COV(M ,R        −R )/E[M
                                                                                                                         2   CRSP   f
                                                                                                               GDP
                                      −0.05
                                          1950     1955   1960   1965   1970       1975     1980    1985    1990      1995     2000     2005




Notes: The top panel of this figure plots rolling, 5 quarter estimates of risk premium for the aggregate stock
market, computed as the covariance of Mt=M1,t*M2,t with the CRSP excess stock market return, RCRSP,t-Rf,t,
divided by the mean of Mt . Also plotted is real gross domestic product (GDP) growth over time. “Corr =”
indicates the correlation between the risk premium and GDP growth. M1,t corresponds to the conventional
CRRA piece, M 1,t 1   C t 1 / C t  , M2,t corresponds to multiplicative piece added by EZW preferences,
                                        

                                                                  
              Vt 1 / C t 1 C t 1 / C t  
 M 2,t 1                                        . Shaded areas denote a recession as designated by the National
              Vt 1 / C t 1 C t 1 / C t  
Bureau of Economic Research. The SDF plotted is estimated using aggregate consumption, with W=I as
the weighting matrix in second-step estimation. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005Q1.
                                                    Figure 5
              Cyclical Properties of Components of Market Risk Premium Implied by EZW Estimation

                                                 −CORR(M,RCRSP−Rf)/E[M] , GDP
                       1
                                                                                                     Corr=−0.174
                      0.5
         Raw Units




                       0

                                                                                                      recession
                     −0.5
                                                                                                      corr(R,M)
                                                                                                      GDP
                      −1
                       1950    1960             1970             1980             1990             2000


                                                          StD(M) , GDP
                       1
                                                                                                     Corr=−0.26
                      0.5
         Raw Units




                       0


                     −0.5                                                                             recession
                                                                                                      StD(M)
                                                                                                      GDP
                      −1
                       1950    1960             1970             1980             1990             2000


                                                       StD(RCRSP−Rf) , GDP
                      0.2
                                                                                                     Corr=−0.18
                      0.1
         Raw Units




                       0

                                                                                                      recession
                     −0.1
                                                                                                      StD(R)
                                                                                                      GDP
                     −0.2
                       1950    1960             1970             1980             1990             2000




Notes: The estimated pricing kernel is Mt=M1,t*M2,t. The top panel plots rolling, 5 quarter estimates of
Corr(Mt, RCRSP,t-Rf,t)/E(Mt), along with real gross domestic product (GDP) growth over time. The bottom
subpanels plot rolling, 5 quarter estimates of the standard deviations of M1,t and M2,t. M1,t corresponds to the
conventional CRRA piece, M 1,t 1   C t 1 / C t  , M2,t corresponds to multiplicative piece added by EZW
                                                     



                          Vt 1 / C t 1 C t 1 / C t  
                                                        

preferences, M 2,t 1                                         . “Corr =” indicates the correlation between the dashed
                          V t 1 / C t 1 C t 1 / C t   
line in each subplot and GDP growth. Shaded areas denote a recession as designated by the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The SDF plotted is estimated using aggregate consumption, with W=I as
the weighting matrix in second-step estimation. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005Q1.
                                          Table 1
                First-Stage Estimates of Weights for Stockholder Consumption

                      Model: ∆
                                 =  0 +  1 ∆ ln( ) +  2 ∆ ln ( ) + 
                                               Est.          (-)

                                   0          0.007         (1.447)

                                   1          0.833         (6780)

                                   2          1.992         (2204)

                                   2          0.075


   Notes: The table reports the results from regressing stockholder consumption growth on the log diﬀerence
of industrial production growth,∆ ln( ), and the log diﬀerences of real services expenditure growth,
∆ ln ( ). Point estimates are reported, along with Newey and West (1987) corrected -statistics in
parentheses. The sample period is 1982:M7-2002:M2.
                                             Table 2
                                 Preference Parameter Estimates
                    2nd Step Estimation                                             
                                           (95% CI)    (95% CI)                    (95% CI)

                                                         Aggregate Consumption

                             W=I                    0.990            57.5             0.60
                                                 (.985, .996)     (27.5, 129)      (.24, .99)

                           W = G−1
                                                   0.999              60             0.50
                                                (.994, .9999)       (42,144)       (.20, .75)

                                                        Stockholder Consumption

                             W=I                    0.994             20.00          0.90
                                                (.993, .9995)       (.25, 40)     (.38, 1.24)

                           W = G−1
                                                   0.998             17.0           0.68
                                                (.992, .9999)       (1, 43.3)     (.23, 1.01)

    Notes: The table reports second-step estimates of preference parameters, with 95% confidence intervals
in parenthesis.    is the subjective time discount factor,  is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, and  is
the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Second-step estimates are obtained by minimizing
the GMM criterion with either     W = I or with W = G−1
                                                       where in both cases x =1 , an  × 1 vector
of ones. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005:Q1.
                                            Table 3
                   Specification Errors for Alternative Models: HJ Distance
                                                   Unconditional       Conditional

                                     Aggregate Consumption

                      Model                           HJ Dist            HJ Dist
                       (1)                              (2)                (3)

                 Recursive                             0.451               0.591
                 CRRA Utility                          0.514               0.627
                 Fama-French                           0.363               0.515
                 Scaled CCAPM                          0.456               0.625



                                    Stockholder Consumption

                      Model                           HJ Dist            HJ Dist
                       (1)                              (2)                (3)

                 Recursive                             0.463               0.605
                 CRRA Utility                          0.517               0.627
                 Fama-French                           0.363               0.515
                 Scaled CCAPM                          0.490               0.620


   Notes: The table reports the Hansen-Jagannathan distance metric
                                              q
                              () = min  ()0 G−1
                                                          () 
                                               

where   are parameter values associated with the model listed in column 1. In column 2,  () ≡
 1
  P                +                     1
                                            P        0
    =1 [{   ()}   −1 ]  and G ≡    =1   , where  () is the stochastic discount fac-
tor associated with the model listed in column 1 and { ()}+ = max {0  ()}. In column 3,
               P                                                    P
 () ≡ 1 =1 [({+1 ()}+ +1 −1 ) ⊗  ] and G ≡ 1 =1 (+1 ⊗ +1 ) (+1 ⊗  )0
with  =   . The sample is 1952:Q1-2005:Q1.
                                           Table 4
                 Specification Errors for Alternative Models: HJ+ Distance
                                                 Unconditional       Conditional

                                    Aggregate Consumption

                      Model                        HJ+ Dist            HJ+ Dist
                       (1)                           (2)                 (3)

                Recursive                             0.451              0.591
                CRRA Utility                          0.514              0.627
                Fama-French                           0.341              0.519
                Scaled CCAPM                          0.464              0.643



                                   Stockholder Consumption

                      Model                        HJ+ Dist            HJ+ Dist
                       (1)                           (2)                 (3)

                Recursive                             0.463              0.605
                CRRA Utility                          0.517              0.627
                Fama-French                           0.338              0.506
                Scaled CCAPM                          0.467              0.661


   Notes: For each model in column 1, “HJ+ Dist” is the distance between the model proxy and
the family of admissible nonnegative stochastic discount factors. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005:Q1.
                                            Table 5
                             Preference Parameter Estimates, EIS=1
                         2nd Step Estimation                HJ Dist

                                                      Aggregate Consumption

                                 W=I                0.985      20          –

                               W = G−1
                                                   0.985      60         0.448

                                                    Stockholder Consumption

                                 W=I                0.990 20.00            –

                               W = G−1
                                                   0.999     10.0        0.469

    Notes: The table reports second-step estimates of preference parameters, when the EIS    = −1 is fixed
at one. is the subjective time discount factor,and  is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. Second-step
                                                                                                 −1
estimates are obtained by minimizing the GMM criterion with either W = I or with W = G  where in
both cases x =1 , an  × 1 vector of ones. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005:Q1.
                                    Table 6
   Summary Statistics for Return to Aggregate Wealth, Human Wealth, W = I

                         Model-Implied Aggregate Wealth Return
                                    Representative Agent     Rep Stockholder
                                                     
                                          Panel A: Correlation Matrix

                                1.00       0.171         1.00    -0.049
                                        1.00                   1.00

                                     Panel B: Univariate Summary Statistics

               Mean                0.057       0.084        0.109    0.084
         Standard deviation        0.010       0.165        0.036    0.165
          Autocorrelation          0.234       0.055        -0.08    0.055


Notes: See next page.
                                        Table 6, continued

                        Model-Implied Human Wealth Return,  = 0333
                                       Representative Agent     Rep Stockholder
                                                        
                                             Panel A: Correlation Matrix

                                       1.00         -0.996            1.00      -0.953
                                                  1.00                        1.00

                                            Panel B: Univariate Summary Statistics

                  Mean                     0.003         0.084           0.160      0.084
            Standard deviation             0.327         0.165           0.353      0.165
             Autocorrelation               0.044         0.055           0.042      0.055


                        Model-Implied Human Wealth Return,  = 0667
                                       Representative Agent     Rep Stockholder
                                                        
                                             Panel A: Correlation Matrix

                                       1.00         -0.982            1.00      -0.847
                                                  1.00                        1.00

                                            Panel B: Univariate Summary Statistics

                  Mean                     0.043         0.084           0.121      0.084
            Standard deviation             0.082         0.165           0.101      0.165
             Autocorrelation               0.036         0.055           0.016      0.055


   Notes: The table reports summary statistics for the return to the aggregate wealth portfolio,    , and
                           , implied by the estimates of the model, and for the CRSP value-weighted
the return to human wealth,
stock market return,  . The parameter  is the steady state fraction of human wealth in aggregate
wealth. Means and standard deviations are annualized. Results for the model-implied returns are based
on second-step estimates obtained by minimizing the GMM criterion with   W = I and x =1 , an  × 1
vector of ones. The sample is 1952:Q1-2005:Q1.
                                    Table 7
  Summary Statistics for Return to Aggregate Wealth, Human Wealth, W = G−1
                                                                        


                         Model-Implied Aggregate Wealth Return
                                    Representative Agent     Rep Stockholder
                                                      
                                          Panel A: Correlation Matrix

                                1.00       0.18          1.00    0.004
                                        1.00                  1.00

                                     Panel B: Univariate Summary Statistics

               Mean                0.023       0.084         0.092   0.084
         Standard deviation        0.012       0.165         0.046   0.165
          Autocorrelation          0.055       0.055        -0.434   0.055


Notes: See next page.
                                         Table 7, continued

                          Model-Implied Human Wealth Return,  = 0333
                                         Representative Agent     Rep Stockholder
                                                          
                                               Panel A: Correlation Matrix

                                         1.00         -0.994           1.00      -0.921
                                                    1.00                       1.00

                                             Panel B: Univariate Summary Statistics

                   Mean                     -0.093        0.084           0.110      0.084
             Standard deviation              0.326        0.165           0.359      0.165
              Autocorrelation               0.043         0.055           0.013      0.055


                          Model-Implied Human Wealth Return,  = 0667
                                         Representative Agent     Rep Stockholder
                                                           
                                               Panel A: Correlation Matrix

                                         1.00         -0.975           1.00      -0.764
                                                    1.00                       1.00

                                             Panel B: Univariate Summary Statistics

                   Mean                     -0.007        0.084            0.097      0.084
             Standard deviation              0.081        0.165            0.108      0.165
              Autocorrelation               0.032         0.055           -0.103      0.055


    Notes: The table reports summary statistics for the return to the aggregate wealth portfolio,    , and
                           , implied by the estimates of the model, and for the CRSP value-weighted
the return to human wealth,
stock market return,  . The parameter  is the steady state fraction of human wealth in aggregate
wealth. Means and standard deviations are annualized statistics from quarterly data. Results for the model-
implied returns are based on second-step GMM estimation using the W     = G−1
                                                                            and x = 1 . The sample
is 1952:Q1-2005:Q1.
