                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      GLOBALIZATION, STRUCTURAL CHANGE AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

                                        Margaret S. McMillan
                                            Dani Rodrik

                                         Working Paper 17143
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17143


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




This is a paper prepared for a joint ILO-WTO volume. We are grateful to Marion Jansen for guidance
and Inigo Verduzco for outstanding research assistance. Rodrik gratefully acknowledges financial
support from IFPRI. McMillan gratefully acknowledges support from IFPRI’s regional and country
program directors for assistance with data collection. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Margaret S. McMillan and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth
Margaret S. McMillan and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 17143
June 2011
JEL No. O1

                                              ABSTRACT

Large gaps in labor productivity between the traditional and modern parts of the economy are a fundamental
reality of developing societies. In this paper, we document these gaps, and emphasize that labor flows
from low-productivity activities to high-productivity activities are a key driver of development. Our
results show that since 1990 structural change has been growth reducing in both Africa and Latin America,
with the most striking changes taking place in Latin America. The bulk of the difference between these
countries’ productivity performance and that of Asia is accounted for by differences in the pattern
of structural change – with labor moving from low- to high-productivity sectors in Asia, but in the
opposite direction in Latin America and Africa. In our empirical work, we identify three factors that
help determine whether (and the extent to which) structural change contributes to overall productivity
growth. In countries with a relatively large share of natural resources in exports, structural change
has typically been growth reducing. Even though these “enclave” sectors usually operate at very high
productivity, they cannot absorb the surplus labor from agriculture. By contrast, competitive or undervalued
exchange rates and labor market flexibility have contributed to growth enhancing structural change.


Margaret S. McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
               GLOBALIZATION, STRUCTURAL CHANGE, AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH


Introduction

       One of the earliest and most central insights of the literature on economic development is

that development entails structural change. The countries that manage to pull out of poverty and

get richer are those that are able to diversify away from agriculture and other traditional

products. As labor and other resources move from agriculture into modern economic activities,

overall productivity rises and incomes expand. The speed with which this structural

transformation takes place is the key factor that differentiates successful countries from

unsuccessful ones.

       Developing economies are characterized by large productivity gaps between different

parts of the economy. Dual economy models à la W. Arthur Lewis have typically emphasized

productivity differentials between broad sectors of the economy, such as the traditional (rural)

and modern (urban) sectors. More recent research has identified significant differentials within

modern, manufacturing activities as well. Large productivity gaps can exist even among firms

and plants within the same industry. Whether between plants or across sectors, these gaps tend

to be much larger in developing countries than in advanced economies. They are indicative of

the allocative inefficiencies that reduce overall labor productivity.

       The upside of these allocative inefficiencies is that they can potentially be an important

engine of growth. When labor and other resources move from less productive to more

productive activities, the economy grows even if there is no productivity growth within sectors.

This kind of growth-enhancing structural change can be an important contributor to overall

economic growth. High-growth countries are typically those that have experienced substantial

growth-enhancing structural change. As we shall see, the bulk of the difference between Asia’s
                                                         2

recent growth, on the one hand, and Latin America’s and Africa’s, on the other, can be explained

by the variation in the contribution of structural change to overall labor productivity. Indeed,

one of the most striking findings of this paper is that in many Latin American and Sub-Saharan

African countries, broad patterns of structural change have served to reduce rather than increase

economic growth since 1990.

        Developing countries, almost without exception, have become more integrated with the

world economy since the early 1990s. Industrial tariffs are lower than they ever have been and

foreign direct investment flows have reached new heights. Clearly, globalization has facilitated

technology transfer and contributed to efficiencies in production. Yet the very diverse outcomes

we observe among developing countries suggest that the consequences of globalization depend

on the manner in which countries integrate into the global economy. In several cases – most

notably China, India, and some other Asian countries – globalization’s promise has been

fulfilled. High-productivity employment opportunities have expanded and structural change has

contributed to overall growth. But in many other cases – in Latin America and Sub-Saharan

Africa – globalization appears not to have fostered the desirable kind of structural change. Labor

has moved in the wrong direction, from more productive to less productive activities, including,

most notably, informality.

        This conclusion would seem to be at variance with a large body of empirical work on the

productivity-enhancing effects of trade liberalization. For example, study after study shows that

intensified import competition has forced manufacturing industries in Latin America and

elsewhere to become more efficient by rationalizing their operations.1 Typically, the least

productive firms have exited the industry, while remaining firms have shed “excess labor.” It is


1
 See for example Cavalcanti et al (2003), Esclava et al (2007), Fernandez et al (2007), McMillan et al (2004), Paus
et al (2003) and Pavcnik (2002).
                                                 3

evident that the top tier of firms has closed the gap with the technology frontier – in Latin

America and Africa, no less than in East Asia. However, the question left unanswered by these

studies is what happens to the workers who are thereby displaced. In economies that don’t

exhibit large inter-sectoral productivity gaps or high and persistent unemployment, labor

displacement would not have important implications for economy-wide productivity. In

developing economies, on the other hand, the prospect that the displaced workers would end up

in even lower-productivity activities (services, informality) cannot be ruled out. That is indeed

what seems to have typically happened in Latin America and Africa. An important advantage of

the broad, economy-wide approach we take in this paper is that it is able to capture changes in

inter-sectoral allocative efficiency as well as improvements in within-industry productivity.

       In our empirical work, we identify three factors that help determine whether (and the

extent to which) structural change goes in the right direction and contributes to overall

productivity growth. First, economies with a revealed comparative advantage in primary

products are at a disadvantage. The larger the share of natural resources in exports, the smaller

the scope of productivity-enhancing structural change. The key here is that minerals and natural

resources do not generate much employment, unlike manufacturing industries and related

services. Even though these “enclave” sectors typically operate at very high productivity, they

cannot absorb the surplus labor from agriculture.

       Second, we find that countries that maintain competitive or undervalued currencies tend

to experience more growth-enhancing structural change. This is in line with other work that

documents the positive effects of undervaluation on modern, tradable industries (Rodrik 2008).

Undervaluation acts as a subsidy on those industries and facilitates their expansion.
                                                       4

        Finally, we also find evidence that countries with more flexible labor markets experience

greater growth-enhancing structural change. This also stands to reason, as rapid structural

change is facilitated when labor can flow easily across firms and sectors. By contrast, we do not

find that other institutional indicators, such as measures of corruption or the rule of law, play a

significant role.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes our data and

presents some stylized facts on economy-wide gaps in labor productivity. The core of our

analysis is contained in section III, where we discuss patterns of structural change in Africa, Asia

and Latin America since 1990. Section IV focuses on explaining why structural change has been

growth-enhancing in some countries and growth-reducing in others. Section V offers final

comments. The Appendix provides further details about the construction of our data base.



II. The data and some stylized facts

        Our data base consists of sectoral and aggregate labor productivity statistics for 38

countries, covering the period up to 2005. Of the countries included, twenty-nine are developing

countries and nine are high-income countries. The countries and their geographical distribution

are shown in Table 1, along with some summary statistics.

        In constructing our data, we took as our starting point the Groningen Growth and

Development Center (GGDC) data base, which provides employment and real valued added

statistics for 27 countries disaggregated into 10 sectors (Timmer and de Vries, 2007; 2009).2

The GGDC dataset does not include any African countries or China. Therefore, we collected our


2
 The original GGDC sample also includes West Germany, but we dropped it from our sample due to the truncation
of the data after 1991. The latest update available for each country was used. Data for Latin American and Asian
countries came from the June 2007 update, while data for the European countries and the U.S. came from the
October 2008 update.
                                                        5

own data from national sources for an additional eleven countries, expanding the sample to cover

several African countries, China and Turkey (another country missing from the GGDC sample).

In order to maintain consistency with the GGDC Database data, we followed, as closely as

possible, the procedures on data compilation followed by the GGDC authors.3 For purposes of

comparability, we combined two of the original sectors (Government Services and Community,

Social and Personal Services) into a single one, reducing the total number of sectors to nine. We

converted local currency value added at 2000 prices to dollars using 2000 PPP exchange rates.

Labor productivity was computed by dividing each sector’s value added by the corresponding

level of sectoral employment. We provide more details on our data construction procedures in

the Appendix. The sectoral breakdown we shall use in the rest of the paper is shown in Table 2.

        A big question with data of this sort is how well they account for the informal sector.

Our data for value added come from national accounts, and as mentioned by Timmer and de

Vries (2007), the coverage of such data varies from country to country. While all countries make

an effort to track the informal sector, obviously the quality of the data can vary greatly. On

employment, Timmer and de Vries’ strategy is to rely on household surveys (namely, population

censuses) for total employment levels and their sectoral distribution, and use labor force surveys

for the growth in employment between census years. Census data and other household surveys

tend to have more complete coverage of informal employment. In short, a rough characterization

would be that the employment numbers in our dataset broadly coincide with actual employment

levels regardless of formality status, while the extent to which value added data include or

exclude the informal sector heavily depends on the quality of national sources.



3
  For a detailed explanation of the protocols followed to compile the GGDC 10-Sector Database, the reader is
referred to the “Sources and Methods” section of the database’s web page:
http://www.ggdc.net/databases/10_sector.htm.
                                                  6

       The countries in our sample range from Malawi, with an average labor productivity of

$1,354 (at 2000 PPP dollars), to the United States, where labor productivity is more than fifty

times as large ($70,235). They include nine African countries, nine Latin American countries,

ten developing Asian countries, one Middle Eastern country, and nine high-income countries.

China is the country with the fastest overall productivity growth rate (8.9 percent per annum

between 1990 and 2005). At the other extreme, Kenya, Zambia, Malawi, and Venezuela have

experienced negative productivity growth rates over the same period.

       As Table 1 shows, labor productivity gaps between different sectors are typically very

large in developing countries. This is particularly true for poor countries with mining enclaves,

where few people tend to be employed at very high labor productivity. In Malawi, for example,

labor productivity in mining is 136 times larger than that in agriculture! In fact, if only all of

Malawi’s workers could be employed in mining, Malawi’s labor productivity would match that

of the United States. Of course, mining cannot absorb many workers, and neither would it make

sense to invest in so much physical capital across the entire economy.

        It may be more meaningful to compare productivity levels across sectors with similar

potential to absorb labor, and here too the gaps can be quite large. We see a typical pattern in

Turkey, which is a middle-income country with still a large agricultural sector (Figure 1).

Productivity in construction is more than twice the productivity in agriculture, and productivity

in manufactures is almost three times as large. The average manufactures-agriculture

productivity ratio is 2.3 in Africa, 2.8 in Latin America, and 3.9 in Asia. Note that the

productivity-disadvantage of agriculture does not seem to be largest in the poorest countries, a

point to which we will return below.
                                                   7

       On the whole, however, inter-sectoral productivity gaps are clearly a feature of

underdevelopment. They are widest for the poorest countries in our sample and tend to diminish

as a result of sustained economic growth. Figure 2 shows how a measure of economy-wide

productivity gaps, the coefficient of variation of the log of sectoral labor productivities, declines

over the course of development. The relationship between this measure and the average labor

productivity in the country is negative and highly statistically significant. The figure underscores

the important role that structural change plays in producing convergence, both within economies

and across poor and rich countries. The movement of labor from low-productivity to high-

productivity activities raises economy-wide labor productivity. Under diminishing marginal

products, it also brings about convergence in economy-wide labor productivities.

       The productivity gaps described here refer to differences in average labor productivity.

When markets work well and structural constraints don’t bind, it is productivities at the margin

that should be equalized. Under a Cobb-Douglas production function specification, the marginal

productivity of labor is the average productivity multiplied by the labor share. So if labor shares

differ greatly across economic activities comparing average labor productivities can be

misleading. The fact that average productivity in public utilities is so high (see Table 2), for

example, may simply indicate that the labor share of value added in this capital-intensive sector

is quite small. But in the case of other sectors it is not clear that there is a significant bias. Once

the share of land is taken into account, for example, it is not obvious that the labor share in

agriculture is significantly lower than in manufacturing (Mundlak et al., 2008). So the 2-4-fold

differences in average labor productivities between manufacturing and agriculture do point to

large gaps in marginal productivity.
                                                         8

         Another way to emphasize the contribution of structural change is to document how

much of the income gap between rich and poor countries is accounted for by differences in

economic structure as opposed to differences in productivity levels within sectors. Since even

poor economies have some industries that operate at high level of productivity, it is evident that

these economies would get a huge boost if such industries could employ a much larger share of

the economy’s labor force. The same logic applies to broad patterns of structural change as well,

captured by our 9-sector classification.

         Consider the following thought experiment. Suppose that sectoral productivity levels in

the poor countries were to remain unchanged, but that the inter-sectoral distribution of

employment matched what we observe in the advanced economies.4 This would mean that

developing countries would employ a lot fewer workers in agriculture and a lot more in their

modern, productive sectors. We assume that these changes in employment patterns could be

achieved without any change (up or down) in productivity levels within individual sectors. What

would be the consequences for economy-wide labor productivity? Figures 3 and 4 show the

results for the non-African and African samples, respectively.

         The hypothetical gains in overall productivity from sectoral reallocation, along the lines

just described, are quite large, especially for the poorer countries in the sample. India’s average

productivity would more than double, while China’s would almost triple (Figure 3). The

potential gains are particularly large for several African countries, which is why those countries

are shown on a separate graph using a different scale. Ethiopia’s productivity would increase

six-fold, Malawi’s seven-fold, and Senegal’s eleven-fold! Of course these numbers are only

indicative of the extent of dualism that marks poor economies and should not be taken literally.

4
  The inter-sectoral distribution of employment for high-income countries is calculated as the simple average of each
sector’s employment share across the high-income sample.
                                                  9

Taking developing countries as a whole, as much as a fifth of the productivity gap that separates

them from the advanced countries would be eliminated by the kind of reallocation considered

here.

        Traditional dual-economy models emphasize the productivity gaps between the

agricultural (rural) and non-agricultural (urban) parts of the economy. Indeed, the summary

statistics in Table 1 show that agriculture is typically the lowest-productivity activity in the

poorest economies. Yet another interesting stylized fact of the development process revealed by

our data is that the productivity gap between the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors

behaves non-monotonically during economic growth. The gap first increases and then falls, so

that the ratio of agricultural to non-agricultural productivity exhibits a U-shaped pattern as the

economy develops.

        This is shown in Figure 5, where the productivity ratio between agriculture and non-

agriculture (i.e., the rest of the economy) is graphed against the (log) of average labor

productivity for our full panel of observations. A quadratic curve fits the data very well, and

both terms of the equation are statistically highly significant. The fitted quadratic indicates that

the turning point comes at an economy-wide productivity level of around $9,000 ( = exp(9.1))

per worker. This corresponds to a development level somewhere between that of India and China

in 2005.

        We can observe this U-shaped relationship also over time within countries, as is shown in

Figure 6 which collates the time-series observations for three countries at different stages of

development (India, Peru, and France). India, which is the poorest of the three countries, is on

the downward sloping part of the curve. As its economy has grown, the gap between agricultural

and non-agricultural productivity has increased (and the ratio of agricultural to non-agricultural
                                                      10

productivity has fallen). France, a wealthy country, has seen the opposite pattern. As income

has grown, there has been greater convergence in the productivity levels of the two types of

sectors. Finally, Peru represents an intermediate case, having spent most of its recent history

around the minimum-point at the bottom of the U-curve.

        A basic economic logic lies behind the U-curve. A very poor country has few modern

industries in the non-agricultural parts of the economy. So even though agricultural productivity

is very low, there isn’t a large gap yet with the rest of the economy. Economic growth typically

happens with investments in the modern, urban parts of the economy. As these sectors expand, a

wider gap begins to open between the traditional and modern sectors. The economy becomes

more “dual.”5 At the same time, labor begins to move from traditional agriculture to the modern

parts of the economy, and this acts as a countervailing force. Past a certain point, this second

force becomes the dominant one, and productivity levels begin to converge within the economy.

This story highlights the two key dynamics in the process of structural transformation: the rise of

new industries (i.e., economic diversification) and the movement of resources from traditional

industries to these newer ones. Without the first, there is little that propels the economy

forward. Without the second, productivity gains don’t diffuse in the rest of the economy.

        We end this section by relating our stylized facts to some other recent strands of the

development literature that have focused on productivity gaps and misallocation of resources.

There is a growing literature on productive heterogeneity within industries. Most industries in

the developing world are a collection of smaller, typically informal firms that operate at low

levels of productivity along with larger, highly productive firms that are better organized and use

more advanced technologies. Various studies by the McKinsey Global Institute have


5
 See Kuznets (1955) for an argument along these lines. However, Kuznets conjectured that the gap between
agriculture and industry would keep increasing, rather than close down as we see here.
                                                 11

documented in detail the duality within industries. For example, MGI’s analysis of a number of

Turkish industries finds that on average the modern segment of firms is almost three times as

productive as the traditional segment (MGI 2003). Bartelsman et al. (2006) and Hsieh and

Klenow (2009) have focused on the dispersion in total factor productivity across plants, the

former for a range of advanced and semi-industrial economies and the latter for China and India.

Hsieh and Klenow’s (2009) findings indicate that between a third and a half of the gap in these

countries’ manufacturing TFP vis-à-vis the U.S. would be closed if the “excess” dispersion in

plant productivity were removed. There is also a substantial empirical literature, mentioned in

the introduction, which underscores the allocative benefits of trade liberalization within

manufacturing: as manufacturing firms are exposed to import competition, the least productive

among them lose market share or shut down, raising the average productivity of those that

remain.

       There is an obvious parallel between these studies and ours. Our data are too broad-brush

to capture the finer details of misallocation within individual sectors and across plants and firms.

But a compensating factor is that we may be able to track the economy-wide effects of re-

allocation – something that analyses that remain limited to manufacturing cannot do.

Improvements in manufacturing productivity that come at the expense of greater inter-sectoral

misallocation – say because employment shifts from manufacturing to informality – need not be

a good bargain. In addition, we are able to make comparisons among a larger sample of

developing countries. So this paper should be viewed as a complement to the plant- or firm-level

studies.
                                                 12

III. Patterns of structural change and productivity growth

       We now describe the pace and nature of structural change in developing economies over

the period 1990 to 2005. We focus on this period for two reasons. First, this is the most recent

period, and one where globalization has exerted a significant impact on all developing nations. It

will be interesting to see how different countries have handled the stresses and opportunities of

advanced globalization. And second, this is the period for which we have the largest sample of

developing countries.

       We will demonstrate that there are large differences in patterns of structural change

across countries and regions and that these account for the bulk of the differential performance

between successful and unsuccessful countries. In particular, while Asian countries have tended

to experience productivity-enhancing structural change, both Latin America and Africa have

experienced productivity-reducing structural change. In the next section we will turn to an

analysis of the determinants of structural change. In particular, we are interested in

understanding why some countries have the right kind of structural change while others have the

wrong kind.



   A. Defining the contribution of structural change

       Labor productivity growth in an economy can be achieved in one of two ways. First,

productivity can grow within economic sectors through capital accumulation, technological

change, or reduction of misallocation across plants. Second, labor can move across sectors, from

low-productivity sectors to high-productivity sectors, increasing overall labor productivity in the

economy. This can be expressed using the following decomposition:
                                                       13


(1)                           Yt  i ,t k yi ,t   yi ,t i ,t
                                      i n              i n


where   Yt   and   yi ,t   refer to economy-wide and sectoral labor productivity levels, respectively,

and  i ,t is the share of employment in sector i. The Δ operator denotes the change in productivity

or employment shares between t-k and t. The first term in the decomposition is the weighted

sum of productivity growth within individual sectors, where the weights are the employment

share of each sector at the beginning of the time period. We will call this the “within”

component of productivity growth. The second term captures the productivity effect of labor re-

allocations across different sectors. It is essentially the inner product of productivity levels (at

the end of the time period) with the change in employment shares across sectors. We will call

this second term the “structural change” term. When changes in employment shares are

positively correlated with productivity levels, this term will be positive, and structural change

will increase economy-wide productivity growth.

        The decomposition above clarifies how partial analyses of productivity performance

within individual sectors (e.g., manufacturing) can be misleading when there are large

differences in labor productivities ( yi ,t ) across economic activities. In particular, a high rate of

productivity growth within an industry can have quite ambiguous implications for overall

economic performance if the industry’s share of employment shrinks rather than expands. If the

displaced labor ends up in activities with lower productivity, economy-wide growth will suffer

and may even turn negative.



        B. Structural change in Latin America: 1950-2005
                                                 14

       Before we present our own results, we illustrate this possibility with a recent finding on

Latin America. When the Inter-American Development Bank recently analyzed the pattern of

productivity change in the region since 1950, using the same Timmer and de Vries (2007, 2009)

dataset and a very similar decomposition, it uncovered a striking result, shown in Figure 7.

Between 1950 and 1975, Latin America experienced rapid (labor) productivity growth of almost

4 percent per annum, roughly half of which was accounted for by structural change. Then the

region went into a debt crisis and experienced a “lost decade,” with productivity growth in the

negative territory between 1975 and 1990. Latin America returned to growth after 1990, but

productivity growth never regained the levels seen before 1975. This is due entirely to the fact

that the contribution of structural change has now turned negative. The “within” component of

productivity growth is virtually identical in the two periods 1950-1975 and 1990-2005 (at 1.8

percent per annum). But the structural change component went from 2 percent during 1950-

1975 to -0.2 percent in 1990-2005, an astounding reversal in the course of a few decades.

       This is all the more surprising in light of the commonly accepted view that Latin

America’s policies and institutions improved significantly as a result of the reforms of the late

1980s and early 1990s. Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Colombia, and most of the other

economies got rid of high inflation, brought fiscal deficits under control, turned over monetary

policy to independent central banks, eliminated financial repression, opened up their economies

to international trade and capital flows, privatized state enterprises, reduced red tape and most

subsidies, and gave markets freer rein in general. Those countries which had become

dictatorships during the 1970s experienced democratic transitions, while others significantly

improved governance as well. Compared to the macroeconomic populism and protectionist,
                                                 15

import-substitution policies that had prevailed until the end of the 1970s, this new economic

environment was expected to yield significantly enhanced productivity performance.

       The sheer scale of the contribution of structural change to this reversal of fortune has

been masked by microeconomic studies that record significant productivity gains for individual

plants or industries, and further, find these gains to be strongly related to post-1990 policy

reforms. In particular, studies after studies have shown that the intensified competition brought

about by trade liberalization has forced manufacturing industries to become more productive (see

for example Pavcnik 2000, Paus et al. 2003, Cavalcanti Ferreira and Rossi 2003, Fernandes

2007, and Esclava et al. 2009). A key mechanism that these studies document is what’s called

“industry rationalization:” the least productive firms exit the industry, and remaining firms shed

“excess labor.”

       The question left unanswered is what happens to the workers who are thereby displaced.

In economies which do not exhibit large inter-sectoral productivity gaps, labor displacement

would not have important implications for economy-wide productivity. Clearly, this is not the

case in Latin America. The evidence in Figure 7 suggests instead that displaced workers may

have ended up in less productive activities. In other words, rationalization of manufacturing

industries may have come at the expense of inducing growth-reducing structural change.

       An additional point that needs making is that these calculations (as well as the ones we

report below) do not account for unemployment. For a worker, unemployment is the least

productive status of all. In most Latin American countries unemployment has trended upwards

since the early 1990s, rising by several percentage points of the labor force in Argentina, Brazil,

and Colombia. Were we to include the displacement of workers into unemployment, the
                                                          16

magnitude of the productivity-reducing structural change experienced by the region would look

even more striking.6

         Figure 7 provides interesting new insight on what has held Latin American productivity

growth back in recent years, despite apparent technological progress in many of the advanced

sectors of the region’s economies. But it also raises a number of questions. In particular, was

this experience a general one across all developing countries, and what explains it? If there are

significant differences across countries in this respect, what are the drivers of these differences?



    C. Patterns of structural change by region

         We present our central findings on patterns of structural change in Figure 8. Simple

averages are presented for the 1990-2005 period for four groups of countries: Latin America,

Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and high-income countries.7

         We note first that structural change has made very little contribution (positive or

negative) to the overall growth in labor productivity in the high-income countries in our sample.

This is as expected, since we have already noted the disappearance of inter-sectoral productivity

gaps during the course of development. Even though many of these advanced economies have

experienced significant structural change during this period, with labor moving predominantly

from manufacturing to service industries, this (on its own) has made little difference to

productivity overall. What determines economy-wide performance in these economies is, by and

large, how productivity fares in each individual sector.



6
  We have undertaken some calculations along these lines, including “unemployment” as an additional sector in the
decomposition. Preliminary calculations indicate that the rise in unemployment between 1990 and 2005 worsens the
structural change term by an additional 0.2 percentage points. We hope to report results on this in future work.
7
  Even though Turkey is in our dataset, this country has not been included in this and the next figure because it is the
only Middle Eastern country in our sample.
                                                       17

        The developing countries exhibit a very different picture. Structural change has played

an important role in all three regions. But most striking of all is the differences among the

regions. In both Latin America and Africa, structural change has made a sizable negative

contribution to overall growth, while Asia is the only region where the contribution of structural

change is positive. (The results for Latin America do not match exactly those in Figure 7

because we have applied a somewhat different methodology when computing the decomposition

from that used by Pages et al., 2010.8) We note again that these computations do not take into

account unemployment. Latin America (certainly) and Africa (possibly) would look

considerably worse if we accounted for the rise of unemployment in these regions.

        Hence, the curious pattern of growth-reducing structural change that we observed above

for Latin America is repeated in the case of Africa. This only deepens the puzzle as Africa is

substantially poorer than Latin America. If there is one region where we would have expected

the flow of labor from traditional to modern parts of the economy to be an important driver of

growth, a la dual-economy models, that surely is Africa. The disappointment is all the greater in

light of all of the reforms that African countries have undergone since the late 1980s. Yet labor

seems to have moved from high- to low- productivity activities on average, reducing Africa’s

growth by 1.3 percentage points per annum on average (Table 3). Since Asia has experienced

growth-enhancing structural change during the same period, it is difficult to ascribe Africa’s and

Latin America’s performance solely to globalization or other external determinants. Clearly,

country-specific forces have been at work as well.

        Differential patterns of structural change in fact account for the bulk of the difference in

regional growth rates. This can be seen by checking the respective contributions of the “within”

8
 We fixed some data discrepancies and used a 9-sector disaggregation to compute the decomposition rather than
IDB’s 3-sector disaggregation. See the data appendix for more details.
                                                 18

and “structural change” components to the differences in productivity growth in the three

regions. Asia’s labor productivity growth in 1990-2005 exceeded Africa’s by 3 percentage

points per annum and Latin America’s by 2.5 percentage points. Of this difference, the structural

change term accounts for 1.84 points (61%) in Africa and 1.45 points (58%) in Latin America.

We saw above that the decline in the contribution of structural change was a key factor behind

the deterioration of Latin American productivity growth since the 1960s. We now see that the

same factor accounts for the lion’s share of Latin America’s (as well as Africa’s) under-

performance relative to Asia.

        In other words, where Asia has outshone the other two regions is not so much in

productivity growth within individual sectors, where performance has been broadly similar, but

in ensuring that the broad pattern of structural change contributes to, rather than detracts from,

overall economic growth. As Table 4 shows, some mineral-exporting African countries such as

Zambia and Nigeria have in fact experienced very high productivity growth at the level of

individual sectors, as have many Latin American countries. But when individual countries are

ranked by the magnitude of the structural change term, it is Asian countries that dominate the top

of the list.

        The regional averages we have discussed so far are unweighted averages across countries

that do not take into account differences in country size. When we compute a regional average

that sums up value added and employment in the same sector across countries, giving more

weight to larger countries, we obtain the results shown in Figure 9. The main difference now is

that we get a much larger “within” component for Asia, an artifact of the predominance of China

in the weighted sample. Also, the negative structural change component turns very slightly

positive in Latin America, indicating that labor flows in the larger Latin American countries
                                                       19

haven’t gone as much in the wrong direction as they have in the smaller ones. Africa still has a

large and negative structural change term. Asia once more greatly outdoes the other two

developing regions in terms of the contribution of structural change to overall growth.



    D. More details on individual countries and sectors

        The presence of growth-reducing structural change on such a scale is a surprising

phenomenon that calls for further scrutiny. We can gain further insight into our results by

looking at the sectoral details for specific countries. We note that growth-reducing structural

change indicates that the direction of labor flows is negatively correlated with (end-of-period)

labor productivity in individual sectors. So for selected countries we plot the (end-of-period)

relative productivity of sectors ( yi , t   / Yt ) against the change in their employment share (  i, t )

between 1990 and 2005. The relative size of each sector (measured by employment) is indicated

by the circles around each sector’s label in the scatter plots. The next six figures (Figures 10-15)

show sectoral detail for two countries each from Latin America, Africa, and Asia.

        Argentina shows a particularly clear-cut case of growth-reducing structural change

(Figure 10). The sector with the largest relative loss in employment is manufacturing, which

also happens to be the largest sector among those with above-average productivity. Most of this

reduction in manufacturing employment took place during the 1990s, under the Argentine

experiment with hyper-openness. Even though the decline in manufacturing was halted and

partially reversed during the recovery from the financial crisis of 2001-2002, this was not enough

to change the overall picture for the period 1990-2005. By contrast, the sector experiencing the

largest employment gain is community, personal, and government services, which has a high
                                                 20

level of informality and is among the least productive. Hence the sharply negative slope of the

Argentine scatter plot.

       Brazil shows a somewhat more mixed picture (Figure 11). The collapse in manufacturing

employment was not as drastic as in Argentina (relatively speaking), and it was somewhat

counterbalanced by the even larger contraction in agriculture, a significantly below-average

productivity sector. On the other hand, the most rapidly expanding sectors were again relatively

unproductive non-tradable sectors such as personal and community services and wholesale and

retail trade. On balance, the Brazilian slope is slightly negative, indicating a small growth-

reducing role for structural change.

       The African cases of Nigeria and Zambia show negative structural change for somewhat

different reasons (Figures 12 and 13). In both countries, the employment share of agriculture has

increased significantly (alongside with community and government services in Nigeria). By

contrast, manufacturing and relatively productive tradable services have experienced a

contraction – a remarkable anomaly for countries at such low levels of development, in which

these sectors are quite small to begin with. The expansion of agricultural employment in Zambia

is particularly large – more than 20 percentage points of total employment between 1990 and

2005, if the numbers are to be believed. These figures indicate a veritable exodus from the rest

of the economy back to agriculture, where labor productivity is roughly half of what it is

elsewhere. Thurlow and Wobst (2005, pp. 24-25) describe how the decline of formal

employment in Zambian manufacturing during the 1990s as a result of import liberalization led

to many low-skilled workers ending up in agriculture.

       Africa exhibits a lot of heterogeneity, however, and the expansion of agricultural

employment that we see in Nigeria and Zambia is not a common phenomenon across the
                                                21

continent. In general the sector with the largest relative loss in employment is wholesale and

retail trade where productivity is higher (in Africa) than the economy-wide average. The

expansion of employment in manufacturing has been meager, at around one quarter of one

percent over the fifteen year period. The sector experiencing the largest employment gain tends

to be community, personal, and government services, which has a high level of informality and is

the least productive.

       Ghana, Ethiopia and Malawi are three countries that have experienced growth-enhancing

structural change. In all three cases, the share of employment in the agricultural sector has

declined while the share of employment in the manufacturing sector has increased. However,

labor productivity in manufacturing remains notably low in both Ghana and Ethiopia.

       Compare the African cases now to India, which has experienced significant growth-

enhancing structural change since 1990. As Figure 15 shows, labor has moved predominantly

from very low-productivity agriculture to modern sectors of the economy, including notably

manufacturing. India is one of the poorest countries in our sample, so its experience need not be

representative. But another Asian country, Thailand, shows very much the same pattern (Figure

16). In fact, the magnitude of growth-enhancing structural change in Thailand has been

phenomenal, with agriculture’s employment share declining by some 20 percentage points and

manufacturing experiencing significant gains.

       Not all Asian countries exhibit this kind of pattern. South Korea and Singapore, in

particular, look more like Latin American countries in that high-productivity manufacturing

sectors have shrunk in favor of some relatively lower-productivity service activities. But in both

of these cases, very rapid “within” productivity growth has more than offset the negative

contribution from structural change. That has not happened in Latin America. Moreover, a
                                                 22

contraction in the share of the labor force in manufacturing is not always a bad thing. For

example, in the case of Hong Kong, the share of the labor force in manufacturing fell by more

than 20%. But because productivity in manufacturing is lower than productivity in most other

sectors, this shift has produced growth-enhancing structural change.



IV. What explains these patterns of structural change?

       All developing countries in our sample have become more “globalized” during the time

period under consideration. They have phased out remaining quantitative restrictions on imports,

slashed tariffs, encouraged direct foreign investment and exports, and, in many cases, opened up

to cross-border financial flows. So it is natural to think that globalization has played an

important behind-the-scenes role in driving the patterns of structural change we have

documented above.

       However, it is also clear that this role cannot have been a direct, straightforward one. For

one thing, what stands out in the findings described previously is the wide range of outcomes:

some countries (mostly in Asia) have continued to experience rapid, productivity-enhancing

structural change, while others (mainly in Africa and Latin America) have begun to experience

productivity-reducing structural change. A common external environment cannot explain such

large differences. Second, as important as agriculture, mining, and manufacturing are, a large

part – perhaps a majority – of jobs are still provided by non-tradable service industries. So

whatever contribution globalization has made, it must depend heavily on local circumstances,

choices made by domestic policy makers, and domestic growth strategies.

       We have noted above the costs that premature de-industrialization have on economy-

wide productivity. Import competition has caused many industries to contract and release labor
                                                  23

to less productive activities, such as agriculture and informality. One important difference

among countries may be the degree to which they are able to manage such downsides. A notable

feature of Asian-style globalization is that it has had a two-track nature: many import-competing

activities have continued to receive support while new, export-oriented activities were spawned.

For example, until the mid-1990s, China had liberalized its trade regime at the margin only.

Firms in special economic zones (SEZs) operated under free-trade rules, while domestic firms

still operated behind high trade barriers. State enterprises still continue to receive substantial

support. In an earlier period, South Korea and Taiwan pushed their firms onto world markets by

subsidizing them heavily, and delayed import liberalization until domestic firms could stand on

their feet. Strategies of this sort have the advantage, from the current perspective, of ensuring

that labor remains employed in firms that might otherwise get decimated by import competition.

Such firms may not be the most efficient in the economy, but they often provide jobs at

productivity levels that exceed their employees’ next-best alternative (i.e., informality or

agriculture).

       A related issue concerns the real exchange rate. Countries in Latin America and Africa

have typically liberalized in the context of overvalued currencies – driven either by

disinflationary monetary policies or by large foreign aid inflows. Overvaluation squeezes

tradable industries further, damaging especially the more modern ones in manufacturing that

operate at tight profit margins. Asian countries, by contrast, have often targeted competitive real

exchange rates with the express purpose of promoting their tradable industries. Below, we will

provide some empirical evidence on the role played by the real exchange rate in promoting

desirable structural change.
                                                 24

        Globalization promotes specialization according to comparative advantage. Here there is

another potentially important difference among countries. Some countries – many in Latin

America and Africa – are well-endowed with natural resources and primary products. In these

economies, opening up to the world economy reduces incentives to diversify towards modern

manufactures and reinforces traditional specialization patterns. As we have seen, some primary

sectors such as minerals do operate at very high levels of labor productivity. The problem with

such activities, however, is that they have a very limited capacity to generate substantial

employment. So in economies with a comparative advantage in natural resources, we expect the

positive contribution of structural change associated with participation in international markets

to be limited. Asian countries, most of which are well endowed with labor but not natural

resources, have a natural advantage here. The regression results to be presented below bear this

intuition out.

        The rate at which structural change in the direction of modern activities takes place can

also be influenced by ease of entry and exit into industry and by the flexibility of labor markets.

Ciccone and Papaioannou (2008) show that intersectoral reallocation within manufacturing

industries is slowed down by entry barriers. When employment conditions are perceived as

“rigid,” say because of firing costs that are too high, firms are likely to respond to new

opportunities by upgrading plant and equipment (capital deepening) rather than by hiring new

workers. This slows down the transition of workers to modern economic activities. This

hypothesis also receives some support from the data.

        We now present the results of some exploratory regressions aimed at uncovering the

main determinants of differences across countries in the contribution of structural change (Table

5). We regress the structural-change term over the 1990-2005 period (the second term in
                                                  25

equation (1), annualized in percentage terms) on a number of plausible independent variables.

We view these regressions as a first pass through the data, rather than a full-blown causal

analysis.

        We begin by examining the role of initial structural gaps. Clearly, the wider those gaps,

the larger the room for growth-enhancing structural change for standard dual-economy model

reasons. We proxy these gaps by agriculture’s employment share at the beginning of the period

(1990). Somewhat surprisingly, even though this variable enters the regression with a positive

coefficient, it falls far short of statistical significance (column 1). The implication is that

domestic convergence, just like convergence with rich countries, is not an unconditional process.

Starting out with a significant share of your labor force in agriculture may increase the potential

for structural-change induced growth, but the mechanism is clearly not automatic.

        Note that we have included regional dummies (in this and all other specifications), with

Asia as the excluded category. The statistically significant coefficients on Latin America and

Africa (both negative) indicate that the regional differences we have discussed previously are

also meaningful in a statistical sense.

        We next introduce the share of a country’s exports that is accounted for by raw materials,

as an indicator of comparative advantage. This indicator enters with a negative coefficient, and

is highly significant (column 2). There is a very strong and negative association between a

country’s reliance on primary products and the rate at which structural change contributes to

growth. Countries that specialize in primary products are at a distinct disadvantage.

        We note two additional points about column (2). First, agriculture’s share in employment

now turns statistically significant. This indicates the presence of conditional convergence:

conditional on not having a strong comparative advantage in primary products, starting out with
                                                  26

a large countryside of surplus workers does help. Second, once the comparative advantage

indicator is entered, the coefficients on regional dummies are slashed and they are no longer

statistically significant. In other words, comparative advantage and the initial agricultural share

can jointly fully explain the large differences in average performance across regions. Countries

that do well are those that start out with a lot of workers in agriculture but do not have a strong

comparative advantage in primary products. That most Asian countries fit this characterization

explains the Asian difference we have highlighted above.

       For trade/currency practices, we use a measure of the undervaluation of a country’s

currency, based on a comparison of price levels across countries (after adjusting for the Balassa-

Samuelson effect; see Rodrik 2008). For labor markets, we use the employment rigidity index

from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators data base. The results in columns (3)-(5)

indicate that both of these indicators enter the regression with the expected sign and are

statistically significant. Undervaluation promotes growth-enhancing structural change, while

employment rigidity inhibits it.

       We have tried a range of other specifications and additional regressors, including income

levels, demographic indicators, institutional quality, and tariff levels. But none of these variables

have turned out to be consistently significant.



V. Concluding comments

       Large gaps in labor productivity between the traditional and modern parts of the economy

are a fundamental reality of developing societies. In this paper, we have documented these gaps,

and emphasized that labor flows from low-productivity activities to high-productivity activities

are a key driver of development.
                                                         27

         Our results show that since 1990 structural change has been growth reducing in both

Africa and Latin America, with the most striking changes taking place in Latin America. The

bulk of the difference between these countries’ productivity performance and that of Asia is

accounted for by differences in the pattern of structural change – with labor moving from low- to

high-productivity sectors in Asia, but in the opposite direction in Latin America and Africa.

         A key promise of globalization was that access to global markets and increased

competition would drive an economy’s resources toward more productive uses and enhance

allocative efficiency. It is certainly true that firms that are exposed to foreign competition have

had no choice but to either become more productive or shut down. As trade barriers have come

down, industries have rationalized, upgraded and become more efficient. But an economy’s

overall productivity depends not only on what’s happening within industries, but also on the

reallocation of resources across sectors. This is where globalization has produced a highly

uneven result. Our empirical work shows that countries with a comparative advantage in natural

resources run the risk of stunting their process of structural transformation. The risks are

aggravated by policies that allow the currency to become overvalued and place large costs on

firms when they hire or fire workers.

         Structural change, like economic growth itself, is not an automatic process. It needs a

nudge in the appropriate direction, especially when a country has a strong comparative advantage

in natural resources. Globalization does not alter this underlying reality. But it does increase the

costs of getting the policies wrong, just as it increases the benefits of getting them right.9




9
 This is not the place to get into an extended discussion on policies that promote economic diversification. See
Cimoli et al. (2009) and Rodrik (2007, chap. 4).
                                                       28

Appendix: Data description

         Our analysis is based on a panel of 38 countries with data on employment, value added
(in 2000 PPP U.S. dollars), and labor productivity (also in 2000 PPP U.S. dollars) disaggregated
into 9 economic sectors (see Table A.1), starting in 1990 and ending in 2005. Our main source of
data is the 10-Sector Productivity Database, by Timmer and de Vries (2009). These data are
available at http://www.ggdc.net/databases/10_sector.htm. The latest update available for each
country was used. Data for Latin American and Asian countries came from the June 2007
update, while data for the European countries and the U.S. came from the October 2008 update.
         We supplemented the 10-Sector Database with data for Turkey, China, and nine African
countries: Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, and
Zambia. In compiling this extended dataset, we followed Timmer and de Vries (2009) as closely
as possible so that the resulting value added, employment and labor productivity data would be
comparable to that of the 10-Sector Database. Our data includes information on value added,
aggregated into 9 main sectors according to the definitions in the 2nd revision of the international
standard industrial classification (ISIC, rev. 2), from national accounts data from a variety of
national and international sources. Similarly, we used data from several population censuses as
well as labor and household surveys to get estimates of sectoral employment. Following Timmer
and de Vries (2009), we define sectoral employment as all persons employed in a particular
sector, regardless of their formality status or whether they were self-employed or family-
workers. Also following Timmer and de Vries, we use population census data to measure levels
of employment by sector and complement this data with labor force surveys (LFS) or
comprehensive household surveys to obtain labor force growth rates.



Supplementing the 10-Sector Database

        Data on value added by sector for Turkey comes from national accounts data from the
Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat). The latest available benchmark year is 1998 and TurkStat
publishes sectoral value added figures (in current and constant 1998 prices) with this benchmark
year starting in 1998 and going all the way up to 2009. These series were linked with series on
sectoral value added (in current and constant prices) with a different benchmark year (i.e. 1987)
which yielded sectoral value added series going from 1968 to 2009.10 This was done for sectoral
value added in current and constant prices. Data on employment by sector comes from sectoral
employment estimates published by Turkstat. These estimates come from annual household LFS
that are updated with data from the most recent population census. These surveys cover all
persons employed regardless of their rural or urban status, formality status, and cover self-
employed and family workers. Hence, they seem to be a good and reliable source of total
employment by sector.
        Chinese data were compiled from several China Statistical Yearbooks, published by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). The Statistical Yearbooks include data on value added (in
current and constant prices) disaggregated into three main “industries”: primary, secondary and
tertiary. The NBS further decomposes the secondary industry series into construction and

10
  We linked these series with the ones having 1998 as a benchmark year using yearly sectoral value added growth
rates for the 1968-1998 period published by Turkstat.
                                                         29

“industry” (i.e. all other non-construction activities in the secondary sector). The tertiary industry
series includes data on services. In order to get disaggregated value added series for the other 7
sectors of interest (i.e. sectors other than agriculture and construction) we had to disaggregate
value added data for the secondary and tertiary sectors. We did this by calculating sectoral
distributions of value added for the non-construction secondary industry and tertiary industry
from different tables published by the NBS. We then used these distributions and the yearly
value added series for the non-construction secondary industry and the tertiary industry to get
estimates of sectoral value added for the other 7 sectors of interest. These estimates, along with
the value added series for the primary industry (i.e. agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing) and
the construction sector, yielded series of value added by sector disaggregated into our 9 sectors
of interest.
        Sectoral employment was calculated using data from the NBS. The NBS publishes
reliable sectoral employment estimates based on data from a number of labor force surveys and
calibrated using data from the different population censuses. Given the availability and reliability
of these estimates and that they are based on and calibrated using data from the different rounds
of population censuses, we decided to use these employment series to get our sectoral
employment estimates. In some cases, we aggregated the NBS’ employment series to get sectoral
employment at the level we wanted.11
        Our African sample includes Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Nigeria,
Senegal, South Africa, and Zambia and covers almost half of total sub-Saharan population (47%)
and close to two thirds of total sub-Saharan GDP (63%).12 The particular steps to get estimates of
sectoral value added and employment for these sub-Saharan countries varied due to differences
in data availability. Once again, we followed Timmer and de Vries’ (2007, 2009) methodology
as closely as possible to ensure comparability with data from the 10-Sector Database. We used
data on sectoral employment from population censuses and complemented this with data from
labor force surveys and household surveys. We took care to make sure that employment in the
informal sector was accounted for. In some cases, this meant using data from surveys of the
informal sector (when available) to refine our estimates of sectoral employment. We used data
on value added by sector from national accounts data from different national sources and
complemented them with data from the UN’s national accounts statistics in cases where national
sources were incomplete or we found inconsistencies. Due to the relative scarcity of data sources
for many of the sub-Saharan economies in our sample, our data are probably not appropriate to
study short-term (i.e. yearly) fluctuations, but we think they are still indicative of medium-term
trends in sectoral labor productivity.




11
   Due to data availability we were only able to calculate estimates of sectoral employment for our 9 sectors of
interest from 1990 to 2001. We compared our sectoral employment estimates with those published by the Asian
Productivity Organization (APO) in its APO Productivity Database. Our sectoral employment estimates are identical
to the ones calculated by the APO for all but the 3 sectors: utilities, wholesale and retail trade, and the community,
social, personal and government services sectors. Overall, these discrepancies were small. Moreover, while our
sectoral employment estimates only cover the 1990-2001 period, the APO employment estimates go from 1978 to
2007. Given the close match between our estimates and those from the APO, and the longer time period covered by
the APO data, we decided to use APO’s sectoral employment estimates in order to maintain intertemporal
consistency in the sectoral employment data for China.
12
   Total GDP (in constant 2000 $US) and total population in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2009 (WDI, 2010).
                                                             30


Table A.1: Sector coverage

                    Sector                       Abbreviation       ISIC rev. 2      ISIC rev. 3 Equivalent




Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing           agr          Major division 1           A+B


Mining and Quarrying                                 min          Major division 2             C


Manufacturing                                        man          Major division 3             D


Public Utilities (Electricity, Gas, and Water)       pu           Major division 4             E

Construction                                         con          Major division 5             F

Wholesale and Retail Trade, Hotels and
                                                     wrt          Major division 6           G+H
Restaurants


Transport, Storage and Communications                tsc          Major divison 7              I


Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Business
                                                     fire         Major division 8            J+K
Services

Community, Social, Personal and
                                                    cspsgs        Major division 9     O+P+Q+L+M+N
Government Services


Economy-wide                                         sum



Source: Timmer and de Vries (2007)
                                              31

REFERENCES

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta "Cross Country Differences in
Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency,” December 2006.

Cavalcanti Ferreira, Pedro, and José Luiz Rossi, “New Evidence from Brazil on Trade
Liberalization and Productivity Growth,” International Economic Review, Vol. 44, No. 4, Nov.,
2003, pp. 1383-1405.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou, “Entry Regulation and Intersectoral Reallocation,”
unpublished paper, June 2008.

Cimoli, Mario, Giovanni Dosi, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., Industrial Policy and Development:
The Political Economy of Capabilities Accumulation, Oxford University Press, Oxford and New
York, 2009.

Esclava, Marcela, Haltiwanger, John, Kugler, Adriana D. and Kugler, Maurice, “Trade Reforms
and Market Selection: Evidence from Manufacturing Plants in Colombia,” NBER Working
Paper No 14935, 2009.

Fernandes, Ana M., “Trade policy, trade volumes and plant-level productivity in Colombian
manufacturing industries,” Journal of International Economics, Volume 71, Issue 1, March 2007,
Pages 52-71.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009.

Kuznets, Simon, “Economic Growth and Income Inequality,” The American Economic Review,
Vol. 45, No. 1 (Mar., 1955), pp. 1-28.

McKinsey Global Institute, Turkey: Making the Productivity and Growth Breakthrough,
McKinsey and Co., Istanbul, 2003.

McMillan, Margaret, Dani Rodrik and K. Horn Welch, “When Economic Reform Goes Wrong:
Cashew in Mozambique,” Brookings Trade Forum 2003, Washington, DC 2004.

Mundlak, Yair, Rita Butzer, and Donald F. Larson, "Heterogeneous technology and panel data:
The case of the agricultural production function," Hebrew University, Center for Agricultural
Economics Research, Discussion paper 1.08, 2008.

Pages, Carmen ed., The Age of Productivity, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington,
D.C., 2010.

Paus, Eva, Nola Reinhardt, and Michael Dale Robinson, “Trade Liberalization and Productivity
Growth in Latin American Manufacturing, 1970-98,” Journal of Policy Reform, 2003, vol. 6,
issue 1, pages 1-15.
                                              32


Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants,” NBER Working Paper No. 7852, August 2000.

Rodrik, Dani, One Economics, Many Recipes, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 2007.

Rodrik, Dani, “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2008:2.

Thurlow, James, and Peter Wobst, “The Road to Pro-Poor Growth in Zambia: Past Lessons and
Future Challenges,” Proceedings of the German Development Economics Conference, Kiel, No.
37, Verein für Socialpolitik, Research Committee Development Economics, 2005.

Timmer, Marcel P., and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, “A Cross-Country Database For Sectoral
Employment And Productivity In Asia And Latin America, 1950-2005,” Groningen Growth and
Development Centre Research Memorandum GD-98, Groningen: University of Groningen,
August 2007.

Timmer, Marcel P., and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, “Structural Change and Growth Accelerations in
Asia and Latin America: A New Sectoral Data Set,” Cliometrica, vol 3 (issue 2), 2009, pp. 165-
190.
Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                                                                                            Compound Annual
                                    Economy‐wide Labor       Coef. of Variation of log    Sector with Highest      Sector with Lowest
               Country       Code                                                                                                          Growth Rate of Econ.‐
                                       Productivity*         of Sectoral Productivity      Labor Productivity      Labor Productivity
                                                                                                                                             wide Productivity
                                                                                                     Labor                    Labor
                                                                                         Sector                   Sector                       (1990‐2005)
                                                                                                  Productivity*            Productivity*
High Income
       1 United States       USA          70,235                      0.062               pu        391,875        con        39,081              1.80%
       2 France              FRA          56,563                      0.047               pu        190,785       cspsgs      37,148              1.20%
       3 Netherlands         NLD          51,516                      0.094               min       930,958       cspsgs      33,190              1.04%
       4 Italy                ITA         51,457                      0.058               pu        212,286       cspsgs      36,359              0.73%
       5 Sweden              SWE          50,678                      0.051               pu        171,437       cspsgs      24,873              2.79%
       6 Japan               JPN          48,954                      0.064               pu        173,304         agr       13,758              1.41%
       7 United Kingdom      UKM          47,349                      0.076               min       287,454        wrt        30,268              1.96%
       8 Spain               ESP          46,525                      0.062               pu        288,160        con        33,872              0.64%
       9 Denmark             DNK          45,423                      0.088               min       622,759       cspsgs      31,512              1.53%
Asia
         10   Hong Kong      HKG          66,020                      0.087                pu       407,628        agr        14,861              3.27%
         11   Singapore      SGP          62,967                      0.068                pu       192,755        agr        18,324              3.71%
         12   Taiwan         TWN          46,129                      0.094                pu       283,639        agr        12,440              3.99%
         13   South Korea    KOR          33,552                      0.106                pu       345,055        fire        9,301              3.90%
         14   Malaysia       MYS          32,712                      0.113               min       469,892        con        9,581               4.08%
         15   Thailand       THA          13,842                      0.127                pu       161,943        agr        3,754               3.05%
         16   Indonesia       IDN         11,222                      0.106               min        85,836        agr        4,307               2.78%
         17   Philippines    PHL          10,146                      0.097                pu       90,225         agr        5,498               0.95%
         18   China          CHN           9,518                      0.122               fire      105,832        agr         2,594              8.78%
         19   India           IND          7,700                      0.087                pu        47,572        agr        2,510               4.23%
Middle East
     20 Turkey               TUR          25,957                      0.080               pu        148,179        agr        11,629              3.16%
Latin America
       21 Argentina          ARG          30,340                      0.083               min       239,645        fire       18,290               2.35%
       22 Chile              CHL          29,435                      0.084               min       194,745        wrt        17,357               2.93%
       23 Mexico             MEX          23,594                      0.078               pu         88,706        agr         9,002               1.07%
       24 Venezuela          VEN          20,799                      0.126               min       297,975         pu         7,392              ‐0.35%
       25 Costa Rica         CRI          20,765                      0.056               tsc        55,744        min        10,575               1.25%
       26 Colombia           COL          14,488                      0.108               pu        271,582        wrt         7,000               0.18%
       27 Peru               PER          13,568                      0.101               pu        117,391        agr         4,052               3.41%
       28 Brazil             BRA          12,473                      0.111               pu        111,923        wrt         4,098               0.44%
       29 Bolivia            BOL           6,670                      0.137               min       121,265        con         2,165               0.88%
Africa
         30   South Africa   ZAF          35,760                      0.074                pu        91,210        con        10,558               0.63%
         31   Mauritius      MUS          35,381                      0.058                pu       137,203         agr       24,795               3.44%
         32   Nigeria        NGA           4,926                      0.224               min       866,646       cspsgs        264                2.28%
         33   Senegal        SEN           4,402                      0.178               fire      297,533         agr        1,271               0.47%
         34   Kenya          KEN           3,707                      0.158                pu        73,937        wrt         1,601              ‐1.22%
         35   Ghana          GHA           3,280                      0.132                pu        47,302        wrt         1,507               1.05%
         36   Zambia         ZMB           2,643                      0.142               fire       47,727         agr         575               ‐0.32%
         37   Ethiopia       ETH           2,287                      0.154               fire       76,016         agr       1,329                1.87%
         38   Malawi         MWI           1,354                      0.176               min        70,846         agr         521               ‐0.47%

Note: All numbers are for 2005 unless otherwise stated.
* 2000 PPP $US. All numbers are for 2005 unless otherwise stated.
Table 2. Sector Coverage
                                                                       Average Sectoral Labor    Maximun Sectoral Labor        Minimum Sectoral Labor
                         Sector                         Abbreviation
                                                                           Productivity*              Productivity                  Productivity

                                                                                                Country Labor Productivity*   Country Labor Productivity*


Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing                  agr               17,530             USA          65,306           MWI            521

Mining and Quarrying                                        min               154,648            NLD          930,958          ETH           3,652

Manufacturing                                              man                38,503             USA          114,566          ETH           2,401

Public Utilities (Electricity, Gas, and Water)              pu                146,218            HKG          407,628          MWI           6,345

Construction                                                con               24,462             VEN          154,672          MWI           2,124

Wholesale and Retail Trade, Hotels and Restaurants          wrt               22,635             HKG          60,868           GHA           1,507


Transport, Storage and Communications                       tsc               46,421             USA          101,302          GHA           6,671

Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Business Services       fire              62,184             SEN          297,533          KOR           9,301

Community, Social, Personal and Government
                                                           cspsgs             20,534             TWN          53,355           NGA            264
Services
Economy‐wide                                                sum               27,746             USA          70,235           MWI           1,354

Note: All numbers are for 2005 unless otherwise stated.
* 2000 PPP $US. All numbers are for 2005 unless otherwise stated.
Table 3: Decomposition of productivity growth, unweighted averages, 1990‐2005
                              labor productivity           component due to:
                                    growth             "within"        "structural"
LAC                                 1.35%               2.24%             ‐0.88%
AFRICA                              0.86%               2.13%             ‐1.27%
ASIA                                3.87%               3.31%              0.57%
HI                                  1.46%               1.54%             ‐0.09%
Table 4: Country rankings

       ranked by the contribution of "within"        ranked by the contribution of "str. change"
                                                                                        "structural
rank         country     region        "within"   rank       country     region           change"
1            CHN         ASIA           7.79%     1          THA         ASIA               1.67%
2            ZMB         AFRICA         7.61%     2          ETH         AFRICA            1.48%
3            KOR         ASIA           5.29%     3          TUR         TURKEY             1.42%
4            NGA         AFRICA         4.08%     4          HKG         ASIA               1.25%
5            PER         LAC            3.85%     5          IDN         ASIA              1.06%
6            CHL         LAC            3.82%     6          CHN         ASIA              0.99%
7            SGP         ASIA           3.79%     7          IND         ASIA               0.99%
8            SEN         AFRICA         3.61%     8          GHA         AFRICA             0.59%
9            MYS         ASIA           3.59%     9          TWN         ASIA              0.54%
10           TWN         ASIA           3.45%     10         MYS         ASIA              0.49%
11           BOL         LAC            3.37%     11         MUS         AFRICA            0.38%
12           IND         ASIA           3.24%     12         CRI         LAC                0.38%
13           VEN         LAC            3.20%     13         MEX         LAC               0.23%
14           MUS         AFRICA         3.06%     14         KEN         AFRICA             0.23%
15           ARG         LAC            2.94%     15         ITA         HI                0.17%
16           SWE         HI             2.83%     16         PHL         ASIA              0.14%
17           UKM         HI             2.47%     17         ESP         HI                 0.13%
18           USA         HI             2.09%     18         DNK         HI                 0.02%
19           HKG         ASIA           2.02%     19         FRA         HI                 0.00%
20           TUR         TURKEY         1.74%     20         JPN         HI                ‐0.01%
Table 5: Determinants of the magnitude of the structural‐change term
Dependent variable: structural‐change term
                                         (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)

agricultural share in employment           0.013       0.027        0.016       0.023
                                           (0.98)     (2.26)**      (1.48)     (2.45)**

raw materials share in exports                         ‐0.050      ‐0.045       ‐0.046     ‐0.038
                                                      (2.44)**    (2.41)**     (2.73)**   (2.29)**

undervaluation index                                                0.016     0.017        0.023
                                                                  (1.75)*** (1.80)***     (2.24)**

employment rigidity index (0‐1)                                                 ‐0.026     ‐0.021
                                                                               (2.64)**   (2.15)**

Latin America dummy                        ‐0.014       0.007       0.006       0.013      0.007
                                          (2.65)**      (0.74)      (0.72)      (1.49)     (0.85)

Africa dummy                               ‐0.022      ‐0.006       ‐0.005      ‐0.004    ‐0.003
                                          (2.04)**     (0.80)       (0.83)      (0.75)    (0.38)

High income dummy                          ‐0.003      ‐0.001       0.008       0.013      0.010
                                           (0.66)      (0.14)       (0.98)      (1.47)     (1.06)

constant                                   0.002        0.005       0.006       0.009      0.014
                                           (0.30)       (1.11)      (1.37)      (2.03)    (3.63)*

Observations                                   38         38           38          37       37
R‐squared                                     0.22       0.43         0.48        0.55     0.50
Robust t‐statistics in parentheses
* significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 10% level
                                                                           Labor Productivity Gaps in Turkey, 2008
                                                       600


                                                                                                                                                                   515
  Sectoral Productivity as % of Average Productivity




                                                       500                                                                                         pu




                                                       400
                                                                                                                                                             tsc

                                                                                                                                                     fire    307
                                                       300
                                                                                                                                        min          272




                                                       200                                                                          man
                                                                                                                                               158
                                                                                                                          con
                                                                                                              wrt                       128
                                                                                     cspsgs                               108
                                                       100        agr
                                                                                                               74

                                                                      42                49



                                                         0
                                                             1   10           20   29           39       48         58        67   77         86            96

                                                                                              Share of Total Employment (%)


Figure 1: Labor productivity gaps in Turkey

Note: Unless otherwise noted, the source for all the data is the dataset described in the main
body of the paper. Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg)
Manufacturing; (pu) Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc)
Transport and Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community,
Social, Personal and Government Services.
      C.V. of Log of Sectoral Labor Productivities in 2005
                                                      .25
                                                                                   NGA
                                         .2




                                                                 MWI              SEN


                                                                       ETH   KEN
                               .15




                                                                         ZMB
                                                                                         BOL
                                                                            GHA
                                                                                                       THA   VEN
                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                    BRA            MYS
                                                                                                  IDN COL          KOR
                                                                                                 PHL PER
                    .1




                                                                                                                          TWN
                                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                           IND                     CHL   DNK HKG
                                                                                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                 TUR
                                                                                                               MEX
                                                                                                                      ZAF UKM
                                                                                                                               SGP
                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                             CRI     MUS ITA USA
        .05




                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                             FRA

                                                             7           8              9                 10              11
                                                                        Log of Avg. Labor Productivity in 2005



Figure 2: Relationship between inter-sectoral productivity gaps and income levels.

The coefficient of variation in sectoral labor productivities within countries (vertical axis) is
graphed against the log of the countries’ average labor productivity (horizontal axis), both in
2005
   ARG
   BOL
   BRA
   CHL
   CHN
   COL
   CRI
   HKG
   IDN
   IND
   KOR
   MEX
   MYS
   PER
   PHL
   SGP
   THA
   TUR
  TWN
   VEN



            0                 50             100              150                 200
                         Increase in economy-wide labor productivity
                        (as % of observed econ-wide L prod. in 2005)


Figure 3: Counterfactual impact of changed economic structure on economy-wide labor
productivity, non-African countries

These figures are the percent increase in economy-wide average labor productivity obtained
under the assumption that the inter-sectoral composition of the labor force matches the pattern
observed in the rich countries.
   ETH


   GHA


   KEN


   MUS


   MWI


   NGA


   SEN


   ZAF


   ZMB




         0                             500                           1,000
                         Increase in economy-wide labor productivity
                        (as % of observed econ-wide L prod. in 2005)


Figure 4: Counterfactual impact of changed economic structure on economy-wide labor
productivity, African countries

These figures are the percent increase in economy-wide average labor productivity obtained
under the assumption that the inter-sectoral composition of the labor force matches the pattern
observed in the rich countries.
  Ratio of Agr. Labor Productivity to Non-Agr. Labor Productivity

                                                               100
                           (in percent)
                                                               50
                                                               0




                                                                     7   8               9                10   11
                                                                             Economy-wide Labor Productivity

                                                                                     Fitted Values


Figure 5: Relationship between economy-wide labor productivity (horizontal axis) and the ratio
of agricultural productivity to non-agricultural productivity (percent, vertical axis), full panel.
  Ratio of Agr. Labor Productivity to Non-Agr. Labor Productivity

                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2001
                                                               80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                           1960                                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1996
                                                                            1961                                                                                                                                             2003
                                                                            19621964                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                             1963
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                  1967 1970
                                                                              1965 1968
                           (in percent)




                                                                                     1969                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1993
                                                                              1966     1971
                                                                                        1975
                                                                                      1973
                                                                                     1972
                                                                                     19741977                                                                                                                          1990
                                                               60




                                                                                         1978
                                                                                       1976
                                                                                         1980
                                                                                           1981
                                                                                              1983                                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                       197919821984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1987
                                                                                                1985                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                     1988                                                                                                         1985
                                                                                                 1986 1989                                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                  1987 1990
                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                         1992                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                        19911994
                                                                                                                1996                                                                                             1984
                                                                                                              1995
                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                 1997                                                                                           1983
                                                                                                                    1999                                                                                      1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1979
                                                               40




                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                            2003                                                                            1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1973
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1975
                                                                                                                               2004                                                                  1972 1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1970
                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                     1991                  2002                              1968
                                                                                                                                                                                           19671969
                                                                                                                                         1989
                                                                                                                                      1990              2001
                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                     1999    2003
                                                                                                                                     19921993                 2004
                                                                                                                                                               2005                     1965
                                                                                                                                                                                         1966
                                                                                                                                                                                  19621964
                                                                                                                                                 19881998 1950 1954 1955     1960 1963
                                                                                                                                                  1994  1997
                                                                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                                        1961
                                                                                                                                      1960 1962       1995                 1959 1961
                                                                                                                                              1964
                                                                                                                                            1963                         1958
                                                                                                                                                                        1957
                                                                                                                                                1965
                                                                                                                                                  1966
                                                                                                                                                    1967 1970
                                                                                                                                                      1969            1956
                                                                                                                                                     1984
                                                                                                                                                     1968
                                                                                                                                                      19851987
                                                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                            1971
                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                    1983 19721982
                                                                                                                                                               1979
                                                                                                                                                              1973
                                                                                                                                                                1981
                                                                                                                                                                 1974
                                                                                                                                                               1978
                                                                                                                                                                 1977
                                                                                                                                                                  1976
                                                                                                                                                                  1975
                                                                                                                                                                1980



                                                                     7.5                                  8.5              9.5                                                                      10.5
                                                                                                          Economy-wide Labor Productivity

                                                                                                            India                                France                                       Peru


Figure 6: Relationship between economy-wide labor productivity (horizontal axis) and the ratio
of agricultural productivity to non-agricultural productivity (percent, vertical axis), selected
countries
            Productivity decomposition in Latin America across different periods
                                  (annual growth rates)




          1950 - 1975




          1975 - 1990




          1990 - 2005                                                     Sectoral productivity
                                                                          growth
                                                                          Structural change



  -0.01    -0.005       0   0.005   0.01   0.015   0.02   0.025   0.03   0.035        0.04        0.045




Figure 7: Productivity decomposition for Latin America, 1950-2005

Source: Pages et al., 2010.
                        LAC




                      AFRICA




                        ASIA




                                                                                     Within

                          HI                                                         Structural
                                                                                     Change



 ‐2.00%      ‐1.00%            0.00%   1.00%      2.00%        3.00%         4.00%                5.00%



Figure 8: Decomposition of productivity growth by country group, 1990-2005
            LAC




          AFRICA




            ASIA



                                                                                     Within


              HI                                                                     Structural
                                                                                     Change



 ‐1.00%            0.00%   1.00%   2.00%    3.00%      4.00%      5.00%      6.00%            7.00%



Figure 9: Decomposition of productivity growth by country group, 1990-2005
(weighted averages)
                                                                 Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                             Change in Employment Shares in Argentina (1990-2005)
  Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                           = -7.0981; t-stat = -1.21                                      min
                                                    2




                                                                                                                           pu
                                                    1.5
                                                    1




                                                             man
                                                    .5




                                                                                                                                                 tsc

                                                                                                                            con
                                                    0




                                                                                       agr                                           wrt
                                                                                                                                                           cspsgs
                                                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                   fire

                                                            -.06                -.04             -.02            0                         .02            .04
                                                                                             Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                   (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                            Fitted values
                                                          *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                          **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                  ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                           Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)


Figure 10

Note: Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg) Manufacturing; (pu)
Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc) Transport and
Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community, Social, Personal
and Government Services.
                                                                  Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                Change in Employment Shares in Brazil (1990-2005)
  Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                          = -2.2102; t-stat = -0.17                                           pu
                                                    2


                                                                                                                               min
                                                    1




                                                                                                                                    fire

                                                                                                                man
                                                                                                                         con
                                                                                                                                      tsc
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                              cspsgs


                                                                                  agr
                                                    -1




                                                                                                                                            wrt

                                                         -.1                               -.05                    0                        .05
                                                                                            Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                 (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                           Fitted values
                                                         *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                         **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                 ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                          Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)




Figure 11

Note: Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg) Manufacturing; (pu)
Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc) Transport and
Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community, Social, Personal
and Government Services.
                                                                    Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                 Change in Employment Shares in Nigeria (1990-2005)
   Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                           = -12.2100; t-stat = -1.06
                                                     6


                                                                                                                           min
                                                     4




                                                                                                                         fire
                                                     2




                                                                                                                   tsc    pu
                                                                    wrt                                             mancon
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                     agr
                                                     -2




                                                                                                                                                           cspsgs
                                                     -4




                                                          -.15                 -.1              -.05            0                            .05                     .1
                                                                                             Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                   (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                            Fitted values
                                                          *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                          **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                  ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                           Source: Authors' calculations with data from Nigeria's National Bureau of Statistics and ILO's LABORSTA


Figure 12

Note: Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg) Manufacturing; (pu)
Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc) Transport and
Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community, Social, Personal
and Government Services.
                                                                    Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                 Change in Employment Shares in Zambia (1990-2005)
   Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                           = -10.9531; t-stat = -3.25
                                                     3

                                                                                fire
                                                     2




                                                                                       pu
                                                                                  min con

                                                                                      tsc
                                                                                     man
                                                     1




                                                                                                                wrt

                                                                      cspsgs
                                                     0
                                                     -1




                                                                                                                                                   agr
                                                     -2




                                                          -.1                                 0                      .1                       .2
                                                                                              Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                   (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                              Fitted values
                                                          *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                          **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                  ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                           Source: Authors' calculations with data from CSO, Bank of Zambia, and ILO's KILM


Figure 13

Note: Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg) Manufacturing; (pu)
Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc) Transport and
Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community, Social, Personal
and Government Services.
                                                                  Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                                Change in Employment Shares in India (1990-2005)
  Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                          = 35.2372; t-stat = 2.97
                                                    2

                                                                                                                                    pu

                                                                                                                                               fire
                                                                                                                                      tsc
                                                                                                                                    min
                                                    1




                                                                                                                                            wrt
                                                                                                                                             con
                                                                                                   cspsgs                                   man
                                                    0
                                                    -1




                                                                agr

                                                         -.04                              -.02                    0                                  .02
                                                                                            Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                 (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                           Fitted values
                                                         *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                         **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                 ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                          Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)


Figure 14

Note: Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg) Manufacturing; (pu)
Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc) Transport and
Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community, Social, Personal
and Government Services.
                                                                 Correlation Between Sectoral Productivity and
                                                             Change in Employment Shares in Thailand (1990-2005)
  Log of Sectoral Productivity/Total Productivity


                                                          = 5.1686; t-stat = 1.27
                                                    3



                                                                                                                                    pu
                                                                                                                                    min
                                                    2




                                                                                                                                     tsc
                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                    man

                                                                                                                                     fire
                                                                                                                                                 cspsgs
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                          wrt

                                                                                                                                           con
                                                    -1




                                                            agr

                                                          -.2                               -.1                     0                                     .1
                                                                                            Change in Employment Share
                                                                                                 (Emp. Share)

                                                                                                           Fitted values
                                                         *Note: Size of circle represents employment share in 1990
                                                         **Note:  denotes coeff. of independent variable in regression equation:
                                                                 ln(p/P) =  + Emp. Share
                                                          Source: Authors' calculations with data from Timmer and de Vries (2009)


Figure 15

Note: Abbreviations are as follows: (agr) Agriculture; (min) Mining; (mfg) Manufacturing; (pu)
Public Utilities; (con) Construction; (wrt) Retail and Wholesale Trade; (tsc) Transport and
Communication; (fire) Finance and Business Services; (cspsgs) Community, Social, Personal
and Government Services.
