                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         FINANCING LABOR

                                           Efraim Benmelech
                                           Nittai K. Bergman
                                               Amit Seru

                                         Working Paper 17144
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17144


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




We thank Rajesh Aggarwal, George-Marios Angeletos, Bo Becker, Frederico Belo, Philip Bond, John
Boyd, Lauren Cohen, Emmanuel Farhi, Edward Glaeser, Steven Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, Larry Katz,
Owen Lamont, Marco Pagano, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Tracy Wang, Ivan Werning
and seminar participants at The Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance in Rome, Harvard Economics
department, Harvard Law School, and University of Minnesota Carlson School of Management for
useful comments. We thank Joe Peek for providing us guidance in constructing the data on Japanese-affiliated
banks. We thank Eduardo Davila and Yu Xu for excellent research assistance. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Efraim Benmelech, Nittai K. Bergman, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financing Labor
Efraim Benmelech, Nittai K. Bergman, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 17144
June 2011
JEL No. D53,E24,E44,G31,G32

                                             ABSTRACT

Financial market imperfections can have significant impact on employment decisions of firms. We
illustrate the economic importance of this channel by demonstrating that the responsiveness of employment
decisions to firms’ financial health is quantitatively similar to the much-studied responsiveness of
investment decisions to cash-flows. We use a collage of three ‘quasi-experiments’ used previously
in the investment-cash flow and finance-growth literatures to trace the effects of finance on employment.
Our results suggest that financial constraints and the availability of credit play an important role in
firm-level employment decisions, as well as aggregate unemployment outcomes


Efraim Benmelech                                    Amit Seru
Harvard University                                  Booth School of Business
Department of Economics                             University of Chicago
Littauer 233                                        5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                            and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu                          amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu

Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-632
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu
Introduction

For more than eighty years – since the great depression of the 1920s – one of the key problems of
macroeconomics has been the explanation of unemployment. More recently, following the recent
financial crisis and economic recession, there has been an increasing interest in understanding the
cyclical behavior of unemployment and in particular its relation to financial constraints and the
availability of financing. While the relation between financial constraints and corporate investment
has been studied extensively, comparatively little is known about the role that financial constraints
and the availability of finance play in determining the level of unemployment and its propagation
over time. Such understanding is crucial, as counter-cyclicality in the cost of external finance (e.g.
Bernanke and Gertler (1995)) may create financial accelerator eﬀects that amplify variation in
employment levels over the business cycle.
       Theoretically, the cost and availability of external finance should aﬀect firm employment de-
cisions for a number of reasons. First, when there is a mismatch between payments to labor and
the ultimate generation of cash flow, firms will need to finance their labor activity throughout the
production process (see for example Greenwald and Stiglitz (1988)). As such, when the ability to
finance working capital deteriorates, firm employment should fall.1
       Frictions in capital markets will also aﬀect firm employment decisions when labor is not solely
a variable factor of production but rather has a fixed, or quasi-fixed cost component (see for
example, Oi (1962), Farmer (1985), Hamermesh (1989), and Hamermesh and Pfann (1996)). As
first described in Oi (1962), such fixed costs include investments associated with hiring and training
activities. Finally, the availability of external finance may aﬀect employment indirectly through its
impact on firm level investment. Specifically, as in the investment-cash-flow sensitivity literature,
in the presence of capital market frictions investment is limited by the availability of internal funds,
and due to complementariness between labor and capital, employment is adjusted for the decline
in capital.
       Testing for a causal eﬀect of financial constraints on firm employment decisions is complicated
by identification concerns of endogeneity and measurement error similar to those found in the
investment-to-cash flow literature.2 Chief among these is the concern that variables measuring
   1
     The argument that firms must finance labor payments is similar to that found in the literature on financial
constraints and inventory investment: firms must finance inventory investment during the production process.
   2
     For two surveys of the literature on capital market imperfections and investment see Hubbard (1998) and Stein
(2003).


                                                        1
firms’ financial health – such as net worth, firm leverage, earnings, and sales – are also correlated
with firms’ demand for labor. Similarly, variables measuring availability of finance and fluctuations
in the wedge between the cost of external and internal funds such as credit spreads, CDS rates, or
the Federal Funds rate are also correlated with demand for firms’ final product and hence influence
its demand for labor. These alternatives suggest that employment should be negatively related
to firm level financial constraints and to empirical measures of costly external finance even in a
frictionless Neoclassical setting.
      In this paper we analyze the relation between finance and labor using several empirical strategies
previously employed in the investment-cash flow and finance-growth literatures that were developed
to alleviate these identification concerns. Consistent with a role of financial constraints, we first
show using Compustat data that firm level employment over last forty years is indeed positively
related to cash flow in a large panel of publicly traded firms. Using the sorting/sample-splits
approach, we also show that the sensitivity of employment to cash flow is higher for firms with
higher financial leverage.3 We next provide evidence from three ‘quasi-experiments’ that enables
better identification of the eﬀects of finance on employment.
      First, we follow the approach in Almeida et al. (2010) by using a ‘maturing-debt’ empirical
strategy which exploits heterogeneity in the maturity of long-term debt across firms. The empirical
tests examine whether firms with long-term debt maturing in a particular year reduce their labor
force by more than their peers that do not face the need to refinance maturing long-term debt.
We find a negative and statistically significant relation between maturing long-term debt and the
change in the number of firm employees. That is, consistent with the presence of financial frictions,
when firms have a large amount of debt coming to maturity which needs refinancing, part of their
adjustment occurs through a reduction in their labor force.
      In a second quasi-experiment we analyze the impact of bank deregulation on state-level un-
employment rates. Our methodology follows Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) which utilizes the
introduction of state-level bank deregulation laws across the United States. During the mid 1970s
states began to deregulate local banks by removing restrictions on both intrastate and interstate
bank branching. Deregulation allowed bank holding company to consolidate their subsidiaries into
branches and to open new branches within state lines. Furthermore, states passed laws allowing out-
of-state banks to purchase banks within the state. If bank deregulation relaxes financial constraints
  3
      For a similar result, see Sharpe (1994).


                                                    2
and leads to more eﬃcient capital allocation, we expect that following such deregulation, state level
unemployment will drop. Consistent with such a finance-labor link, we find that post-deregulation,
states did indeed experience a statistically and economically significant drop in their unemploy-
ment rates. Similar results are documented by Beck et al, (2010). Using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence
specification we show that the introduction of intrastate bank deregulation laws is associated with
a drop of between 0.45 and 0.86 percentage points in the state unemployment rate. Similarly, the
introduction of inter-state bank deregulation laws, which enabled banks to open branches across
state lines, decreases state unemployment rates by between 0.84 and 1.14 percentage points.
   Finally, in the third quasi-experiment we analyze how a negative shock to bank loan supply
adversely aﬀects unemployment rates. We follow Peek and Rosengren (2000) by exploiting a loan
supply shock transmitted by Japanese banks to markets in the United States. As a result of the
dramatic decline in real estate prices in Japan during the 1990s and the concurrent negative shock
to Japanese bank balance sheets, U.S. aﬃliates of Japanese banks contracted loan supply in US
markets. This shock was arguably exogenous to local U.S. market conditions and yet aﬀected
Japanese bank operations in the United States. Since Japanese bank penetration in real estate
markets was quite substantial in many localities in the U.S., a withdrawal of loan supply stemming
from losses arising due to market conditions in Japan would involve substantial disruptions to credit
availability. By focusing on U.S. lending markets with large Japanese bank market presence, we
can thus analyze the eﬀect of credit supply on local lending and unemployment.
   As in Peek and Rosengren, we find that lending by Japanese aﬃliated banks did indeed decline
in the U.S. concurrently with the large declines in real estate values in Japan in the early 1990s.
Instrumenting for Japanese bank losses using real estate market movements in Japan, we find that
Japanese-aﬃliated banks located in the U.S. contracted real-estate lending concurrently with losses
stemming from operations in Japan. Using this result as a first stage in a two-stage least square
specification, we find a significant link between finance and unemployment: unemployment increases
by about one percentage point in MSAs where there was a contraction in Japanese aﬃliated bank
lending following the real estate decline in Japan.
   To verify that shocks to Japanese real estate values do not vary with demand-side eﬀects in
the U.S., we also conduct a placebo test in which we instrument for non-Japanese aﬃliated bank
lending using the Japanese real estate index. Consistent with a supply-side story aﬀecting only
Japanese-aﬃliated banks in the U.S., we find no evidence of a relation between innovations in

                                                 3
Japanese real estate values and changes to lending by non-Japanese aﬃliated banks in the U.S in
the first stage of the regression or between unemployment and non-Japanese aﬃliated bank lending
in the second stage of the regression.
     Taken together, our collage of findings are consistent with the view that finance is an important
determinant of both firm-level employment decisions as well as aggregate-level unemployment rates.
As financial constraints become binding, firms need to adjust both inputs of production – capital
and labor. While much prior research has focused on the eﬀect of financial constraints on capital
formation, our empirical results suggest that financial constraints seem to aﬀect both factors of
production.
     Our paper is related to two strands of literature. First, it is connected to the vast literature
examining the impact of credit market imperfections and investment behavior. It is also related to
a much smaller yet emerging literature on labor and financial constraints (see Pagano and Volpin
(2008) and Pagano (2010)). We discuss related studies in these areas when we describe our results.
     The rest of the paper is organized in the following manner. Section 1 displays the analysis using
the reduced form regressions relating employment levels to cash flows employing Compustat data.
Section 2 presents the evidence from the three ‘quasi-experiments’. Section 3 concludes.


I.     Evidence from Employment Cash-flow Sensitivities
A.     Firm-level Data and Summary Statistics

We utilize several data sets in our paper. The firm-level data are from the Compustat Annual
Industrial Files. We use these files to collect information on all non-financial firms during the
years 1970–2009 with non-missing observations for the dependent and independent variables in
the analysis. In addition to balance sheet and income statement information, Compustat also
reports the number of workers employed by a firm. We define our main dependent variable as the
annual percentage change in the number of employees at the firm level. To construct our sample
we eliminate firms with less than 500 employees and, additionally, trim all variables by removing
outliers at the 1st and 99th percentiles.4 This results in a sample of 51,609 firm-year observations.
All dollar figures are adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Product Index.
     Table 1 reports descriptive statistics on the characteristics of the firms in the sample. The mean
   4
     We use the 500 employee threshold to be consistent with the definition of small/large business in the U.S. Our
results are not driven by this choice.



                                                        4
number of employees is 13,075, the median is 1,300. Since we drop observations with less than 500
employees, the number of employees ranges from 500 to 876,800. The mean annual percentage
change in the number of employees, %∆employees, is 6.0% (median=1.7%) and ranges from -70.8%
to 239.9%. The mean percentage change in investment, %∆investment, is 12.6%, while the level of
investment (measured as investment scaled by beginning of period assets) or I/K is 0.082 which is
similar to the magnitudes found in studies of investment and financial constraints (see e.g., Rauh
(2006)).
     The table also provides descriptive statistics on additional explanatory variables used in the
analysis. We include the variables pertaining to firm size (in logs), Tobin’s Q (proxied by market-to-
book ratio), leverage, liquidity (measured as cash and marketable securities scaled by assets), asset
maturity, profitability and a dummy for whether the firm has a credit rating. Appendix A provides
detailed information on the definitions of the variables used in the paper, their construction, and
their data sources.

B.     Employment Cash-flow Regressions

We now turn to study the sensitivity of employment decisions to cash flows. Similar to other studies
in the literature (see e.g., Fazzari et al (1998), Rauh (2006)), we estimate diﬀerent variants of the
following regression:

             %∆employeesit = α + βp × P rof itabilityit + Xit−1 λ + yt θ + zi ψ + �it ,               (1)

where the dependent variable: %∆employees, is the annual percentage change in the number of
employees. Xit−1 is a vector of firm specific control variables which include lagged values of the firm
market-to-book ratio, firm internal liquidity (Liquidity it−1 ), the log of the book value of firm assets,
firm leverage, asset maturity, profitability, and the credit rating dummy. All regressions include
year fixed eﬀects, yt , to account for changing macroeconomic conditions. In addition, we account
for unobserved industry- or firm-level time invariant heterogeneity by including either four-digit
SIC fixed-eﬀects or firm fixed-eﬀects, denoted by the variable z. All regressions are estimated with
heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by firm.
     The main focus of the analysis in this section is on the sensitivity of employment changes to
P rof itabilityit or cash flows which we measure, following standard literature practice, as operating
income divided by beginning of period assets. As argued by Fazzari et al. (1998) (henceforth FHP),


                                                    5
a Neoclassical model of investment with perfect capital markets implies that the coeﬃcient of cash
flow – βp in specification 1 – should be zero. In contrast, a positive and significant coeﬃcient
implies that some firms face financial constraints due to limited access to external financing and
hence must rely on internal cash flows.
   The FHP approach has been subject to criticism based on either the endogeneity of the main
explanatory variables – that is, cash flows are capturing investment opportunities not captured fully
by Q – or on theoretical grounds (see for example, Poterba (1988), Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
and Stein (2003)). We attempt to address these concerns in additional empirical tests in the next
section.
   We report the results from estimating diﬀerent variants of regression 1 in Table 2. Each column
in the table displays the estimates from a separate regression. The first two columns include all
non-financial firms while columns 3 and 4 report results for manufacturing firms only. We use the
same set of control variables in the first four regressions as well as year fixed-eﬀects and industry- or
firm-fixed eﬀects depending on the specification. As can be seen, column 1 of Table 2 documents a
positive and statistically significant relation between the percentage change in number of employees
and profitability. The coeﬃcient on profitability, βp , is 0.446 and is statistically significant at the
one percent level, controlling for a battery of firm variables and industry and year fixed-eﬀects. A
positive βp suggests that when financial constraints are binding, the ability of a firm to increase its
labor force is constrained by the availability of internal funds. The magnitude of the βp coeﬃcient
implies that a one standard deviation increase in profitability is associated with a 7.6% change
in the number of employees. This represents approximately a third of the standard deviation of
the unconditional percentage change in the number of employees. While this magnitude should be
taken with caution – given the concerns about omitted variables pointed earlier and the potential
endogeneity of profitability – we note that the specification controls for lagged values of market-to-
book ratio, firm internal liquidity, size, leverage and asset maturity.
   Turning to the other control variables, we find that the change in the number of employees is, as
expected, positively related to the market-to-book ratio and to firms with longer-lived assets. Other
measures of the firm’s finances are consistent with the positive relation between profitability and the
change in number of employees. We find that liquidity is positively and statistically significant in
explaining the change in the number of employees (coeﬃcient=0.283 and is statistically significant
at the 1 percent level). Likewise, similar to the results in Calomiris, Orphanides, and Sharpe (1994),

                                                   6
hanka (1998), Ofek (1993) and Sharpe (1994), we find that the coeﬃcient of leverage is negative
and significant.
       While the first column of Table 2 includes industry fixed eﬀects, we use firm-fixed eﬀects in the
second column of the table. As can be seen, the inclusion of firm fixed eﬀects increase the point
estimates of the coeﬃcients on profitability. In particular, as the second column of Table 2 shows,
βp is now 0.721 (significant at the one percent level). Focusing on firm internal liquidity or leverage
rather than firm profitability reveals a similar result: labor is sensitive to both liquidity and firm
leverage. Controlling for firm fixed-eﬀects, the coeﬃcient on liquidity is 0.351. Similarly, leverage
exhibits a negative relation with employment that is about nine times higher than in column 1.                        5


       In columns 3 and 4 we restrict the analysis to only manufacturing firms. This results in a
sample size of 27,967 compared to the 51,609 firm-year observations in our previous sample.6 As
the table shows, our results – especially in specifications with firm fixed eﬀects – are similar to those
in columns 1 and 2. As column 3 shows, the coeﬃcient on profitability βp is 0.597 as compared to
0.446 in column 1. Similarly, as column 4 shows, once we control for firm fixed-eﬀects, βp =0.807
as compared to 0.721 in column 2.
       Taken together, these findings are consistent with the view that financial constraints are po-
tentially an important determinant of firm-level employment decision. These results are related
to Bakke and Whited (2011) that finds, among other variables, employment growth is related to
mandatory pension contributions. Likewise, these findings are also similar in spirit to Campello,
Giambona, Graham and Harvey (2010) who use survey evidence to show that credit lines eased the
impact of the recent financial crisis on a battery of corporate decisions such as investment, R&D
and employment. However, given the concerns about the endogeneity of profitability, liquidity,
and leverage and the relation between these variables and the economic opportunities available to
firms, we are cautious at this stage in arguing for a causal link between financial measures and
employment.
   5
     While adding firm fixed-eﬀects control for unobserved heterogeneity at the firm-level it potentially amplifies the
omitted variable concern. The endogeneity problem is potentially exacerbated when we include firm fixed-eﬀects
since the estimates are identified oﬀ of innovations in cash flows, cash holdings or debt that are more likely to be
correlated with innovations in economic opportunities as would be the case in a model of employment without financial
constraints. For example, Kashyap, Lamont and Stein (1994) use corporate cash holdings instead of cash flow in
specifications that do not include firm-fixed eﬀects to capture the eﬀect of ‘stale’ variation in corporate liquidity on
inventories. Our results hold whether or not we include firm fixed-eﬀects.
   6
     We define manufacturing firms as those operating in 4-digit SIC 2000-3999.




                                                           7
B.1       Does Capital Adjustment Drive Labor Sensitivities to Cash-flows?

One potential interpretation of our findings is that our results are driven solely by capital adjusting
to financial constraints. According to this view, financial constraints do not aﬀect labor directly
since, unlike capital, labor does not require financing. Instead, as in the investment-cash-flow
sensitivity literature, investment is limited by the availability of internal funds, and labor, in turn,
is adjusted for the decline in capital. That is, the sensitivity of labor to cash flows stems from
the omission of investment from the regressions and not from an intrinsic need to finance labor;
financial pressure causes firms to disinvest which mechanically leads to reduction in their labor
force.7
       This alternative view hinges on the notion that while capital requires upfront investment to
smooth the lumpiness associated with fixed costs, labor expenses are variable costs that are paid out
of sales. An extreme variant of this story is the case in which labor is fully paid with the completion
of a transaction – for example as in the case of waiters, bellhops or realtors – and hence labor
hoarding, hiring and firing are unaﬀected by financing needs. Still, in most production activities,
and particularly those associated with manufacturing as opposed to services – labor is not paid only
upon the sale of goods in the market, but rather needs to be financed throughout the production
process.8 Indeed, the larger sensitivities of employment to cash flows found in the analysis with
manufacturing firms in Table 2 are consistent with the notion that labor in manufacturing industries
is more likely to require financing as compared to labor in service industries.
       Nevertheless, even the theoretical argument for labor representing solely a variable cost is not
widely acceptable. Research in labor economics has suggested that labor is not a variable factor of
production but rather a fixed, or at least a quasi-fixed, factor (e.g., Oi (1962), Hamermesh (1989),
Hamermesh and Pfann (1996)) . This argument has been suggested first by Oi (1962) who writes:

         The cyclical behavior of labor markets reveals a number of puzzling features for which
         there are no truly satisfying explanations. [...] I believe that the major impediment to
         rational explanations for these phenomena lies in the classical treatment of labor as a
         purely variable factor. In this paper I propose a short-run theory of employment which
         rests on the premise that labor is a quasi-fixed factor. The fixed employment costs arise
   7
    Garmaise (2008) analyzes capital-labor decisions of financially constrained firms using small businesses data.
   8
    The argument that labor must be financed is similar to that in the literature on financial constraints and inventory
investment: firms must finance inventory investment during the production process.



                                                           8
         from investments by firms in hiring and training activities.9

We argue that labor has fixed-costs aspects that require financing to bridge upfront costs and
revenues. These may give rise to the role that financial constraints play in the inability of firms
to hoard highly trained employees even when the decline in demand for the firm’s goods may be
temporary
       In order to test the alternative explanation that capital adjustments are fully responsible for
the sensitivity of employment changes to financial constraints we directly include contemporane-
ous changes in investment (%∆investment) as well as the concurrent level of scaled investment
(Investment/Assetst−1 ) in the employment-based regressions of specification 1. Results are re-
ported in the last four columns of Table 2. If labor responds to cash-flows only through indirect
complementarities between labor and capital, then controlling for concurrent measures of invest-
ment should fully absorb this eﬀect and βp in these regressions should be equal to zero.
       As Table 2 demonstrates, controlling for the contemporaneous changes in investments (%∆investment)
as well as the concurrent level of scaled investment (Investment/Assetst−1 ) barely aﬀects the eco-
nomic significance of our main findings. Both the percent change in investment and concurrent
investment are positively and significantly correlated with employment change, suggesting that
capital and labor indeed move together, probably due to the demand for production factors and
capital-labor complementarities. In particular, the coeﬃcients on the financial variables are hardly
aﬀected by the inclusion of investment-based measures. As column 1 shows, when we account for
industry fixed-eﬀects βp declines to 0.336 (compared to 0.446 in column 1 of Table 2). Including
firm fixed-eﬀects results in a decrease of βp from 0.721 to 0.600. Similar patterns are observed for
the liquidity measure and for manufacturing firms (columns 7 and 8).10
       To summarize, we find that labor is sensitive to cash flows even after accounting for the con-
temporaneous changes in investment. Our analysis therefore suggests that the potential eﬀect of
financial constraints on employment is unlikely to be driven entirely by an accompanying change
in investment in response to these constraints.
   9
    See Oi (1962) page 538.
  10
    In unreported results we also add as an additional control the 4-digit SIC TFP growth. By doing so we are trying
to control better for investment opportunities making sure our results are not likely to be driven by the omitted
investment opportunities. Our results are unchanged.




                                                         9
C.       Leverage Stratification and Employment and Investment Cash-flow Sensi-
         tivities

We now turn to test whether the sensitivity of the change in the number of employees is higher for
firms that are more likely to be financially constrained. In particular, we examine how the eﬀects
we document vary with the financial leverage of the firm. To do so we sort manufacturing firms into
two groups based on their leverage – below and above the median. Sorting firms based on a-priori
measures of financial constraints and estimating investment cash-flow sensitivities has been used in
several previous studies of investment (e.g. Fazzari et al. (1988), Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein
(1991), Ramirez (1995) and Rauh (2006)).11
       We re-estimate the employment regressions for each of the groups and report the results in
Table 3. All the regressions are estimated with year and either industry of firm fixed-eﬀects. As
Table 3 shows, the sensitivity of the percentage changes in employment to cash-flows increases
when moving from firms with leverage below the median to more levered firms. For example, βp
is 0.569 for high levered firms as compared to 0.391 for low levered firms in industry fixed-eﬀects
specifications, and is 0.897 compared to 0.633 when we include firm fixed-eﬀects. Similar results
are documented in manufacturing firms (columns 5-8).
       These tests also suggest that measurement error concerns highlighted earlier are not likely
driving our findings. In particular, one could have plausibly argued that our earlier regressions
evaluating the labor and investment sensitivities suﬀered from measurement error in investment
opportunities – as measured by Q – which in turn is captured partially by financial health variables.
Consequently, the relation between financial health and employment was spurious and represented
only a mechanical relation between investment opportunities and labor. By demonstrating that
our results increase with leverage, we alleviate some of these endogeneity concerns. The relevant
criticism for our findings therefore has to be that not only is there measurement error in investment
opportunities – but also that this error has to be worse for highly leveraged firms. However, it is not
a-priori clear why the measurement error in Q should be correlated with leverage as a stratifying
variable.
  11
   Some other studies discussing the role of financial constraints on investment decisions include Whited (1992),
Kashyap, Lamont and Stein (1994), Calomiris and Hubbard (1995) and Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995).




                                                       10
II.     Evidence from Three Quasi-Experiments

Our findings in Section 1 are consistent with a role of financial constraints in firms’ employment
decisions but are also consistent with a Neoclassical model of investment and labor demand. We
next turn to evidence from three ‘quasi-experiments’ used in the investment-cash flow and finance-
growth literatures that allow us to more cleanly trace the eﬀects of finance on employment.

A.     The Eﬀects of Maturing Long-term Debt on Employment

We now attempt to alleviate endogeneity concerns about profitability and leverage by using the
‘maturing-debt’ approach pioneered by Almeida et al. (2009). The ‘maturing-debt’ empirical
strategy exploits heterogeneity in the maturity of long-term debt across firms. The empirical tests
examine whether firms with long-term debt maturing in a particular year reduce their investment
(as in Almeida et al. (2009)) or labor force (as in our paper) by more than their peers that do not
face the need to refinance maturing long-term debt in the same year. If external capital is costly
(e.g., Myers and Majluf (1984)) then firms which need to refinance large amounts of maturing
long-term debt will, as a result, adjust their real activity and reduce employment.
     The identification strategy relies on the assumption that variation in the amount of long-term
debt maturing in any given year is exogenous to corporate outcomes in that particular year. To
lend credence to this assumption, we use as our main independent variable measures of maturing
long-term debt which take into account liabilities that were issued with a time-lag to the year of
interest. For example, we compare employment outcomes of firms which in a particular year have a
large amount of maturing debt (issued two, three or four years prior to the year we study) to those
with a small amount of such debt maturing. Since this portion of the maturing debt was issued
prior to the year of maturity, variation in its level is arguably exogenous to market conditions and
investment opportunities that eventually arise in the year in which the debt becomes due.
     Compustat reports the amount of long-term debt which is payable in more than one year
through more than five years from the firm’s fiscal year end. We collect data on the amount
of future maturing debt. Specifically, we utilize Compustat variables dd3, dd4, and dd5 which
represent, respectively, the amount of long-term debt maturing three, four, and five years after the
annual reporting date. To measure the maturing debt structure of a firm in a particular year we
construct lagged values of these debt maturity variables: l2 dd3 is the two-year lag of dd3, l3 dd4



                                                 11
is the three year lag of dd4 and l4 dd5 is the four year lag of dd5. By construction, these variables
measure the amount of long-term debt maturing in the upcoming year of debt that was issued at
least two, three, or four years prior to the base year. For example, at year t, l2 dd3 measures the
amount of long-term debt maturing at t + 1 that was issued prior to year t − 2. We scale the lagged
variables by beginning of year assets.
       Next, we construct a dummy variable that takes on the value of one for those firms for which
long-term debt coming due in the upcoming year and issued at least t years ago is larger than 5
percent of total assets. We also define equivalent dummy variables using 10, 15, and 20 percent
threshold levels. These variables capture whether a firm has a significant amount of long term debt
maturing in the upcoming year which requires refinancing. By examining debt that was issued
prior to the year of analysis, we alleviate concerns that the level of maturing debt co-moves with
other market variables which have a direct impact on employment decisions. As control variables
we use the same set of controls as in the previous section. Following Lamont, Kashyap, and Stein
(1994), we also construct a dummy variable which takes on a value of one if a firm has a credit
rating to measure the firm’s access to the long-term bond market.12
       Table 4 provides summary statistics for the maturing debt variables. The average amount of
debt coming due in the upcoming year with an original maturity of greater than two, three, and
four years equals on average 2.6, 2.4, and 2.3 percent of assets, respectively. We next define dummy
variables that take the value of 1 if the maturing debt exceeds 5, 10, and 15 percent of the firm’s
total assets. As the table shows, 13.4 percent of firm-year observation have refinancing requirements
that exceed 5 percent of total assets and that were issued at least 2 year prior to the year in which
the debt comes due. Turning to higher levels of maturing debt, Table 4 shows that 4.9 percent
of firm-year observations in the sample must refinance maturing long-term debt that was issued
at least 2 years before the current year and that exceeds 10 percent of total assets. Similarly, 2.5
percent of the sample need to refinance maturing long-term debt that is higher than 15 percent of
total assets.
       Having defined the maturing debt variables, our baseline regression specification is:

          %∆employeesit = α + βLT × (Long term debt due)it + Xit−1 λ + yt θ + zi ψ + �it ,                   (2)

where the dependent variable: %∆employees is the annual percentage change in the number of
  12
       As is standard, we assume that firms with a missing observation in their credit rating are unrated.


                                                           12
employees within a firm. Long term debt due it is one of the dummy variables described above that
measures whether the value of long-term debt maturing in year t + 1 and issued two, three or
four years prior to year t is greater than 5, or 10 percent of the book value of firm assets. Xit−1
is a vector of firm specific control variables. These include lagged values of the firm market-to-
book ratio, firm internal liquidity, Liquidity it−1 , the log of the book value of firm assets, firm
leverage, asset maturity, profitability, and the credit rating dummy. All regressions include year
fixed eﬀects, yt , and depending on the specification also include either four-digit SIC fixed eﬀects
or firm fixed-eﬀects, denoted by the vector z. All regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity
robust standard errors which are clustered by firm. Similar to the analysis in Table 2 we control
for both the contemporaneous change in investment, %∆investment, as well as the concurrent
level of scaled investment (Investment/Assetst−1 ) to control for the possibility that the eﬀect on
employment is completely driven by an accompanying change in investment and not through a
direct link between the firm’s financial position and its ability to retain labor or its need to fire
employees.
   Results are presented in Table 5. As column 1 demonstrates, we find a negative and statistically
significant relation between the maturing long-term debt variable and the change in the number of
firm employees. The coeﬃcient of -0.017 (statistically significant at the 1 percent level) implies that
firms that have maturing debt that requires refinancing and that is worth at least 5% of the firm’s
total assets reduce the number of their employees by close to two percent. That is, consistent with
the presence of financial frictions, when firms have a large amount of debt coming to maturity which
must be refinanced, part of their adjustment occurs through a reduction in labor force. As column
2 shows, this negative relation holds when we include firm-fixed eﬀects as well (coeﬃcient=-0.012,
statistically significant at the 1 percent level).
   Next, we further lag the maturing debt variable to ensure that financing decisions do not coincide
in time with employment decisions. As columns 3 and 4 demonstrate, the eﬀect of maturing long-
term debt is negative and statistically significant when we study the eﬀect of debt issued at least
3 years prior to the base year. βLT is -0.021 (significant at the 1 percent-level) when we include
industry fixed-eﬀects compared to -0.013 (significant at the 5 percent level) when we control for
firm fixed-eﬀects. Likewise, even when we lag debt issuance by 4 years (columns 5 and 6) we find
that the eﬀect of maturing debt on employment is negative and significant (-0.023 and -0.014 for
industry- or firm-fixed eﬀects, respectively.) We obtain similar results when we repeat the analysis

                                                     13
using a dummy variable for maturing long-term debt that exceed ten percent of total assets (Table
6). As the table shows, the sensitivity of the change in the number of employees to maturing long-
term debt βLT , is now higher and equals -0.021 which is consistent with a larger refinancing need
than the five percent-based dummy variable in Table 5. Furthermore, our main result still hold –
and in some specifications the eﬀect is indeed larger – when we lag the maturing debt variable by
3 or 4 years.
   It is also important to note that while we focus our attention on maturing long-term debt as
the key explanatory variable in our regressions, we still obtain the same magnitudes as before for
both the profitability, liquidity and leverage variables. In some sense we are ‘over controlling’ in
these regressions capturing separate eﬀects of cash flow, cash holdings and leverage, while studying
the eﬀect of debt that needs to be rolled-over on each of the dependent variables.
   As would be expected, we also find that the firm market-to-book ratio is positively related to
employment growth. Consistent with Kashyap, Lamont, and Stein (1994), we also find a positive
relation between firm internal liquidity and the change in firm employment levels. In addition,
we find that increased leverage predicts lower employment growth. This could be driven by the
fact that firms in distress increase their leverage ratios, or alternatively, reflect firms’ decision to
reduce their labor force when faced with large future liabilities. We note, though, that the negative
relation between the long-term debt maturity variables and the reduction in the labor force does
not simply reflect a leverage eﬀect, as the results hold even after controlling for leverage.
   We have also repeated the analysis of regression 2, using diﬀerent threshold levels to define
significant levels of long-term debt. In particular, rather than using 5% and 10% thresholds, we
define dummy variables that take on the value of one if long-term debt maturing in the upcoming
year is greater than 15 or 20 percent of assets. In unreported results we find that the negative
relation between upcoming long-term debt and changes in firm level employment are robust to
using diﬀerent threshold levels when we control for 4-digit SIC fixed-eﬀects. Further, as would be
expected, the economic significance of the eﬀect monotonically increases with the threshold level:
as firms need to refinance a larger amount of debt, the reduction in employment levels is greater.
However, some of these eﬀects become statistically insignificant when we add firm fixed-eﬀects since
there is not suﬃcient within-firm variation when we require very large maturing debt cutoﬀs for
the dummy variables.



                                                  14
B.     The Eﬀect of Banking Deregulation on Unemployment

In the second ‘quasi-experiment’ we analyze the impact of bank deregulation on the level of state
unemployment. Our methodology follows the seminal work of Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) which
utilizes the introduction of state-level bank deregulation laws across the U.S. Historically, U.S.
banks faced legal restrictions on their ability to expand both within states and across state bor-
ders. The Douglas Amendment to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 barred, in eﬀect, bank
holding companies from expanding across state borders. In addition, most states had laws placing
restrictions on the ability of bank holding companies to operate multiple branches in-state.
     During the mid-1970s, states began to deregulate the banking industry by removing restrictions
on both intrastate and interstate bank branching. States introduced laws that allowed bank holding
companies to consolidate their subsidiaries into branches and to open new branches within state
lines. Furthermore, states passed laws that allowed out-of-state banks to purchase banks within
the state. Bank holding companies were thus enabled to expand across and within state lines.
Prior studies have shown that state bank deregulation led to changes in the local banking industry,
with associated increases in competition, improved bank eﬃciency, reductions in bank loan interest
rates and an increased likelihood of borrowing from banks (see e.g. Flannery (1984), Jayaratne
and Strahan (1996), and Rice and Strahan (2010)). Further, bank deregulation has been shown
to be related to real outcomes such as economic growth (Jayaratne and Strahan (1996)), income
distribution (Beck et al, (2010)), and economic volatility (Demyanyk et al, (2007)). In particular,
while the main focus in Beck et al, (2010) is on the relation between finance and income inequality,
they also show that banking deregulation laws reduced state-level unemployment.
     Following these studies, we use cross-sectional and time-series variation in the introduction of
bank deregulation laws – both inter- and intra- state – to analyze the impact of positive shocks
to banking markets on local unemployment levels. To do so, we collect information on state level
unemployment from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the period 1976-2009. Next, for each state,
we obtain the year of inter- and intra- state banking deregulation. While banking deregulation
occurred throughout the sample period, a large fraction of deregulation activity was concentrated
in the mid- to late 1980s. We use this information to define two dummy variables, Intrastate Bank
and Interstate Bank. For any particular state, Intrastate Bank, takes on the value of one in all years
following the introduction of the intra-state banking reform in that state. Similarly, Interstate Bank



                                                  15
takes on the value of one in all years following the introduction of the inter-state banking reform.
Our baseline regression specification is then as follows:

                       U Est = α + β × Bank Deregulationst + yt θ + zt ψ + �st ,                                    (3)

where U Est is the level of unemployment at state s at time t, Bank Deregulation st is one of the two
bank deregulation dummy variables Intrastate Bank and Interstate Bank at state s at time t. We
also include year fixed eﬀects, yt and state fixed-eﬀects, zt . Year fixed eﬀects control for nation-wide
business cycle eﬀects, while state fixed eﬀects control for non time-varying determinants of state
level unemployment such as regulatory predisposition or average tax rates. In some specifications
we include a state year-trend variable rather than state fixed eﬀects, while in others we include
region by year fixed eﬀects. Regions are defined as in Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) and split
the United States into four groups, the Northeast, Midwest, West, and South. All regressions are
estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by state. Since the
last state bank deregulation occurs in 1999 – by the state of Iowa – we run the regressions over the
time period 1976-1999.13 Our data comprises 1,152 state-year level observations.
       Results of regression (3) are presented in Table 7. As can be seen, we find that banking
deregulation is associated with reduced unemployment. Focusing first on intra-state deregulation
(the first three columns of the table) we find that the introduction of intra-state deregulation
reduces unemployment by between 0.45 and 0.86 percentage points. Since the average level of
unemployment over the sample period is 6.16% percent, the economic magnitude of the eﬀect is
quite substantial. The last three columns of Table 7, analyze the eﬀect of inter-state banking reform.
Here too we find a consistent statistically significant negative relation between banking reform and
unemployment. The eﬀect also appears to be stronger than that of intra-state reform. Depending
on the specification, passing inter-state banking reform laws which allow bank holding companies
to expand across state lines reduces unemployment by between 0.84% and 1.14%, representing
approximately a 15% decrease of the sample mean unemployment rate. Similar results are presented
in Beck et al (2010) who find that banking deregulation reduces income inequality and state-level
unemployment, and by Pagano and Pica (2011) who show that across countries employment growth
is associated with financial development.
  13
    Our results are robust to including additional years in the sample period to allow for a lag in the eﬀect of banking
deregulation.



                                                          16
       While the results in Table 7 point to an important link between credit and unemployment they
do not pin down the channel through which bank deregulation increase employment. However,
coupled with prior evidence in the literature that points to an increase in bank loan allocation eﬃ-
ciency, reduction in interest rates, and diminishing economic volatility following bank deregulation,
the results suggest that positive shocks to the financial intermediation environment within which
businesses operate may have an important eﬀect on firm employment outcomes.

C.       The Eﬀect of Japan’s Real Estate Decline on Unemployment in the U.S.

We now provide more evidence on the link between finance and employment using a credit supply-
shock experiment. We exploit a plausibly exogenous shock to bank loans supply in certain ge-
ographic areas in the U.S. and trace its impact on local unemployment rates. In particular, we
study the contraction of loans made by Japanese aﬃliated banks in the U.S. during the early 1990s
following the sharp economic downturn in Japan. As discussed in Peek and Rosengren (2000), this
contraction in credit was due to negative shocks to the balance sheet of the Japanese parent banks
of these aﬃliates as a result of the dramatic decline in real estate prices in Japan. While Japanese
real estate shocks were relatively exogenous to investment opportunities of firms in the U.S., they
led to a contraction in lending in U.S. regions in which Japanese aﬃliated banks were present.
       At their peak in 1992, the penetration of Japanese banks in many real estate markets in the
U.S. was strikingly large.14 This suggests that the contraction of such loans to firms in the vicinity
of these banks could have a significant impact on the financial health of these firms – for instance by
making refinancing of such loans diﬃcult. In addition, reduction in real estate lending by Japanese-
aﬃliated banks is also likely to be correlated with reduction in other type of credit by these banks.15
The empirical strategy we follow mirrors Peek and Rosengren (2000) and seeks to trace out the
impact of contraction of real estate loans by Japanese aﬃliated banks on unemployment in U.S.
regions with substantial presence of these banks before the real estate collapse in Japan. The
identification assumption relies on the notion that due to asymmetric information in lending, U.S-
based firms in the vicinity of Japanese-aﬃliated banks will find it diﬃcult to switch banks and
  14
     Peek and Rosengren (2000) note that, at their peak in 1992, U.S. subsidiaries and branches of Japanese banking
organizations accounted for one-fifth of all commercial real estate loans held by domestically owned commercial
banks plus foreign bank subsidiaries and branches in the United States. In many major urban markets, the Japanese
penetration was far more substantial. Japanese branches and subsidiaries accounted at their peak for 44 percent
of commercial real estate loans by large ($300 million or more in assets) U.S. commercial banks and foreign bank
aﬃliates located in California, 35 percent in New York State, and 23 percent in Illinois.
  15
     In our empirical analysis we confirm that this is indeed the case.


                                                        17
escape the supply-side contraction in credit.
    The data for this experiment come from call reports provided by Chicago Federal Reserve
Bank. In particular, we construct the market share (in terms of real estate loans) for Japanese
owned banks in a given MSA. We follow Peek and Rosengren (2000) and first identify those entities
that have a foreign owner (top holder) that is Japanese. We include those banks and branches
where the entity has a U.S bank charter as well as branches of banks that do not have a U.S.
charter. For each MSA, we create a panel data set that includes all large domestically owned
commercial banks located in the state that hold real estate loans in their portfolios, as well as
Japanese bank branches and subsidiaries within the MSA. The domestically owned banks in these
markets provide a comparison group for determining whether Japanese-owned banks presence has
a diﬀerential eﬀect on unemployment during the real estate crisis in Japan. Similar to Peek and
Rosengren (2000) we restrict our analysis to MSAs where Japanese banks were present before the
real estate peak in Japan in 1991.
    The resulting dataset that we use is similar to the one reported in Peek and Rosengren (2000).
Specifically, we find that MSAs in eight states have Japanese-bank-aﬃliate operations: California,
Florida, Georgia, Illinois, New York, Oregon, Texas, and Washington. Two other states (Hawaii
and Massachusetts) have Japanese bank presence for part of the sample period.16
    We use Japanese aﬃliate real estate lending (log of total real estate loans by Japanese bank
branches and subsidiaries located in a MSA) as an explanatory variable in explaining MSA un-
employment levels. We obtain data on MSA level unemployment for the sample period from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. The other control variables include lagged log of state GDP, lagged log
of labor force in the area and lagged share of Japanese aﬃliate real estate lending relative to total
real estate loans made by commercial banks in that MSA. We also include state fixed eﬀects and a
time trend to account for secular trends in unemployment and cluster the standard errors at MSA
level. The data spans the years 1990 to 1996.
    As column 1 of Table 8 demonstrates, real estate lending by Japanese banks and aﬃliates does
not explain MSA-level unemployment. In contrast, column 2 shows that, real estate lending by non-
Japanese banks (defined as log of total real estate loans by non-Japanese aﬃliated banks located in
a MSA) has a negative and statistically significant eﬀect on unemployment during the same period
  16
     The results reported in Table 8 include Hawaii and Massachusetts but are robust if we drop these states from
our analysis.



                                                       18
suggesting that, in general, non-Japanese bank presence has a larger eﬀect on unemployment. The
results in columns 1 & 2 provide average correlations across the sample period rather than the
isolated eﬀect of credit contraction by Japanese aﬃliated banks due to real estate decline in Japan.
We now turn to the main empirical results in which we identify this eﬀect.
   We exploit time-series variation in the real-estate market in Japan using an annual Japanese real
estate index as an instrument for the decline in U.S. lending by Japanese-aﬃliated banks. Column
3 present the results obtained from the first stage of regressing lending on the Japanese real-estate
index. Other controls in this regression are the same as those in column 1. As can be seen from
the table, there is a positive and statistically significant eﬀect of the Japanese real estate index
on real estate lending by the Japanese aﬃliated banks in the U.S. during the sample period. The
eﬀects are economically significant as well. In particular, the decline in real estate index between
1993 and 1995 (about a 40 point change) led to about 16% decline in lending by Japanese aﬃliates
around its mean level (40 ∗ .0055/1.43).
   We then assess how this translates into local unemployment by estimating a two-stage least-
squares specification – instrumenting the Japanese aﬃliated lending by the Japanese real estate
index – in column 4. As our results demonstrate, the IV estimates suggest that unemployment sig-
nificantly increases in MSAs in which there was a contraction in Japanese aﬃliated banks following
the real estate decline in Japan. These results are robust to the inclusion of state fixed-eﬀect as
well as time trends and state-trends in addition to additional controls. These eﬀects are econom-
ically large as well. The 16% contraction in lending by Japanese aﬃliated banks discussed above
lead to a one percentage point increase in MSA-level unemployment. This is a reasonably large
eﬀect relative to mean unemployment rate of around 7.5% for these MSAs during the period of our
analysis. These findings are consistent with those in Peek and Rosengren (2000) who show a drop
in employment growth of construction workers in states with Japanese-aﬃliated lending after the
real-estate collapse in Japan in early 1990s. However, our findings represent a broader decline in
unemployment since we examine the impact of credit supply shock on unemployment rates across
sectors within MSAs.
   We next assess the robustness of our findings by conducting a placebo test. In particular, we
estimate similar regressions as those in columns 3-5 instrumenting the non-Japanese aﬃliated bank
lending by the Japanese real estate index. If the instrument is valid then changes in the real estate
index in Japan should not be correlated with changes in the non-Japanese aﬃliated bank lending

                                                 19
– and therefore should not correlate with changes in unemployment in the second stage. As can
be observed in column 6, the first stage reveals that there is no correlation between movements of
Japanese real estate index and real estate lending by the non-Japanese aﬃliated banks in the US.
Moreover, the second stage IV regressions in columns 7 and 8 produce a statistically insignificant
relationship between unemployment and non-Japanese aﬃliated bank lending. These tests therefore
alleviate endogeneity concerns and concerns that the results found earlier are driven by spurious
correlation.
   Finally, in unreported tests we confirm that the reduction in real estate lending by Japanese-
aﬃliated banks is also correlated with reduction in other type of credit by these banks. All the
results reported in this section are qualitatively similar if we use total loans instead of real estate
loans granted by Japanese and non-Japanese aﬃliated banks. Overall, we find a strong relationship
between loan supply contraction and higher unemployment which further corroborates our central
thesis that credit aﬀects employment.


III.    Conclusion

We analyze the eﬀect of financial constraints, maturing debt, bank deregulation and bank balance-
sheets shocks on firm employment and local-unemployment outcomes. By doing so we provide a
collage of evidence showing that labor is sensitive to financial constraints and that unemployment is
aﬀected by the provision of bank credit. This leads us to conclude that finance plays an important
role in firm-level employment decisions. While most of our results are based on micro-level data or
local unemployment, our study has a broader message. Financial constraints and the availability
of credit are important for employment and can potentially amplify variation in employment levels
over the business cycle.




                                                  20
References
Almeida, Heitor, Campbello, Murillo, Laranjeira, Bruno and Weisbenner, Scott, “Corporate Debt
Maturity and the Real Eﬀects of the 2007 Credit Crisis”, Working Paper (2009).
Beck, Thorsten, Levine, Ross, and Levkov, Alexey, “Big Bad Banks: The Winners and Losers from
Bank Deregulation in the United States”, Journal of Finance, 65(5) (2010), 1637-1667.
Bernanke, Ben and Gertler, Mark, “Inside the Blackbox: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy
Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9 (1995), 27-48.
Calomiris, Charles, and Hubbard, Glen, “Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence from the
Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-1937”, Journal of Business, 68 (1995), 443-482.
Calomiris, Charles, Orphanides, Athanasios and Sharpe, Steven, “Leverage as a state variable for
employment, inventory accumulation, and fixed investment”, Working Paper, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System (1994).
Campello, Murillo, Giambona, Erasmo, Graham, John R., and Campbell R., Harvey, “Liquidity
Management and Corporate Investment During a Financial Crisis”, Review of Financial Studies
Forthcoming, 2010.
Demyanyk, Yuliya, Ostergaard, Charlotte, and Sorensen, Bent E., “U.S. banking deregulation,
small businesses, and interstate insurance of personal income”, Journal of Finance, 62 (2007),
2763-2801.
Fazzari, Steven, Hubbard, Glen and Petersen, Bruce, “Financing Constraints and corporate invest-
ment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1988), 141-195.
Farmer, Roger E. A., ‘Implicit Contracts with Asymmetric Information and Bankruptcy: The
Eﬀect of Interest Rates on Layoﬀs,” Review of Economic Studies, 52(3) (1985) 427-442.
Flannery, Mark J., “The social costs of unit banking restrictions”, Journal of Monetary Economics,
13 (1984), 237-249.
Garmaise, Mark J., “Production in Entrepreneurial Firms: The Eﬀects of Financial Constraints on
Labor and Capital,” Review of Financial Studies, 21 (2008), 543-577.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Himmelberg Charles, “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, 36 (1995), 531-572.
Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E., “Externalities in economies with imperfect information
and incomplete markets”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101 (1986) 229-264.
Hamermesh, Daniel “Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment Costs”, American Economic
Review, 79 (1989), 674-689.
Hamermesh, Daniel, and Pfann, Gerard, “Adjustment Costs in Factor Demand.”, Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature, 34 (1996), 1264-1292.
Hanka, G., “Debt and the Terms of Employment,” Journal of Financial Economics (1998) 48 (3),
245-82.
Hoshi, Takeo, Kashyap, Anil and Scharfstein, David, “Corporate structure, liquidity, and invest-
ment: evidence from Japanese industrial groups”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (1991),
33-60.
Hubbard, Glenn, “Capital-Market Imperfections and Investment”, Journal of Economic Literature,
36, (1998),193-225.

                                               21
Jayaratne, Jith, and Strahan, Philip E., “The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
deregulation”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, (1996) 639-670.
Kaplan, Steve, and Zingales, Luigi, “Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful measures
of financing constraints?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1997), 159-216.
Kashyap, Anil, Lamont, Owen and Stein, Jeremy, “ Credit Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior
of Inventories, Quarterly Journal of Economics, (1994), 555-82.
Myers, Stewart, and Majluf, Nicholas, “Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
have information that investors do not have”, Journal of Financial Economics 13 (1984), 187-222.
Ofek, Eli, “Capital Structure and firm response to poor performance,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 34 (1993), 3-30.
Oi, Walter, “Labor as a Quasi-fixed Factor”, Journal of Political Economy, 70 (1962), 538-555.
Pagano, Marco, “Labour and Finance”, (2010) Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford University.
Pagano, Marco and Pica, Giovanni, “Finance and Employment”, (2011) CSEF Working Paper No.
283.
Pagano, Marco and Volpin, Paolo, “Labor and Finance”, (2008) London Business School Working
Paper.
Peek, Joe and Rosengren, Eric, “Collateral Damage: Eﬀects of the Japanese Real Estate Collapse
on Credit Availability and Real Activity in the United States”, American Economic Review, 90
(2000), 30-45.
Poterba, James, “Comment on Financing Constraints and Corporate Investment,” Brookings Pa-
pers on Economic Activity, 1988, 200-204.
Ramirez, Carlos, “Did J.P. Morgan’s Men Add Liquidity? Corporate Investment, Cash Flow, and
Financial Structure at the Turn of the Century”, Journal of Finance, (1995), 661-678.
Rauh, Joshua , “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of Corporate
Plans,” Journal of Finance 61(1) (2006a), 33-71.
Rice, Tara, and Strahan, Philip E., “Does credit competition aﬀect small-firm finance?”, Journal
of Finance, 65(3) (2010).
Sharpe, Steven, “Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of Employ-
ment”, American Economic Review, 84 (1994), 1060-74.
Stein, Jeremy, “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment”, Handbook of the Economics and
Finance, Edited by G.M. Constantinidies, M. Harris and R. Stulz (2003).
Whited, Toni, “Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from Panel
Data”, Journal of Finance, 47 (1992), 1425-1460.




                                               22
Appendix A: Variable description and construction
For reference, the following is a list of the main variables used in the paper, their construction and
their sources.

     %∆ employees : the percentage change in number of employees from t-1 to t [Compustat
     annual item emp]. (source: Compustat).

     %∆ investment: the percentage change in investment from t-1 to t [Compustat annual item
     capx]. (source: Compustat).

     I/K: capital expenditure scaled by beginning of period’s assets. [Compustat annual item
     capxt divided by att−1 ]. (source: Compustat).

     Size: either the dollar book value or the natural logarithm of the book value of the assets
     [Compustat annual Item at] (Source: Compustat).

     Market to Book: book value of assets [Compustat annual item at] plus the market value of
     equity [Compustat annual items at+(csho*prcc f )] minus the book value of equity and deferred
     taxes [Compustat annual item ceq+txdb], all over (book value of assets*0.9 [Compustat annual
     item at]+market value of assets*0.10. (Source: Compustat).

     Profitability: EBITDA [Compustat annual item oibdp] over beginning of period assets [Com-
     pustat annual item at] (Source: Compustat).

     Leverage: total debt [Compustat annual items dltt+dlc+dclo] divided by total assets [Com-
     pustat annual item at]. (Source: Compustat).

     Asset maturity: net property, plant, and equipment [Compustat annual item ppegt] divided
     by annual depreciation expenses [Compustat annual item dp]. (Source: Compustat).

     Liquidity: cash plus marketable securities [Compustat annual item cashplus] divided by total
     assets [Compustat annual item at] (Source: Compustat).

     Long-term debt due issued t years ago: a dummy that take the value of 1 if the amount of
     long-term debt maturing t+1 years after the annual reporting date [Compustat annual item
     dd3] lagged by t years divided by total assets [Compustat annual item at] is higher than 5%,
     10%, 15% or 20%. (Source: Compustat).

     Credit Rating Dummy: A dummy variable that takes the value of one and zero otherwise,
     if the firm has an S&P Long-Term Domestic Issuer Credit Rating. (Source: Standard and
     Poors).




                                                 23
                                               Table 1:
                                 Descriptive Statistics: Main Variables
This table provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the empirical analysis. We report mean, median, 25th
and 75th percentiles, standard deviation and the minimum and maximum values of these variables. Appendix A provides
information on construction and definitions of these variables.



                                            25th                       75th        Standard
                               Mean       Percentile     Median      Percentile    Deviation       Min           Max

Employees                     13,075          1,300        3,100       9,800        36,400           500        876,800
%∆ employees                  6.043%        -4.213%       1.688%      10.280%      24.683%       -70.782%      239.906%
%∆ investment                12.570%       -29.323%      -2.914%      29.640%      82.676%       -99.964%     1137.991%
Investment/Assetst−1           0.082          0.033        0.060       0.102         0.079          0.000         0.913
Sizet−1                      724.116         36.557      113.156      476.125      2,379.384        1.238     81,380.850
Asset Maturityt−1             16.275         10.183       14.475       19.554        9.536          0.713        99.211
Qt−1                           1.366          0.938        1.139       1.549         0.710          0.274         9.576
Liquidityt−1                   0.096          0.017        0.048       0.122         0.125          0.000         0.974
Leveraget−1                    0.292          0.142        0.280       0.408         0.210          0.000         5.106
Profitabilityt                 0.149          0.093        0.140       0.200         0.106         -1.932         0.621
Credit rating dummyt−1         0.430          0.000        0.000       1.000         0.495          0.000         1.000




                                                          24
                                                 Table 2:
                                        Employment, Investment and Cash Flow
This table reports the results of regressions relating employment decision of firms to their cash flows for all non-financial firms
and manufacturing firms in our sample. Manufacturing firms are defined to be those that are operating in 4-digit SIC 2000-3999.
The dependent variable used in the regressions is %∆employees. All regressions include lagged values of the firm market-to-book
ratio, firm internal liquidity, the log of the book value of firm assets, firm leverage, asset maturity, profitability, the credit rating
dummy and year fixed eﬀects. We also include four-digit SIC fixed eﬀects or firm fixed eﬀects in these regressions. We control
for contemporaneous change in investment as well as for the concurrent level of scaled investment in last four regressions. All
regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by firm and reported in parentheses.
Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. a, b and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.


                      All non-financial firms       Manufacturing firms only         All non-financial firms       Manufacturing firms only
                          %∆           %∆               %∆           %∆                  %∆           %∆               %∆           %∆
                      employees employees           employees    employees           employees employees           employees    employees
                          (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)                 (5)          (6)              (7)          (8)
Qt−1                    0.043 a      0.039 a          0.012 b      0.011 c             0.030 a      0.027 a           0.007       0.009 a
                        (0.004)      (0.005)          (0.005)      (0.006)             (0.004)      (0.005)          (0.005)      (0.006)
Liquidityt−1            0.283 a      0.351 a          0.293 a      0.316 a             0.275 a      0.340 a          0.283 a      0.298 a
                        (0.018)      (0.026)          (0.022)      (0.033)             (0.016)      (0.024)          (0.020)      (0.030)
Log sizet−1            -0.007 a      0.033 a         -0.008 a     0.039 a             -0.004 a     0.036 a          -0.005 a     0.043 a
                        (0.001)      (0.004)          (0.001)      (0.005)             (0.001)      (0.004)          (0.001)      (0.005)
Leveraget−1            -0.013 c     -0.096 a           0.007      -0.080 a              0.011      -0.060 a           0.013      -0.057 a
                        (0.007)      (0.013)          (0.010)      (0.017)             (0.008)      (0.013)          (0.010)      (0.016)
Asset                   0.002 a      0.005 a          0.001 a      0.006 a             0.001 a      0.003 a          0.0001       0.004 a
maturityt−1            (0.0003)    (0.0004)          (0.0003)      (0.001)            (0.0002)    (0.0004)          (0.0004)      (0.001)
Profitabilityt          0.446 a      0.721 a          0.597 a      0.807 a             0.336 a      0.600 a          0.477 a      0.701 a
                        (0.027)      (0.035)          (0.031)      (0.040)             (0.025)      (0.035)          (0.029)      (0.038)
%∆ investmentt                                                                         0.023 a      0.020 a          0.027 a      0.026 a
                                                                                       (0.002)      (0.002)          (0.003)      (0.003)
I/Kt                                                                                   0.676 a      0.595 a          0.583 a      0.429 a
                                                                                       (0.030)      (0.039)          (0.048)      (0.056)

Adjusted R2              0.15           0.29           0.15             0.27            0.19           0.32           0.18             0.29
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                     Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
4-digit SIC              Yes             No            Yes              No              Yes             No            Yes               No
Firm                      No            Yes             No             Yes               No            Yes             No              Yes
Observations            51,609         51,609         27,967          27,967           51,609         51,609         27,967           27,967




                                                                25
                                     Table 3:
           Employment and Investment Cash Flow Sensitivities: Stratified by Leverage
This table reports the results of regressions relating employment decision of firms to their cash flows estimated in samples stratified by
leverage. The first four specifications are estimated using non-financial firms while last four specifications use only manufacturing firms.
Manufacturing firms are defined to be those that are operating in 4-digit SIC 2000-3999. The dependent variable used in the regressions
is %∆employees. All regressions include lagged values of the firm market-to-book ratio, firm internal liquidity, the log of the book value
of firm assets, firm leverage, asset maturity, profitability, the credit rating dummy and year fixed eﬀects. We also include four-digit
SIC fixed eﬀects or firm fixed eﬀects in these regressions. All regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors
which are clustered by firm and reported in parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. a, b and c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                     All non-financial firms                                   Manufacturing firms only
                               Leverage                   Leverage                       Leverage                   Leverage
                           low          high          low          high              low          high        low            high
                           %∆           %∆            %∆           %∆                %∆           %∆          %∆             %∆
                       employees employees employees employees                   employees employees employees           employees
                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)        (7)             (8)
Qt−1                     0.045 a      0.055 a      0.034 a       0.064 a           0.015 a      0.021 b      0.003         0.038 a
                         (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.010)           (0.005)      (0.010)     (0.007)        (0.013)
Liquidityt−1             0.270 a      0.395 a      0.324 a       0.487 a           0.307 a      0.334 a     0.321 a        0.370 a
                         (0.020)      (0.035)       (0.031)      (0.055)           (0.026)      (0.040)     (0.041)        (0.071)
Log sizet−1             -0.011 a     -0.006 a      0.028 a       0.040 a          -0.010 a     -0.008 a     0.033 a        0.053 a
                         (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.007)      (0.006)           (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.009)        (0.008)
Leveraget−1              0.123 a     -0.060 a      -0.068 a     -0.141 a           0.124 a     -0.060 a    -0.085 b       -0.093 a
                         (0.022)      (0.013)       (0.032)      (0.020)           (0.027)      (0.017)     (0.038)        (0.026)
Asset maturityt−1        0.001 c      0.002 a      0.005 a       0.005 a            0.001       0.002 a     0.006 a        0.006 a
                        (0.0004)     (0.0002)       (0.001)      (0.001)           (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)
Profitabilityt           0.391 a      0.569 a      0.633 a       0.897 a           0.561 a      0.708 a     0.751 a        0.905 a
                         (0.034)      (0.039)       (0.044)      (0.055)           (0.035)      (0.057)     (0.046)        (0.071)

Adjusted R2               0.17           0.13          0.37           0.27          0.16           0.14          0.34             0.23
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
4-digit SIC               Yes            Yes            No             No           Yes            Yes            No              No
Firm                       No             No           Yes            Yes            No             No           Yes             Yes
Observations             25,812         25,797        25,812         25,797        16,687         11,280        16,687          11,280




                                                               26
                                            Table 4:
                           Maturing Long-term Debt Approach: Summary Statistics
This table provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis that uses the ‘maturity-debt’ approach. In Panel A we report
the summary statistics of the amount of long-term debt coming due in the upcoming year as a percent of assets. In Panels B, C and D we
report summary statistics of the dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the maturing debt exceeds 5 percent, 10 percent and 15 percent
of the firm’s total assets, respectively. In each of the panels we take the long-term debt coming due in the upcoming year with an original
maturity of greater than two, three, and four years. We report mean, median, 25th and 75th percentiles, standard deviation and the minimum
and maximum values of these variables. Appendix A provides information on construction and definitions of these variables.



                                                              25th                        75th        Standard
                                                Mean        Percentile     Median       Percentile    Deviation        Min           Max

                                          Panel A: Long-term debt          due to total assets
Long-term debt due issued 2 years ago         0.026      0.001              0.011      0.030             0.053         0.000         2.844
Long-term debt due issued 3 years ago         0.024     0.0007              0.009      0.026             0.052         0.000         1.888
Long-term debt due issued 4 years ago         0.023     0.0003              0.008      0.024             0.058         0.000         2.365

                        Panel B: Long-term debt due>5% of total assets                    (dummy variables)
Long-term debt due issued 2 years ago  0.134     0.000     0.000                          0.000    0.340               0.000         1.000
Long-term debt due issued 3 years ago  0.116     0.000     0.000                          0.000    0.320               0.000         1.000
Long-term debt due issued 4 years ago  0.111     0.000     0.000                          0.000    0.314               0.000         1.000

                       Panel C:       Long-term debt due>10% of total assets (dummy variables)
Long-term debt due issued 2 years     ago    0.049     0.000     0.000       0.000    0.215                            0.000         1.000
Long-term debt due issued 3 years     ago    0.042     0.000     0.000       0.000    0.199                            0.000         1.000
Long-term debt due issued 4 years     ago    0.041     0.000     0.000       0.000    0.200                            0.000         1.000

                       Panel D:       Long-term debt due>15% of total assets (dummy variables)
Long-term debt due issued 2 years     ago    0.025     0.000     0.000       0.000    0.157                            0.000         1.000
Long-term debt due issued 3 years     ago    0.022     0.000     0.000       0.000    0.146                            0.000         1.000
Long-term debt due issued 4 years     ago    0.024     0.000     0.000       0.000    0.152                            0.000         1.000




                                                            27
                                       Table 5:
                 The Eﬀect of Maturing Long-term Debt on Employment
                      (Maturing Debt at least 5% of Firm’s Assets)
This table reports the results of regressions relating employment decision of firms to their maturing long-term debt for
firms in our sample. The dependent variable used in the regressions is %∆employees. All regressions include lagged
values of the firm market-to-book ratio, firm internal liquidity, the log of the book value of firm assets, firm leverage,
asset maturity, profitability, the credit rating dummy and year fixed eﬀects. We also control for contemporaneous
investment change in the firm. The regressions also include four-digit SIC fixed eﬀects or firm fixed eﬀects. All
regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by firm and reported in
parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. a, b and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.


                                       Long-term debt due>5% of total assets
                               %∆             %∆          %∆             %∆                    %∆               %∆
                           employees      employees     employees     employees              employees        employees
                               (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)                   (5)              (6)
Long-term debt due          -0.017 a       -0.012 b
issued 2 years ago           (0.004)        (0.005)

Long-term debt due                                           -0.021 a        -0.013 b
issued 3 years ago                                            (0.004)         (0.005)

Long-term debt due                                                                            -0.023 a         -0.014 a
issued 4 years ago                                                                             (0.005)          (0.005)

%∆ investmentt               0.032 a         0.025 a          0.033 a          0.026 a         0.030 a          0.024 a
                             (0.003)         (0.004)          (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.003)          (0.003)
I/Kt                         0.632 a         0.572 a          0.629 a          0.583 a         0.611 a          0.581 a
                             (0.048)         (0.067)          (0.049)          (0.068)         (0.050)          (0.070)
Qt−1                         0.013 b          0.003           0.009 a           0.002          0.009 b           0.003
                             (0.004)         (0.006)          (0.004)          (0.006)         (0.004)          (0.006)
Liquidityt−1                 0.252 a         0.347 a          0.240 a          0.317 a         0.246 a          0.317 a
                             (0.020)         (0.035)          (0.020)          (0.034)         (0.020)          (0.034)
Log sizet−1                  0.005 a         0.058 a          0.006 a          0.059 a         0.006 a          0.054 a
                             (0.002)         (0.006)          (0.002)          (0.006)         (0.002)          (0.006)
Leveraget−1                   0.014         -0.048 a           0.016          -0.049 a          0.017          -0.051 a
                             (0.010)         (0.017)          (0.010)          (0.018)         (0.011)          (0.019)
Asset maturityt−1            0.001 c        0.004 a           0.001 b          0.004 a         0.001 a          0.004 a
                            (0.0003)         (0.001)         (0.0003)          (0.001)        (0.0003)          (0.001)
Credit rating               -0.027 a        -0.035 a         -0.030 a         -0.036 a        -0.031 a         -0.043 a
dummyt−1                     (0.005)         (0.009)          (0.005)          (0.009)         (0.005)          (0.009)
Profitabilityt               0.382 a         0.684 a          0.414 a          0.702 a         0.433 a          0.711 a
                             (0.031)         (0.044)          (0.031)          (0.044)         (0.030)          (0.046)

Adjusted R2                   0.17            0.29              0.17            0.29            0.17             0.30
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                          Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
4-digit SIC                   Yes              No              Yes              No              Yes               No
Firm                           No             Yes               No             Yes               No              Yes
Observations                 25,374          25,374           24,940          24,940           23,779           23,779




                                                           28
                                       Table 6:
                 The Eﬀect of Maturing Long-term Debt on Employment
                     (Maturing Debt at least 10% of Firm’s Assets)
This table reports the results of regressions relating employment decision of firms to their maturing long-term debt for
firms in our sample. The dependent variable used in the regressions is %∆employees. All regressions include lagged
values of the firm market-to-book ratio, firm internal liquidity, the log of the book value of firm assets, firm leverage,
asset maturity, profitability, the credit rating dummy and year fixed eﬀects. We also control for contemporaneous
investment change in the firm. The regressions also include four-digit SIC fixed eﬀects or firm fixed eﬀects. All
regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by firm and reported in
parentheses. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. a, b and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.


                                       Long-term debt due>10% of total assets
                               %∆             %∆           %∆            %∆                    %∆               %∆
                           employees       employees     employees    employees              employees        employees
                               (1)             (2)         (3)            (4)                  (5)              (6)
Long-term debt due          -0.021 a        -0.013 c
issued 2 years ago           (0.006)        (0.007)

Long-term debt due                                           -0.029 a         -0.013 c
issued 3 years ago                                            (0.006)          (0.007)

Long-term debt due                                                                            -0.027 a         -0.013 c
issued 4 years ago                                                                             (0.007)         (0.007)

%∆ investmentt               0.031 a         0.025 a          0.033 a          0.026 a         0.030 a          0.024 a
                             (0.003)         (0.004)          (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.003)          (0.003)
I/Kt                         0.633 a         0.574 a          0.630 a          0.585 a         0.614 a          0.583 a
                             (0.048)         (0.067)          (0.049)          (0.068)         (0.050)          (0.070)
Qt−1                         0.013 b          0.003           0.010 b           0.002          0.009 b           0.003
                             (0.004)         (0.006)          (0.004)          (0.006)         (0.004)          (0.006)
Liquidityt−1                 0.253 a         0.347 a          0.240 a          0.317 a         0.247 a          0.316 a
                             (0.020)         (0.035)          (0.020)          (0.034)         (0.020)          (0.034)
Log sizet−1                  0.005 a         0.058 a          0.005 a          0.059 a         0.006 a          0.054 a
                             (0.002)         (0.006)          (0.002)          (0.006)         (0.002)          (0.006)
Leveraget−1                   0.012         -0.050 a           0.014          -0.051 a          0.015          -0.052 a
                             (0.010)         (0.017)          (0.010)          (0.018)         (0.010)          (0.019)
Asset maturityt−1            0.001 c        0.004 a           0.001 b          0.004 a         0.001 a          0.004 a
                            (0.0003)         (0.001)         (0.0003)          (0.001)        (0.0003)          (0.001)
Credit rating               -0.027 a        -0.035 a         -0.030 a         -0.036 a        -0.032 a         -0.044 a
dummyt−1                     (0.005)         (0.009)          (0.005)          (0.009)         (0.005)          (0.009)
Profitabilityt               0.382 a         0.684 a          0.414 a          0.702 a         0.433 a          0.711 a
                             (0.031)         (0.044)          (0.031)          (0.044)         (0.030)          (0.046)

Adjusted R2                   0.17            0.29              0.17            0.29            0.17             0.30
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                          Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
4-digit SIC                   Yes              No              Yes              No              Yes               No
Firm                           No             Yes               No             Yes               No              Yes
Observations                 25,374          25,374           24,940          24,940           23,779           23,779




                                                           29
                                                Table 7:
                                    Banking Deregulation and Unemployment
This table reports the results of regressions relating unemployment rates to the passing of state-level bank deregulation
laws . The dependent variable is the state-level unemployment rates over the sample period 1976-1999. For each state,
the two independent variables, Intra-bank deregulation and Inter-bank deregulation are dummy variables taking on
the values of one in years following the passage of the state Intra- and Inter- banking deregulation laws. Region fixed
eﬀects are defined based on four U.S. geographic regions: Northeast, Midwest, West, and South. All regressions are
estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by state and are reported in parentheses.
a, b and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                  Unemployment        Unemployment        Unemployment         Unemployment        Unemployment         Unemployment
Intra-bank           -0.449 c            -0.856 b            -0.556 b
deregulation          (0.236)             (0.359)             (0.227)

Inter-bank                                                                         - 0.839 a           -1.081 a             -1.142 a
deregulation                                                                        (0.280)             (0.286)              (0.257)

Adjusted R2             0.74                0.78                 0.74                0.74                 0.78               0.75

Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
State                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
State trends            No                   Yes                 No                  No                   Yes                 No
Region*Year             No                   No                  Yes                 No                   No                  Yes
Observations           1,152                1,152               1,152               1,152                1,152               1,152




                                                              30
                                      Table 8:
            Lending and Unemployment: The Eﬀect of the Japanese Bank Crisis
This table reports the results of regressions relating unemployment rates in the U.S. to the lending by Japanese-aﬃliated banks
during the real estate decline in Japan. The dependent variable is MSA-level unemployment rate over the sample period 1990-
1996. For each MSA, we construct an independent variable, Japanese-aﬃliate lending which is the log of total real estate loans
by Japanese bank branches and subsidiaries located in a MSA. Similarly, we construct the independent variable non-Japanese
aﬃliate lending as the log of total real estate loans by non-Japanese commercial banks located in a MSA. These regressions
all include time trends and state fixed eﬀects. We also include state year trend fixed eﬀects in two specifications reported in
the table. All regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors which are clustered by MSA and are
reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. a, b and c denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                             OLS              First                 IV                 First                      IV
                                              Stage                                    Stage

                      Unemployment          Japanese        Unemployment           Non-Japanese              Unemployment
                                             lending                                 lending

                       (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)              (8)

Japanese             0.070                                -5.194a        -4.290a
lending             (0.123)                               (1.855)        (1.332)
Non-Japanese                    -0.756b                                                                54.97            -51.14
lending                         (0.291)                                                               (117.9)          (821.9)
Real Estate                                  0.006a                                   -0.0005
Index                                        (0.002)                                  (0.001)
GDPt−1              -3.918a     -3.057b                    5.567          -0.755                       -57.15           6.794
                    (1.341)     (1.425)                   (4.664)        (4.457)                      (111.2)          (476.0)
Labor forcet−1       -0.676      0.368                    10.39b         8.490a                        -65.63           60.00
                    (0.435)     (0.469)                   (4.118)        (2.989)                      (139.5)          (972.8)
Japanese             -0.433      4.235                    288.1c         238.6c                        -55.69           59.72
sharet−1            (9.414)     (8.481)                   (163.4)        (126.7)                      (160.0)          (913.2)

Adjusted R2          0.297         0.317      0.693           .             .          0.813             .                .

Other Controls                                 Yes                                      Yes
Time-trend            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes

Fixed-Eﬀects
State                 Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes
State trend           No           No          No           No            Yes           No              No              Yes
Observations          684          684         684          684           684           684             684             684
Treated                68           68         68           68            68             68              68              68




                                                             31
