                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                TRADE CREDIT CONTRACTS

                                        Leora F. Klapper
                                          Luc Laeven
                                        Raghuram Rajan

                                       Working Paper 17146
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17146


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2011




We thank PrimeRevenue for generously sharing the trade credit contract data, Alexander
Ljungqvist (the Editor), two anonymous referees, Stijn Claessens, Shane Maine, John Sculley,
and Chris Woodruff for useful comments or suggestions, and Teresa Molina and Douglas Randall
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Leora F. Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Credit Contracts
Leora F. Klapper, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 17146
June 2011, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G32

                                           ABSTRACT

We employ a novel dataset on almost 30,000 trade credit contracts to describe the broad
characteristics of the parties that contract together and the key contractual terms of these
contracts. Whereas prior work has typically used information on only one side of the buyer-seller
transaction, this paper utilizes information on both, allowing for the first analysis of buyer-seller
pairs. An equally important distinction is that we have multiple contracts for the same buyer or
supplier firms, rather than a firm-average response, allowing for the correction of time-invariant
firm characteristics that might determine the choice of credit terms. We find that the largest and
most creditworthy buyers receive contracts with the longest maturities from smaller suppliers,
and that discounts for early payment tend to be offered to riskier buyers. (JEL G32)


Leora F. Klapper                                  Raghuram Rajan
The World Bank                                    Booth School of Business
1818 H Street, NW                                 University of Chicago
Washington, DC 20433                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
lklapper@worldbank.org                            Chicago, IL 60637
                                                  and NBER
Luc Laeven                                        raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
European Central Bank
Research Department
Sonnemannstrasse 20
Frankfurt am Main
GERMANY
Luc.Laeven@ecb.europa.eu
1. Introduction

       Trade credit is an important source of external financing for firms of all sizes (Demirguc-

Kunt and Maksimovic, 2001). For instance, suppliers often offer working capital financing to

their buyers, some of whom may be small or credit constrained (McMillan and Woodruff, 1999;

and Marotta, 2005). Trade credit has also been shown to act as a substitute for bank credit during

periods of monetary tightening or financial crisis (see, for example, Calomiris et al., 1995; Choi

and Kim, 2005; and Love et al., 2007).

       Trade credit, however, is not used for financing purposes alone. Trade credit, it has been

argued, is a way for a supplier to engage in price discrimination, giving favored or more

powerful clients longer terms (see, for example, Wilner, 2000; Fisman and Raturi, 2004; Van

Horen, 2005; and Giannetti, Burkart, and Ellingsen, 2011). Furthermore, trade credit may simply

be customary in an industry, with customs driven by economic rationales such as allowing

buyers time to assess the quality of the supplied goods (Lee and Stowe, 1993).

       Studies have explored the supply and demand of trade credit around the world (for

instance, Petersen and Rajan, 1997; Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff, 2002; Boissay and Gropp,

2007; and Fabbri and Klapper, 2009). Yet, in part due to the lack of detailed contract-level data

on trade credit terms, little is known about how the contract terms of trade credit vary across

buyer and supplier characteristics. For example, what is the typical contract period of trade

credit? Which buyers receive longer net days (days before payment is due)? Which firms are

offered early payment discounts? Equally important, past studies have not been able to

investigate issues such as whether the relative bargaining power of buyers and suppliers matters

because they have not had access to data on both sides of the contract.




                                                3
       This paper addresses these questions using a unique database that includes contract

information for about 30,000 supplier transactions for 56 large buyers in the United States and

Europe. The data includes detailed information on contract terms: the contract size (the amount

in trade credit to spend in U.S. dollars), net days (days within which the buyer has to pay the

amount owed), discount days (days within which the buyer has to pay to get the full discount),

and the discount rate (the size of the discount if the amount is paid by the discount date).

       What really sets our dataset apart from the earlier survey based work, however, is that our

data has bilateral contract information, allowing us to control both for buyer and supplier firm

characteristics and analyze both sides of the buyer-seller transaction, whereas earlier work only

analyzed one side of the buyer-seller transaction. An equally important advantage with respect to

previously used survey data is that we have multiple contracts for the same buyer and supplier

firms, rather than a firm-average response. This allows us to include firm fixed effects in our

empirical analysis, thereby correcting for time-invariant firm characteristics that might determine

the choice of credit terms.

       The limitations of our data set are that the number of buyers is small (a total of 56), which

limits our analysis of buyer characteristics, and that we have relatively little information about

the sellers in our sample. For example, we do not have information on the industry of the seller.

Unfortunately, we have no way of getting more data. Also, because our buyers are mostly large

firms we are less likely to pick up the financing motive as strongly as in the earlier literature

(although we do have a mix of investment and non-investment grade buyers). The silver lining is

that this allows us to focus on other non-financing motives.

       We start by summarizing typical trade credit contracts terms, such as number of discount

days, discount rate, and net days, and analyze how they relate to buyer and seller characteristics.




                                                 4
We then turn to analysis. Our primary conclusion is that no single motive is likely to account for

all the patterns in even our limited data. Instead, a combination of motives appears to be at work.

       Specifically, it seems hard to conclude that trade credit is primarily a cheap way for

suppliers to provide buyers financing in our sample (most of our buyers are larger and better

rated than our suppliers, and still get credit). Instead, non-financing motives seem to be operative.

In particular, large, investment-grade buyers get long terms from small suppliers. While this is

consistent with large buyers exercising market power, they do not seem to exercise it in the most

effective way one might imagine – obtaining upfront price discounts from the small supplier

rather than obtaining financing, which the supplier has no comparative advantage in providing.

This suggests that another motive for extending trade credit is also at work: Relatively untrusted

suppliers have to extend longer terms to buyers to guarantee product quality. However, this

leaves suppliers exposed to riskier credits. This is where discounts help. Riskier buyers are

offered discounts to repay early so that suppliers can continue offering product quality warranties

even while containing the credit risk in their trade credit portfolio.

       The paper continues as follows. In section 2 we review theories of trade credit, and we

describe our data set in section 3. In section 4, we present the empirical results, and we conclude

in section 5.



2. Theories of Trade Credit

        Before we present the data, it might be useful to outline various theories of trade credit.

Much of the work on trade credit has seen it as a form of financing that can overcome traditional

impediments in financing. In particular, the seller may know more about, and have more clout

over, the buyer than other arm’s length financiers (see, for example, Smith, 1987; Brennan et al.,




                                                  5
1988; Petersen and Rajan, 1997; Biais and Gollier, 1997; and Burkart and Ellingsen, 2004).

Therefore trade credit may be available when other forms of financing are not. Much of this

literature argues that large, high credit quality suppliers have a comparative advantage in

obtaining outside finance and pass on this advantage to small, credit constrained buyers (e.g.,

Boissay and Gropp, 2007). Similarly, large suppliers may act also as liquidity providers, insuring

buyers against liquidity shocks that could endanger their survival (see, for example, Cunat, 2006).

They may also be better able to extract value from the liquidation of assets in default, generating

demand for trade credit from credit constrained buyers (Petersen and Rajan, 1997; and Fabbri

and Menichini, 2010). Or, as in Burkart and Ellingsen (2004), receivables may be used as

collateral for bank credit, improving the buyer and supplier’s combined access to finance.

        Nevertheless, previous studies also suggest that trade credit is not only used to finance

credit constrained firms.1 For instance, large, listed, multinational firms around the world, which

are unlikely to face financing constraints in the market, have large volumes of accounts payable

on their balance sheet (e.g., Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 2005). Globally, it is estimated

that trade credit financed 90% of world merchandise trade in 2007, valued at about US$ 25

trillion dollars.2

        Why might large, investment grade buyers choose to use trade credit financing? Perhaps

their suppliers have even cheaper access to financing, and a comparative advantage in passing it

on (see Ng et al., 1999). However, one of the advantages of seeing both sides of the contract in

our data set is that we find many suppliers who extend credit are much smaller and less well

rated than their buyers, and are unlikely to have access to cheaper financing.

        Another rationale, which is relatively poorly documented in the literature because data on

both sides of the contract has hitherto not been available, is that large buyers have the market




                                                 6
power to extract favorable contract terms from small suppliers, which reduce their overall

borrowing costs (see, for example, the discussion in Fabbri and Klapper, 2009, and Giannetti,

Burkart, and Ellingson, 2011). Why small suppliers may want to borrow at high cost in order to

provide such cheap financing seems less clear – could they not simply offer more of a price

discount up front, without incurring the deadweight costs of intermediation? One reason may be

that a country’s laws may not allow a vendor to offer different prices to different clients. 3 To the

extent that price discrimination is prohibited, variations in trade credit terms also offer

opportunities for sellers to offer better terms to more important buyers.

       Another non-financial reason for the use of trade credit is for the supplier to warranty

product quality to the buyer. To the extent that the buyer does not have to pay for a good until he

has used or sold it satisfactorily, it allows him time to verify the quality of the good before

deciding whether or not to make payment and accept the merchandise (see, for example, Lee and

Stowe, 1993; Long et al., 1993; and Antras and Foley, 2011). The time that buyers need to verify

quality may then determine the duration of trade credit. For instance, perishable goods bought by

small suppliers may take a relatively short time to verify. In contrast, durable goods bought by

cross-border large buyers, who take more time to distribute to their outlets, may require longer

payment terms.4

       Both the market power and warranty rationales have similar implications: small, lesser

known suppliers should extend credit to large buyers. However, the market power rationale has

another implication. To the extent that a buyer is more creditworthy than a supplier and enjoys

lower financing costs, he should prefer to obtain a larger discount for early payment (effectively,

a price discount) rather than longer term financing. If we find instead that discounts are targeted

by suppliers elsewhere, it might suggest that the warranty rationale is also operative.




                                                 7
        Finally, given non-financial reasons for extending trade credit, financial risk management

might dictate at the margin what terms are set. For instance, suppliers may be more willing to

trust large investment grade buyers with longer terms. Trade credit terms can also be set by

suppliers as a screening mechanism to gauge buyer default risk (see, for example, Mian and

Smith, 1992; and Frank and Maksimovic, 2005). Sellers can reduce payment risks through two-

part payment terms, such as early payment discounts to incentivize buyers to pay early (e.g., Ng

et al., 1999).

        In sum then, we see three important factors driving trade credit: 1) As a way for suppliers

with cheaper access to credit to finance buyers; 2) As a means for the buyer to exercise market

power and obtain favorable price discrimination; and 3) As a warranty assuring buyers of

product quality. Given these three factors, terms may also be influenced by the supplier’s need to

contain financial risks.

        Our data set is unique in that we know some characteristics of the parties on either side of

the contract. So we can take a closer look at these rationales for trade credit, focusing on how

contract terms vary with characteristics of the parties to the contract. The limitations of our data

set are that we do not have detailed characteristics on the firms, and we have no way of getting

more data. Therefore our tests are reduced-form in nature, allowing us to document associations

but not identify causality. Nevertheless, what we can tease out is intriguing.




3. Data, Summary Statistics, and Variance Decomposition Analysis

        We use a novel database of trade credit contracts for nearly the universe of suppliers of

56 large buyers.5 The data are provided by PrimeRevenue, an online network that links large,




                                                 8
global companies, their suppliers, and third-party financial institutions, via the Internet.

PrimeRevenue provides software and an IT platform for buyers to post their invoices directly.

Suppliers choose whether to be paid at the maturity of the contract or to have the contract

“factored out” and be paid immediately at a discount. PrimeRevenue is a leading provider of

such “open platform supply-chain finance (SCF)” solutions, allowing multiple banks to

participate directly in a buyer’s SCF program.

       The buyers in our dataset are PrimeRevenue’s clients. The data on the suppliers is

collected from the buyers, who hold extensive information on their suppliers, including detailed

information on their trade credit contracts. The suppliers sell mostly final goods (only 1% of

contracts are from sellers that produce intermediate goods), indicating that the buyers are mostly

at the end of the value chain.

        Our data is a snapshot of outstanding receivables as of December 1, 2005. Importantly,

this snapshot is before PrimeRevenue started factoring the receivables.6 Also, PrimeRevenue

allows firms to post whatever trade credit contract they choose, and does not limit the choice to a

set of standardized options for firms. Buyers generally post invoices for all ‘important’ suppliers,

which is estimated by PrimeRevenue to capture over 90% of total inputs to the buyer. Our

database includes information for 29,019 contracts, the full set of contracts in PrimeRevenue at

the time, which includes 56 large buyers and 24,140 suppliers. The data includes complete

information on contract terms: the contract size, net days, discount days, discount, and currency

in which the contract is denominated. Most buyers interact with most sellers only once, though

there is a fraction of repeat buyers and sellers who have multiple buyers.

       For buyers, we can control for firm size using buckets based on their total sales7, location

(North America or Europe), sector, and whether the buyer is investment grade. For suppliers, we




                                                 9
know their size (sales buckets) and whether the supplier is investment grade. Information is not

provided on supplier location or sector, since 95% of buyers purchase inputs via local

distribution centers to avoid any import duties, such as tariffs and taxes. Apart from missing

information about net days for 832 out of 29,019 contracts, we have complete information on

contract terms.

       Empirical work on trade credit thus far has been hampered due to a lack of firm-level data

on trade credit contract terms. Most studies have used the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Small

Business Finances (SSBF) database of U.S. firms, which has only limited data on credit terms

and firm characteristics (e.g., Petersen and Rajan, 1997; and Giannetti et al., 2011). Ng et al.

(1999), instead, uses survey level data on 950 listed U.S. firms to study the determinants and

characteristics of trade credit contracts.

       Our dataset differs from ones used in the earlier survey based work by Ng et al. (1999),

Giannetti et al. (2011) and others in several important ways. First, we use data from actual trade

credit contracts rather than data based on survey responses, thereby mitigating the usual

misreporting concerns associated with survey based data. Importantly, our dataset consists of

trade credit contracts signed, while papers using the National Survey of Small Business Finance

(NSSBF) database use trade credit contracts offered. Our dataset also covers a broader set of

industries that includes technology firms, allowing for an analysis of trade credit contract terms

across a range of industries, and includes trade credit terms not only for U.S. firms but also for

international firms, allowing for a comparison of trade credit terms across different jurisdictions.

Moreover, our dataset covers suppliers of all sizes, and not just small firms as in the SSBF. This

is an important difference because the credit terms offered by large firms could be very different

than those by small firms.




                                                10
           We begin by summarizing the main characteristics of buyers, suppliers, and contracts.

Panels A and B of Table 1 show summary statistics of buyer and supplier characteristics. First,

the buyers in our sample are very large – 33 out of 56 (or 59%) of buyers have over US$ 10

billion in sales and only one buyer has less than US$ 2 billion in sales.

           The buyers are also creditworthy as measured by whether or not they are investment

grade: about 75% of buyers in the dataset are investment grade. That we have mostly large,

investment-grade buyers will make it harder to find evidence in this dataset of a financing motive

for trade credit. We should, therefore, treat our results with appropriate caution.

           Buyers are active in a range of industries, with the majority in retail industries. The

sectoral distribution of buyers is: 16% in auto manufacturing, 13% in diversified retail, 29% in

diversified manufacturing, 7% in retail groceries, 16% in retail hard goods, 11% in retail soft

goods, 5% in technology, 4% in food and beverages, and 2% in the utility sector. The data

encompasses only one firm in the utility sector and two firms in the food and beverages sector.

Approximately 77% of buyers are from North America (the U.S. or Canada) and 23% of buyers

are from Europe.

           In comparison to the buyers, our suppliers are relatively small: 56% of suppliers have less

than US$ 100 million in sales and only 11% of suppliers have more than US$ 2 billion in sales.

Creditworthiness is also an issue for many suppliers, given that almost two-thirds of suppliers are

not investment grade (meaning their credit rating is below investment grade or they do not have a

rating).

           In Table 1, Panel C, we present summary statistics of contract characteristics. We have a

wide distribution of contract amounts (contract size) varying from about US$ 400 dollars to over

US$ 4 billion dollars, with a median of about US$ 3.5 million dollars.8 Contracts in our sample




                                                   11
are generally very long in duration: the average net days is 59.2 and the median is 60 net days.

About 75% of contracts in our sample have net days longer than 30 days, which is longer than

the ‘typical’ contract of 30 days previously shown in the literature (Ng, Smith and Smith 1999),

possibly because our buyers are relatively large. For example, 20% of contracts have net days of

exactly 30 days, 28% have net days of exactly 60 days, and 17% have net days of exactly 75

days.

        About 60% of contracts in our sample are denominated in U.S. dollars, followed by

almost 40% in euros; this is in line with the distribution of contracts among buyers in North

America and in Europe (59% and 41%, respectively, as shown in Table 1, Panel A).

        In our sample, 13% of contracts (or 3,707 in total) offer early payment discounts.9 We

also examine the discount terms, including the discount and discount days (the number of days

within which the buyer has to pay to obtain the discount). Almost two-thirds of discount days

are 30 days or less, while 27% are between 30 and 60 days, and 9% are more than 60 days.

Some terms seem very common; 20% of discount days are 10 days, 20% are 30 days, and 16%

are 60 days. The most common spreads of net days less discount days are 1 day (34% of

contracts with discounts), 30 days (29% of contracts), and 20 days (16% of contracts), with the

majority (or 63%) of contracts having a spread of net days less discount days equal to or less

than 20 days. The mean spread of net days less discount days equals 17 and the mean ratio of

discount to net days is 63%.

        That 30% of contracts have a spread of exactly one day might suggest that discounts can

be used simply to encourage prompt payments, or as an implicit price discount, i.e. an alternative

to a cut in list prices.10 The mean and median discount rate is equal to 2%. Of contracts with




                                               12
discounts, 36% have a discount equal to 1% or less, 56% have a discount of 2% or less but

exceeding 1%, and the remaining 8% have a discount greater than 2%.

        Trade credit appears expensive for most buyers. The effective interest rate, defined as the

implied interest rate if the buyer does not pay on the discount date, foregoes the discount, and

pays on the due date, is (1 (1 − discount rate) )360 /( net days − discount days ) − 1 . For contracts with net days

equal to discount days, we set the spread between net days and discount days to one to allow for

the computation of an interest rate. Moreover, given the high interest rates that result for

contracts with low spreads between net days and discount days, we truncate interest rates at

100%. The resulting average effective interest rate is high at 54%, though effective interest rates

vary from a low of 2% to a high of 100%.

        In Table 2, we show the distribution of contracts and buyers across buyer and supplier

characteristics, indicating that the sample is well distributed across firms of different sizes and

investment grade ratings. For example, while the majority of buyers are investment grade, there

are still 14 (out of 56) firms that are not investment grade.

        In Table 3 we present the distribution of contract terms by buyer and supplier

characteristics. Larger buyers tend to make purchases with a wider range of contract size,

including more frequent relatively small purchases of less than US$ 1 million in size. Across

industries, auto manufacturing and retail hard goods have relatively larger average contract size,

especially relative to technology, where almost 75% of contracts are less than US$ 1 million in

size. We find no notable differences in contract size across buyer location or investment grade.

In addition, large suppliers appear to make large sales, while whether a supplier is investment

grade or not does not seem related to average contract size.




                                                        13
       Contracts to the largest and most creditworthy buyers also entail longer maturities (net

days). We find strong sectoral effects in the net days offered: 85% of contracts in retailing of

soft goods have a maturity of 30 days or less, while other sectors have longer average maturities.

Contracts to firms in Europe are on average longer than contracts in North America (although the

sectoral distribution is relatively even across regions).

       Next, we focus on the decision to extend early payment discounts (Table 4). The statistics

refer to the subsample of contracts that offer an early payment discount. Overall, 34 out of the 56

buyers (or 63% of buyers) are offered at least one early payment discount. In general, the buyers

receiving a discount are small and non-investment grade, while suppliers offering a discount tend

to be larger and are roughly equally likely to be investment or non-investment grade. Suppliers

are also most likely to offer discounts to buyers that retail in hard goods. 22 buyers are never

offered discounts (including all buyers in the food and beverages, technology, and utility sectors).

In the empirical analysis of this paper we therefore also check how the results look if we drop the

firms who never report discounts.

       Discounts do not appear strongly related to buyer or supplier characteristics, with the

exception that higher discounts (>2%) are more common in the auto industry and among grocery

firms. Discount days, the number of days the buyer has to pay and receive a discount, appears

strongly related to buyer size: 78% of firms with less than US$ 10 billion in total sales have

discount days of 30 or less, while only about 64% of firms larger than US$ 10 billion in size

receive a short discount window. The mean of net days is 60 days for contracts without discounts

and 44 days for contracts with discounts, suggesting that suppliers offer trade discounts in

association with shorter net days.




                                                  14
       Importantly, our database also allows for both supplier and buyer fixed effects. About

25% of suppliers (or 7,273 suppliers) sell to multiple buyers. Of these, 3,126 suppliers sell to 2

buyers and 4,147 suppliers sell to 3 or more buyers. In addition, 16% of suppliers (or 4,557

suppliers) have more than one contract with the same buyer. Specifically, 2,685 suppliers have

exactly 2 contracts with a buyer, and 1,872 suppliers have 3 or more contracts with a buyer. In

general, we find variation in net days and the decision to extend an early payment discount

across contracts of a single supplier.

       The summary statistics and correlation matrix of the main regression variables are

presented in Tables 5 and 6. We find that the correlation between supplier investment grade and

supplier large size is not high at 0.11, and that the correlation between buyer investment grade

and buyer large size is close to zero (these calculations treat unrated firms as non-investment

grade firms because the data do not allow us to distinguish between non-investment grade and

unrated). These low correlations reduce concerns about potential multi-collinearity problems in

our regressions.

       Next, we conduct a variance decomposition analysis of our main outcome variables of

interest: log of net days, the discount dummy (equal to one if a discount is offered), and the

effective interest rate. In earlier work, Ng et al. (1999) argue that most of the determinants of

trade credit contracts are sector driven. The variance decomposition results presented in Table 7,

Panel A confirm this: net days, discounts, and interest rates are mainly driven by buyer industry

characteristics.

        Of course, the supplier characteristics we have are coarse, and do not include the supplier

industry. Because the suppliers are smaller and hence likely to be more narrowly focused, their

industry is likely to carry more information about trade credit terms. One way to explore the




                                                15
effect of inclusion of detailed supplier characteristics is to include supplier fixed effects. This

will allow us to check whether credit terms of a given seller vary across buyers. Specifically, we

compute the contribution of buyer characteristics in explaining the variance of contract

characteristics that remain after controlling for supplier fixed effects, for the sellers with multiple

contracts. The results are in Table 7, Panel B.

       They show that buyer characteristics explain only a small fraction of the variation in net

days and interest rates once the variation in credit terms from supplier characteristics has been

fully accounted for, indicating that the credit terms offered by a given seller do not vary much

across buyers (and that the narrower seller’s industry probably subsumes much of the variation in

the buyer’s industry). However, buyer industry characteristics remain an important determinant

of the variation in discounts and interest rates of a given seller across buyers, even after

controlling for supplier fixed effects. The results suggest that a seller may offer discounts

selectively across buyers, even if other terms like the duration of credit may be largely

determined by the seller’s characteristics. This willingness to be selective in discounts will be

important in our explanation of its purpose.



4. Characteristics of Contracting Parties and Regression Analysis

        Let us now examine the determinants of contract terms more explicitly, starting first with

the explicit duration of contracts, that is, net days.



4.1 Net days

        In Figure 1, we plot the average net days for different sets of supplier-buyer

characteristics. Figures 1a to 1d suggest that large, investment grade buyers get longer net days




                                                   16
from smaller suppliers. To verify this, we turn to regressions, with log net days as the dependent

variable.

       We include supplier and buyer characteristics as explanatory variables. We include an

indicator if the buyer is large (above $ 10 billion in sales), as well as an indicator if the buyer has

an investment grade rating. Similarly, we include an indicator if the supplier is large (above $ 2

billion in sales), an indicator if the supplier is medium sized (between $ 100 million and $ 2

billion in sales), as well as an indicator if the supplier is investment grade. We also include

indicators for the buyer’s industry.

       Our first results are shown in Table 8. The first two columns cluster standard errors by

buyer, while the next two columns include buyer fixed effects, and the last two columns include

supplier fixed effects. Note that the supplier fixed-effects regressions are identified on the basis

of those sellers that sell to more than one buyer, which in our case account for 25% of the sample

of contracts. The second column in each of these pairs excludes credit contracts with discounts,

so as to correct for the possibility that net days on two-part contracts vary systematically from

those of simple contracts without discounts. However, the estimates excluding contracts with a

discount do not seem to be qualitatively different.

       Our industry classifications are very broad. Nevertheless, we find buyers in industries

with substantial turnover and where goods are more likely to be perishable (groceries, soft

goods), tend to have shorter net days. This is consistent with trade credit as a warranty of quality.

Utilities also tend to have lower net days, which would be consistent with trade credit as a

warranty if utilities primarily buy fuel, whose quality is easily assessed.11

       Consistent with Figure 1, we find that longer net days are offered to significantly larger,

investment grade buyers (Table 8, Columns 1 and 2). The magnitude of these effects is sizeable.




                                                  17
For example, from the estimates in Column 2, a buyer who is large gets 9.8 longer days than the

mean of 59 days. Similarly, a buyer who is investment grade gets 7.5 longer days than the mean

net days.

       We also find that net days are shorter for buyers located in North America (the majority

of which are located in the United States) relative to buyers located in Europe. One potential

explanation for this result is that sales in Europe are often cross-border in which case buyers may

demand longer days to protect against damaged goods and avoid having to challenge suppliers in

foreign courts.

       When we include buyer fixed effects (Table 8, Columns 3 and 4), we find that longer net

days are significantly more likely to be extended by smaller suppliers and by investment grade

suppliers, again consistent with Figure 1. When we include supplier fixed effects (thus focusing

on the subsample of suppliers with multiple contracts within or across buyers), we continue to

find that larger and investment grade buyers get longer net days (Table 8, Columns 5 and 6). For

robustness, we also performed additional regressions (not reported) on the restricted sample of

suppliers with multiple contracts but without fixed effects. These regressions reveal that the

differences in estimates between the regressions with supplier fixed effects (Columns 5 and 6)

and the regressions without fixed effects (Columns 1 and 2) can be attributed to the inclusion of

supplier fixed effects (and not simple the different sampling).

       The evidence thus far is consistent with trade credit as a way to warranty product quality:

the easier verifiability of the quality of supplies to buyers running high turnover businesses with

perishable inputs would justify the short duration credit extended to these businesses, while the

long time period before cross-border buyers get to use shipped goods justifies the longer terms

extended to them.12




                                                18
        That investment grade suppliers, who presumably have greater access to finance, extend

longer net days is consistent with the financing explanation. However much of the evidence

cannot be reconciled with the financing explanation. We have seen that large, investment grade

buyers get longer net days, while the financing argument would suggest that smaller, higher

credit risk buyers should get longer term financing. Also small suppliers tend to offer longer term

credit, which again is inconsistent with the financing story. These results may be more consistent

with the market power rationale for trade credit: large, investment grade buyers would typically

have more power over small suppliers and be able to demand better terms from them. They are

also consistent with the warranty rationale: small suppliers may be relatively unknown, and have

to offer longer term credit to persuade buyers to take their products.

        Finally, given some underlying rationale for extending credit (such as its value as a

warranty of product quality) the evidence is also consistent with a risk management explanation.

Suppliers are willing to trust larger investment grade buyers with longer-term credit because they

are less likely to default.



4.2 Buyer-supplier pairs

        Perhaps we can shed more light on the alternative explanations for trade credit by looking

more closely at buyer-supplier pairs more carefully, correcting for buyer fixed effects. The

financing explanation would suggest that large investment grade suppliers should extend longer

terms to small non-investment grade buyers than should small non-investment grade suppliers.

The bargaining power explanation would suggest that small suppliers should extend longer terms

than would large suppliers, especially to large buyers. To the extent that the primary factor

driving trade credit is its use as a warranty of quality, and to the extent that larger buyers take




                                                 19
longer to use a product and test its quality, while small suppliers have a greater need to warranty

their product quality, this is another reason why small suppliers should extend longer term credit

to large buyers. Finally, whatever the reason suppliers extend credit, small non-investment grade

suppliers have the least ability to sustain credit losses, and would have the greatest preference for

mitigating risk by reducing the length of credit, especially to small, non-investment grade buyers.

Of course, these theories need not be mutually exclusive.

       In Table 9, we explore these possibilities by including buyer fixed effects, and various

interaction effects in the regression explaining log net days. In column 1, we include interactions

between the supplier’s size and the buyer’s rating. Large and medium-sized suppliers offer

significantly shorter terms than small suppliers (the omitted category) to non-investment grade

buyers, while their terms are longer, but still less than those offered by small suppliers, for

investment grade buyers.     Thus small suppliers offer relatively the longest duration credit,

especially to low credit quality buyers.

       In column 2, we see that medium-sized suppliers are significantly less likely than small

suppliers to extend credit to small buyers, while large-sized suppliers are significantly less likely

than small suppliers to extend credit to large buyers. Small suppliers seem therefore to extend

longer credit than larger suppliers, no matter what the size or investment rating of the buyer.

       In column 3, we see that investment grade suppliers offer shorter terms to non-investment

grade buyers than do non-investment grade suppliers, while they offer longer terms to investment

grade buyers than do non-investment grade suppliers. Again, it seems that non-investment grade

suppliers are forced to provide longer terms to less creditworthy buyers.

       In sum, small suppliers offer the longest terms, which is consistent with them being

squeezed by more powerful buyers for more credit, or with them having to post a stronger




                                                 20
performance bond. That small, non-investment grade suppliers offer relatively more credit to

non-investment grade buyers than to investment grade buyers suggests they are forced to extend

credit to risky buyers, even when suppliers with greater access to finance are not.

       Not all the evidence goes against the financing explanation though. When the supplier is

investment grade and therefore has greater access to financing, it seems to be willing to lend

longer, except to non-investment grade buyers. For instance, investment grade suppliers do lend

longer to investment grade buyers than do non-investment grade suppliers (column 3). Also,

investment grade suppliers offer longer terms to small buyers than do non-investment grade

suppliers, while the differences narrow for larger buyers (column 4).

       In column 5, we include all the explanatory variables in the previous columns, and while

the coefficient estimates of the interaction terms are typically smaller, the signs are unchanged.

       We have to recognize the dangers of drawing overly strong conclusions, given that our

buyers are, for the most part, billion dollar companies. This is likely to be a sample where the

financing motive for trade credit is least likely to be operative. Nevertheless, it is telling that our

strongest finding runs against the grain of the financing theory: Even after correcting for buyer

fixed effects, small suppliers extend the longest credit, even to small, non-investment grade

buyers. Perhaps then, our sample allows us to highlight the non-financial motives for trade

credit; the need to offer better terms to powerful buyers, and the need to signal product quality.

       Interestingly, though, given a non-financial motive to extend credit, credit is naturally

longest when the cost of giving it is low – when the buyer is investment grade and the supplier is

investment grade.



4.3 Discounts




                                                  21
       To throw further light on the motivations behind trade credit, we examine the sample of

contracts that include an early payment discount. The view that discounts are used as a way to

reduce buyer default risk would suggest that smaller and non-investment grade buyers, where

default risk tends to be higher, would more likely receive discounts. To the extent that it is easier

for large rated suppliers to diversify or otherwise absorb default risk, this view would also

suggest that small unrated suppliers are more likely to extend discounts.

       Discounts also allow us to shed more light on the bargaining power explanations. If trade

credit is a means for large powerful buyers to effectively extract better prices, we should also see

the following: Because it is costly for small unrated suppliers to extend long term trade credit,

and because longer term credit is of least value to large rated buyers, who can get financing

elsewhere, we should see the large buyers translate their bargaining power into shorter terms and

a discount for early payment.

       Finally, to the extent that longer trade credit is a way for the supplier to guarantee product

quality, we should see small young suppliers, who might suffer the greatest distrust of the quality

of their product, most reluctant to offer discounts for early payment. Thus the data on early

payment discounts might shed light on the relative merits of the non-financing explanations.

       We start by charting the average number of contracts with discounts for suppliers and

buyers of different characteristics. We only consider the 34 buyers who receive at least one

discount.13 The results are reported in Figure 2.

       Suppliers offer discounts for early payment more frequently to small buyers (Figure 2a

and 2c) as well as to non-investment grade buyers (Figure 2b and 2d), consistent with the use of

discounts as a way to mitigate the risk of default. Unlike the predictions of the bargaining power

theory, however, small suppliers are least likely to offer early discounts to large buyers. Instead,




                                                    22
they seem to conserve discounts and offer relatively more to small and non-investment grade

buyers (Figures 2a and 2c). A similar pattern can be seen for non-investment grade suppliers:

discounts are targeted at riskier buyers.

       These findings suggest a more nuanced view of trade credit and the separate role of

contractual features such as net days and the discount. It may be that the primary rationale for

trade credit in our sample is to give buyers the time to ascertain product quality, which is why

the duration from small unrated suppliers is the longest. At the same time, the cost of offering

this warranty is highest for small suppliers, especially when they offer it to unrated small buyers.

As a result, they offer discounts to those buyers to manage the risks down.

        So while large rated buyers may have bargaining power, they seem to exercise it by

demanding longer “trial” credit periods before they pay.14 It may seem inefficient for the small

supplier to extend credit to the large rated buyer. But given that it has to extend credit for non-

financial reasons, it may be constrained efficient for it to use scarce cash resources for

selectively-targeted discounts that persuade lower credit quality buyers to pay early, thus

maintaining a high overall quality of its credit portfolio.

         We turn next to regression analysis. In Table 10, we present logit regressions of

determinants of early payment discounts for the subsample of contracts that offer early payment

discounts. The dependent variable takes value 1 if the contract includes a discount (two-part

contract), and 0 otherwise. We focus on the regressions for buyers who have at least one discount

(columns 2, 3, and 5), though for completeness, we also present regression results for the

complete sample of buyers (in columns 1 and 4).

       Let us focus first on the regression estimates with supplier fixed effects in column 5.

Large buyers get significantly fewer contracts with discounts, and investment grade buyers are




                                                  23
also less likely to get discounts for early payment. Discounts also tend to be industry-specific,

with discounts being more common for buyers in the groceries sector, where goods tend to be

perishable. Turning next to the estimates with buyer fixed effects in column 3, we find that large

and medium-sized suppliers give significantly fewer discounts than small suppliers.

        That early payment discounts are more common from small suppliers is consistent with

the market power hypothesis, except that these discounts go more to small and non-investment

grade buyers. The finding is more consistent with the risk management view that stipulates that

smaller suppliers are more likely to offer discounts to risky buyers as a way to encourage early

payment and prevent default because it is more difficult for these firms to absorb and diversify

default risk.15



4.4 Discount terms

        Finally, we analyze the determinants of discount terms for the subsample of contracts that

offer early payment discounts and for which we have complete information on discount terms

(including discount period, discount rate, and net days). Specifically, we analyze the effective

interest rate of the trade credit contract. The regression results are presented in Table 11 and are

based on the subsample of contracts that offer early payment discounts. Columns 1 to 3 present

results when we regress our buyer and supplier characteristics on the natural logarithm of the

effective interest rate, defined as (1 (1 − discount rate) )360 /( net days − discount days ) − 1 . We use the natural

logarithm of this variable in the regression to reduce the impact of outliers.

        As mentioned earlier, a surprisingly large fraction of contracts (over 30%) with early

payment discounts have a spread between net days and discount days of exactly one day,

suggesting that discounts are used to encourage prompt payments. Contracts with net days equal




                                                         24
to discount days are automatically dropped from the regressions in columns 1 to 3 (because the

denominator in the formula of interest rates is equal to zero). These contracts are of particular

interest because they most represent the types who are encouraged to pay on time. In Columns 4

to 6, we therefore also present regression results with the effective interest rate computed after

setting the spread between net days and discount days equal to one for contracts with net days

equal to discount days. It turns out that including these additional contracts in this way does not

materially affect the results.

       Discount terms appear to be dependent on industry norms. For instance, buyers of soft

goods and groceries tend to receive the highest effective rates on two-part contracts, according to

the regression in column 1 where standard errors as clustered at the buyer level. One reason why

suppliers might be especially interested in encouraging risky buyers in this industry to pay up

might be because of the perishable nature of the underlying good. Without much ability to take

back a shipment for non-payment, suppliers might have an unsecured claim that they would like

repaid as soon as possible.

       In unreported regressions, we generally find similar patterns across discount terms

(including the discount period and discount rate) in the sense that the coefficients on the various

firm determinants have the same sign in most specifications, suggesting that the different

discount terms serve similar purposes and that firms do not systematically trade off various terms

against each other. This is consistent with the findings by Ng et al. (1999).



5. Concluding Remarks

       The bilateral, multi-contract nature of our dataset is a valuable improvement on

(generally survey based) datasets that have previously been used to study the determinants of




                                                 25
credit terms used in trade credit. This multi-contract structure of our dataset allows us to abstract

from unobserved buyer and supplier firm characteristics, something previous empirical work has

not been able to do.

       We find that the largest and most creditworthy buyers receive contracts with the longest

maturities, as measured by net days, from smaller suppliers. This is consistent with a market

power explanation (smaller suppliers are squeezed more by large buyers) as well as the view that

credit may be a means for small suppliers to warranty quality to their large buyers. However, if

the buyer’s bargaining power is the sole rationale for trade credit, it is puzzling that the large

rated buyers do not swap the credit (which the supplier can ill afford and the buyer does not

need) for a discount. Instead, it is the small unrated buyer who typically gets the discount.

       All this suggests that there are multiple, not mutually exclusive, rationales for extending

trade credit. While the duration of trade credit may reflect the relative bargaining power of the

buyer vis a vis the supplier, the former may be reluctant to take a discount instead because trade

credit serves as a warranty of product quality that is lost when the buyer is offered and takes a

discount. Nevertheless, trade credit discounts may still be offered to the riskiest buyers in order

to reduce the overall risk of the supplier’s credit portfolio, and achieve an optimal mix of

warranty and risk.

       Clearly, more work is needed to put these conjectures on firmer footing. For instance,

while our data on both sides of the contract allows us to put the bargaining power hypothesis on

firmer footing, we need better data to determine the relative importance of the bargaining power

and warranty rationales. Nevertheless, our work provides more evidence that the motivations for

trade credit are both intriguing and suggestive of the richness of financial contracting.




                                                 26
Footnotes



1
    In fact, Schiff and Lieber (1974) argue that risk management and inventory management

decisions are often taken separately from financing decisions and by different units of the firm,

and that consequently trade credit cannot be solely explained on financing grounds.

2
    “World Bank urged to lift trade credit finance,” Financial Times, November 11, 2008.

3
    For example, the Clayton Act in the United States prohibits price discrimination across

customers for the same good.

4
    Of course, a supplier who is in a repeated relationship with a buyer may have incentives to

deliver quality. Even so, trade credit could save on transactions costs, with the buyer paying only

for what meets the quality hurdle (or the time specified for sales as in consignment sales).

5
    Because purchasing history is proprietary information, we do not know the identity of buyers in

our sample. However, as discussed in this section, PrimeRevenue provided us with buyer

characteristics (such as size, sector, and location) and informed us that almost all buyers in our

sample are Global Fortune 500 companies.

6
    Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain repeated cross-sections or panels of data from Prime

Revenue, because these are proprietary data. We obtained a single snapshot of data for the year

2005, prior to Prime Revenue starting factoring the receivables in 2006.

7
    Buyer and supplier size buckets based on total sales are (in U.S. dollars): less than $0.1 billion;

$0.1-2 billion; $2-7 billion; $7-10 billion; larger than $10 billion.




                                                   27
8
    The largest contract in our dataset is for a large, diversified U.S. retailer.

9
    This is a comparable figure to that obtained using SSBF survey data on U.S. firms, indicating

that 20% of firms that use trade credit are offered an early payment discount from their suppliers.

10
     Anecdotally, large buyers do not pay late fees to their suppliers.

11
     We should be cautious about over-interpreting the effect found for the utility sector because it

is based on observations from only one firm.

12
     It could also be argued that buyers may have to raise the money needed to pay for shipped

goods by selling them, so they need to be financed until that happens. However, this would not

explain why the largest buyers, who presumably have the easiest access to financing, get the

longest term credit.

13
     Our main results are robust to the inclusion of the remaining buyers that do not receive

discounts in the model that includes supplier fixed effects and adjusts standard errors for

clustering at the buyer level. Buyers who never receive discounts are dropped from the model

that includes buyer fixed effects.

14
     Antras and Foley (2011) study contracts for one U.S. poultry exporter and find similar

evidence that trade contracts are extended to protect buyers in the case that a seller does not

deliver goods as specified in the contract.

15
     We could also examine buyer-seller pairs as in Table 9, but the smaller number of

observations on discounts renders much of the analysis statistically inconclusive.




                                                     28
Acknowledgements

We thank PrimeRevenue for generously sharing the trade credit contract data, Alexander

Ljungqvist (the Editor), two anonymous referees, Stijn Claessens, Shane Maine, John Sculley,

and Chris Woodruff for useful comments or suggestions, and Teresa Molina and Douglas

Randall for excellent research assistance. Rajan thanks the National Science Foundation, the

University of Chicago’s Stigler Center, and the Booth School’s Initiative on Global Markets for

funding. Send correspondence to Luc Laeven, International Monetary Fund, 700 19th Street,

N.W., Washington, DC 20431; telephone: 202-623-9020; e-mail: Llaeven@imf.org. This paper’s

findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily

represent the views of the World Bank, the IMF, their Executive Directors, or the countries they

represent.




                                                29
References

Antras, P., and F. Foley. 2011. Poultry in Motion: A Study of International Trade Finance
Practices. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Biais, B., and C. Gollier. 1997. Trade Credit and Credit Rationing. Review of Financial Studies
10:903–37.

Boissay, F., and R. Gropp. 2007. Trade Credit Defaults and Liquidity Provision by Firms.
European Central Bank Working Paper No. 753.

Brennan, M., V. Maksimovic, and J. Zechner. 1988. Vendor Financing. Journal of Finance
43:1127–41.

Burkart, M., and T. Ellingsen. 2004. In-Kind Finance: A Theory of Trade Credit. American
Economic Review 94:569–90.

Calomiris, C., C. Himmelberg, and P. Wachtel. 1995. Commercial Paper, Corporate Finance, and
the Business Cycle: A Microeconomic Perspective. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 42:203–50.

Choi, W. G., and Y. Kim. 2005. Trade Credit and the Effect of Macro-Financial Shocks:
Evidence from U.S. Panel Data. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40:897–925.

Cunat, V. 2007. Trade Credit: Suppliers and Debt Collectors as Insurance Providers. Review of
Financial Studies 20:491–527.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic. 2001. Firms as Financial Intermediaries: Evidence
from Trade Credit Data. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2696.

Fabbri, D., and L. Klapper. 2009. Trade Credit and the Supply Chain. Mimeo, University of
Amsterdam.

Fabbri, D., and A. Menichini. 2010. Trade Credit, Collateral Liquidation and Borrowing
Constraints. Journal of Financial Economics 96:413–432.

Fisman, R., and M. Raturi. 2004. Does Competition Encourage Credit Provision? Evidence from
African Trade Credit Relationships. Review of Economics and Statistics 86:345–52.

Frank, M., and V. Maksimovic. 2005. Trade Credit, Collateral, and Adverse Selection. Mimeo,
University of Maryland.

Giannetti, M., M. Burkart, and T. Ellingsen. 2011. What You Sell is What You Lend?
Explaining Trade Credit Contracts. Review of Financial Studies 24:1261–98.




                                              30
Johnson, S., J. McMillan, and C. Woodruff. 2002. Courts and Relational Contracts. Journal of
Law, Economics and Organization 18:221–77.

Lee, Y. W., and J. D. Stowe. 1993. Product Risk, Asymmetric Information, and Trade Credit.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 28:285–300.

Long, M., I. Malitz, and S. A. Ravid. 1993. Trade Credit, Quality Guarantees, and Product
Marketability. Financial Management 22:117–127.

Love, I., L. Preve, and V. Sartia-Allende. 2007. Trade Credit and Bank Credit: Evidence from
Recent Financial Crises. Journal of Financial Economics 83:453–69.

Marotta, G. 2005. Is Trade Credit More Expensive than Bank Credit Loans? Evidence from
Italian Firm-Level Data. Applied Economics 37:403–16.

McMillan, J., and C. Woodruff. 1999. Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in Vietnam.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:1285–1320.

Mian, S., and C. W. Smith. 1992. Accounts Receivable Management Policy: Theory and
Evidence. Journal of Finance 47:169–200.

Ng, Chee, Janet Smith and Richard Smith, 1999, Evidence on the Determinants of Credit Terms
Used in Interfirm Trade. Journal of Finance 54:1109–29.

Petersen, M., and R. G. Rajan. 1995. The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
Relationships. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:407–43.

Petersen, M., and R. G. Rajan. 1997. Trade Credit: Theory and Evidence. Review of Financial
Studies 10:661–91.

Smith, J. 1987. Trade Credit and Informational Asymmetry. Journal of Finance 42:863–72.

Van Horen, N. 2005. Do Firms Use Trade Credit as a Competitiveness Tool? Evidence from
Developing Countries. Mimeo, World Bank.

Wilner, B. S. 2000. The Exploitation of Relationships in Financial Distress: The Case of Trade
Credit. Journal of Finance 55:153–78.




                                             31
                                                 Table 1
                                      Buyer and Seller Characteristics
This table reports summary statistics of buyer, supplier, and contract characteristics. Sample consists of 29,019 trade
credit contracts between 56 large buyers and 24,140 suppliers. Early payment discounts are offered on 3,717 of
these contracts. The effective interest rate variable is winsorized at 100% and computed after setting the spread
between net days and discount days to one for contracts with net days equal to discount days. Panel A reports
summary statistics for buyer characteristics, panel B for supplier characteristics, and panel C for contract
characteristics.

                                    Panel A: Buyer Characteristics (Percentages)

                                                                                              Total
                                   Number of         % of         Number        % of                      % of total
                                                                                             Amount
                                    Buyers          buyers        Contracts     Contracts                  amount
                                                                                            ($ billion)

   Size >$10 billion                   33             59           24,298          84          612           89
   Size $0.1–10 billion                23             41           4,721           16           79           11
   Industry auto                       9              16           1,615            6          75.8          11
   Industry diversified retail         7              13           9,749           34          193           28
   Industry diversified mfg            16             29           3,824           13          74.3          11
   Industry grocery                    4               7           1,630            6          88.5          13
   Industry hard goods retail          9              16           3,146           11          164           24
   Industry soft goods retail          6              11           2,362            8          42.1          6
   Industry technology                 3               5           5,306           18          24.2          4
   Industry food & beverages           2               4            682             2          26.7          4
   Industry utility                    1               2            705             2          2.47          0
   Location: Europe                    13             23           12,029          41          241           35
   Location: North America             43             77           16,990          59          450           65
   Investment Grade: No                14             25           4,008           14          107           16
   Investment Grade: Yes               42             75           25,011          86          583           84

                                   Panel B: Supplier Characteristics (Percentages)

                                                                                              Total
                                  Number of         % of          Number        % of                      % of total
                                                                                             Amount
                                  Suppliers       Suppliers       Contracts     Contracts                  amount
                                                                                            ($ billion)

   Size >$2 billion                  2,727            11           5,772            20         531           77
   Size $0.1–2 billion               7,821            32           9,549            33         142           21
   Size <$0.1 billion               13,590            56           13,698           47         17.9          3
   Investment Grade: No             16,391            68           18,655           65         319           46
   Investment Grade: Yes             7,713            32           10,043           35         372           54

                                            Panel C: Contract Characteristics

                                             N          Mean          Median        Min        Max        Std Dev

   Contract amount (US$ million)         29,019          23.8          3.47         .0004     6,520.0       111.0
   Net Days                              29,019          59.2           60             1        120          26.1
   Discount Offered (Yes/No)             29,019          0.13            0             0         1           0.33
   Discount Days                         3,462          30.43           30             1        180         20.09
   Discount Rate (%)                     3,707            2              2            .02       11.5         0.09
   Ratio of Discount to Net Days         2,634           0.63           0.6          0.02        1           0.28
   Effective Interest Rate               2,624          54%            31%           2%        100%         38%



                                                             32
                                                Table 2
                                   Buyer and Seller Cross-Tabulations

This table reports cross-tabulations of count statistics of buyer and supplier characteristics (Panel A) and within
buyer characteristics (Panel B). Sample consists of 29,019 trade credit contracts between 56 large buyers and 24,140
suppliers. Not investment grade also includes unrated firms.

                       Panel A: Buyer vs. Supplier Characteristics (number of observations)

                                             Supplier Size                       Supplier
                                                                             Investment Grade
                                    Small       Medium        Large            No        Yes            Total
    Buyer Size
    Small/Medium                    1,608        2,166         947            3,471     1,250          4,721
    Large                          12,090        7,383        4,825          15,505     8,793          24,298

    Buyer Investment Grade
    No                              1,204        1,729        1,075          2,667      1,341          4,008
    Yes                            12,494        7,820        4,697          16,309     8,702          25,011

    Total                          13,698        9,549        5,772          18,976     10,043         29,019


                                Panel B: Buyer Characteristics (number of buyers)

                                                         Buyer size
                                              Small /Medium         Large                   Total
              Buyer Investment Grade
              No                                    6                    8                    14
              Yes                                   17                  25                    42

              Total                                 23                  33                    56




                                                         33
                                                                Table 3
                       Distribution of Buyer and Seller Characteristics, by Contract Characteristics (Percentages)
This table reports the distribution (in percentages) of trade credit contract terms by buyer and supplier characteristics. Sample consists of 29,019 trade credit
contracts between 56 large buyers and 24,140 suppliers. NA denotes North America.

                                                         Contract Amount (%)                               Net Days (%)                   Location
                                             < $1 mln    $1-4 mln $4-15 mln         > $15 mln     0-30    31-60 61-90         91+     Europe     NA
            Buyer Characteristics:

            Size >$10 billion                  32           23            20            25         20      38        29        13       46         54
            Size $0.1–10 billion                5           35            33            26         52      40        8         0        18         82

            Industry auto                       0           15            28            57         20      53        20        7         59         41
            Industry diversified retail        23           37            22            17         10      13        50        26        84         16
            Industry diversified mfg            6           29            36            29         47      34        17        1         0         100
            Industry grocery                   11           25            18            47         42      54        3         0         84         16
            Industry hard goods retail          0           15            29            57         21      52        24        4         3          97
            Industry soft goods retail         26           23            22            29         85      14        1         1         0         100
            Industry technology                74           9             10            7          8       88        3         0         0         100
            Industry food & beverage           28           34            21            17         27      30        12        31       100         0
            Industry utility                   73           18             6            4          54      9         36        0        100         0

            Location: Europe                   26           33            20            20         11      19        46        23       100         0
            Location: North America            29           19            23            29         37      53        10        1         0         100

            Investment Grade: No               20           20            28            32         68      29        2         0        7          93
            Investment Grade: Yes              29           26            21            24         18      39        28        12       50         50

            Supplier Characteristics:

            Size: >$2 billion                   5           11            18            65         33      39        21        8        30         70
            Size: $0.1-2 billion                5           9             48            38         34      32        24        11       39         61
            Size: <$0.1 billion                53           41             6            0          18      43        27        12       48         52

            Investment Grade: No               28           26            23            23         27      40        24        10       43         57
            Investment Grade: Yes              27           22            21            30         23      37        27        12       41         59




                                                                                 34
                                                                Table 4
                       Distribution of Buyer and Seller Characteristics, by Discount Characteristics (Percentages)
This table reports the distribution of trade credit contract terms (in percentages) by buyer and supplier characteristics for the subsample of 3,717 contracts that
offer an early payment discount. Statistics are not reported for the technology, food & beverages, and utility industries, as no buyers in these industries are
offered discounts.

                                                                              Subsample of Contracts that Offer an Early Payment Discount
                                                        Full Sample
                                                                            Discount Rate (%)        Discount Days (%)       Discount to Net
                                                       Discount (%)       0-1% 1-2% > 2%          0-30     31-60     61+      Days Ratio (%)
                  Buyer Characteristics:
                  Size >$10 billion                          10            35       58         7       64       33        3              64
                  Size $0.1- 10 billion                      26            37       52        11       78       21        2              60

                  Industry auto                              19            21       50        29      100        0        0              35
                  Industry diversified retail                 5            34       66         0       94        5        1              43
                  Industry diversified mfg                   13            67       30         3       95        4        1              44
                  Industry grocery                           25            31       48        22       84       15        0              87
                  Industry hard goods retail                 58            35       60         5       54       42        4              68
                  Industry soft goods retail                  8             5       86         9       25       75        0              95

                  Location: Europe                            4            19       44        37       70       28        2              80
                  Location: North America                    19            38       58         4       67       30        3              61

                  Investment Grade: No                       17            42       57         1       93       6         1              53
                  Investment Grade: Yes                      12            34       56        10       57       32        2              66

                  Supplier Characteristics:
                  Size >$2 billion                           27            34       58         7      66       31         3              65
                  Size $0.1-2 billion                        17            38       54         8      67       30         2              63
                  Size <$0.1 billion                          4            32       58        11      80       19         1              57

                  Investment Grade: No                       13            37       55        9       69       29         2              63
                  Investment Grade: Yes                      12            33       59        7       67       30         3              64




                                                                                 35
                                           Table 5
                          Summary Statistics of Regression Variables

This table reports summary statistics of the main regression variables. Sample consists of 29,019 trade
credit contracts between 56 large buyers and 24,140 suppliers. Early payment discounts are offered on
3,717 of these contracts. Summary statistics on buyer-specific variables are computed at the buyer level,
and summary statistics on supplier-specific variables are computed at the supplier level.

Variable                                                 Obs      Mean     Std. Dev.    Min       Max
Complete sample:
Log net days                                           28,187     3.947      0.614       0        5.481
Discount dummy                                         29,019     0.128      0.334       0          1

Subsample of contracts with early payment discount:
Discount days                                            3,462   30.433      20.09       1         180
Discount rate                                            3,707   0.017       0.008     0.000      0.115
Discount days/Net days                                   2,634   0.630       0.282     0.017        1
Effective rate                                           2,584   0.533       0.381     0.017        1

Buyer characteristics:
Buyer large size                                          56      0.589      0.496       0          1
Buyer small size                                          56      0.411      0.496       0          1
Buyer investment grade                                    56      0.750      0.437       0          1
Buyer North America                                       56      0.768      0.426       0          1
Industry auto                                             56      0.161      0.371       0          1
Industry diversified retail                               56      0.125      0.334       0          1
Industry diversified mfg                                  56      0.286      0.456       0          1
Industry grocery                                          56      0.071      0.260       0          1
Industry hard goods retail                                56      0.150      0.354       0          1
Industry soft goods retail                                56      0.100      0.296       0          1
Industry technology                                       56      0.054      0.227       0          1
Industry food and beverages                               56      0.036      0.187       0          1
Industry utility                                          56      0.018      0.134       0          1

Supplier characteristics:
Supplier large size                                    24,140     0.113      0.316       0          1
Supplier medium size                                   24,140     0.324      0.468       0          1
Supplier small size                                    24,140     0.563      0.496       0          1
Supplier investment grade                              24,140     0.320      0.466       0          1




                                                    36
                                          Table 6
                         Correlation Matrix of Regression Variables

This table reports correlations between the main regression variables. Panel A presents correlations
between the explanatory and dependent variables. Panel B presents correlations between the explanatory
variables. Sample consists of 29,019 trade credit contracts between 56 large buyers and 24,140 suppliers.
Early payment discounts are offered on 3,717 of these contracts. Correlations between buyer characteristics
are computed at the buyer level, correlations between supplier characteristics are computed at the supplier
level, and correlations between buyer-supplier characteristics are computed at the buyer-supplier level,
after aggregating contracts at the appropriate level. Asterisks indicate significance at 1%.

        Panel A: Correlations between credit terms, buyer characteristics, and supplier characteristics
                                                Full Sample              Subsample w/Discount
                                          Log net       Discount         Discount        Effective
                                            days        dummy         days/net days        rate

        Buyer large size                     0.26*         -0.18*           0.09*           0.01
        Buyer small size                    -0.26*          0.18*          -0.09*          -0.02
        Buyer investment grade               0.29*         -0.05*           0.20*         0.15*
        Buyer North America                 -0.37*          0.22*          -0.18*         -0.26*
        Industry auto                         0.00          0.04*          -0.17*         -0.12*
        Industry diversified retail          0.35*         -0.17*          -0.33*         -0.27*
        Industry diversified mfg            -0.13*           0.00          -0.32*         -0.26*
        Industry grocery                    -0.17*          0.09*           0.35*         0.44*
        Industry hard goods retail           -0.01          0.47*           0.15*          -0.03
        Industry soft goods retail          -0.25*         -0.04*           0.33*         0.34*
        Industry technology                 -0.02*         -0.18*            n.a.           n.a.
        Industry food and beverage           0.05*         -0.06*            n.a.           n.a.
        Industry utility                    -0.07*         -0.06*            n.a.           n.a.
        Supplier large size                 -0.11*          0.21*           0.06*         0.08*
        Supplier medium size                -0.10*          0.08*            0.00          -0.05
        Supplier small size                  0.18*         -0.25*          -0.08*          -0.04
        Supplier investment grade            0.03*         -0.02*            0.02           0.02




                                                     37
       Panel B: Correlations between buyer and supplier characteristics
                              Buyer Buyer      Buyer Industry Industry Industry Industry Industry        Industry Industry Industry Industry Supplier Supplier
                              large investment North   auto   diversified diversified grocery hard goods soft goods technology food and utility large medium
                              size  grade      America        retail      mfg                 retail     retail                beverage         size  size


Buyer investment grade         0.02
Buyer North America            -0.12   -0.12
Industry auto                  -0.03   -0.20     -0.10
Industry diversified retail    0.10     0.09     -0.18   -0.17
Industry diversified mfg       -0.28    0.00     0.35*   -0.28    -0.24
Industry grocery               0.23    -0.00     -0.34   -0.12    -0.10     -0.18
Industry hard goods retail     -0.06    0.13     0.11    -0.19    -0.16     -0.27     -0.12
Industry soft goods retail     0.04     0.06     0.19    -0.15    -0.13     -0.22     -0.09     -0.10
Industry technology            0.20    -0.05     0.13    -0.10    -0.09     -0.15     -0.07     -0.10     -0.08
Industry food and beverage     -0.03   -0.11     -0.35   -0.08    -0.07     -0.12     -0.05     -0.08     -0.07     -0.05
Industry utility               0.11     0.08     -0.25   -0.06    -0.05     -0.09     -0.04     -0.06     -0.05     -0.03     -0.03
Supplier large size            -0.02   -0.07*    0.09*   0.11*    -0.10*    0.02*    0.11*     0.21*      -0.02*    -0.14*    -0.00   -0.05*
Supplier medium size          -0.14*   -0.10*    0.06*   0.11*    -0.06*    0.14*     0.02     0.12*      0.05*     -0.21*    -0.02   -0.08*   -0.25*
Supplier investment grade     0.08*     0.01    -0.04*   0.02*    0.03*     -0.04*   -0.02*     0.00      -0.05*    0.04*    -0.03*    0.01    0.11*    -0.05*




                                                                                38
                                                      Table 7
                                          Variance Decomposition Analysis

This table shows the results of an ANOVA analysis of variance of the log ofnet days, discount dummy, and effective
interest rate variables. Specifically, we report the contribution of buyer and supplier characteristics in explaining the
variance of contract characteristics. Panel A includes supplier specific variables, while panel B shows results of an
ANOVA analysis of variance for the subset of contracts from suppliers with multiple buyers when including
supplier fixed effects.

Panel A: Full sample

  Dependent variable: Log of net         Degrees of      Partial sum                             Contribution to sum
  days                                    freedom        of squares       F-stat     p-value       of squares (%)

  Buyer's size                                1            127.94        509.71       0.000              3.60
  Buyer's sub-industry                        8           1145.83        570.64       0.000             32.28
  Buyer's location                            3            458.36        608.72       0.000             12.91
  Buyer's investment grade                    1            117.80        469.34       0.000              3.32
  Supplier's size                             2            61.83         123.17       0.000              1.74
  Supplier's investment grade                 1             1.36          5.42        0.020              0.04

  Number of obs = 28,187
  Adj R-squared = 0.334


   Dependent variable: Discount          Degrees of      Partial sum                            Contribution to sum
   dummy                                  freedom        of squares      F-stat     p-value       of squares (%)

   Buyer's size                               1             9.08         123.38      0.264              0.82
   Buyer's sub-industry                       8            738.17       1253.48      0.000             66.74
   Buyer's location                           3            178.13        806.64      0.000             16.11
   Buyer's investment grade                   1             0.00          0.00       0.980              0.00
   Supplier's size                            2             0.45          3.04       0.048              0.04
   Supplier's investment grade                1             0.21          2.84       0.092              0.02

   Number of obs = 29,019
   Adj R-squared = 0.341


   Dependent variable: Effective        Degrees of      Partial sum                            Contribution to sum
   interest rate                         freedom        of squares      F-stat     p-value       of squares (%)

   Buyer's size                                    1       3.18         37.97       0.000               1.93
   Buyer's sub-industry                            5      131.15        312.76      0.000              79.42
   Buyer's location                                2       9.27         55.25       0.000               5.61
   Buyer's investment grade                        1       5.36         63.93       0.000               3.25
   Supplier's size                                 2       1.80         10.75       0.000               1.09
   Supplier's investment grade                     1       0.00          0.05       0.820               0.00

   Number of obs = 2,624
   Adj R-squared = 0.427




                                                           39
Panel B: Supplier fixed effects

    Dependent variable: Log of net    Degrees of    Partial sum                        Contribution to sum
    days                               freedom      of squares     F-stat    p-value     of squares (%)

    Buyer's size                         1             16.25       62.14     0.000             0.67
    Buyer's sub-industry                 8             73.93       35.35     0.000             3.07
    Buyer's location                     3             35.03       44.66     0.000             1.45
    Buyer's investment grade             1             18.24       69.77     0.000             0.76
    Supplier fixed effect               2266          1371.56       2.32     0.000            56.89

    Number of obs = 6,448
    Adj R-squared = 0.519


    Dependent variable: Discount      Degrees of    Partial sum                        Contribution to sum
    dummy                              freedom      of squares     F-stat    p-value     of squares (%)

    Buyer's size                          1             4.76       67.82     0.450             0.44
    Buyer's sub-industry                  8            46.82       83.31     0.000             4.31
    Buyer's location                      3            18.39       87.26     0.000             1.69
    Buyer's investment grade              1             0.56        8.05     0.005             0.05
    Supplier fixed effect                2393          483.93       2.88     0.000            44.57

    Number of obs = 7,273
    Adj R-squared = 0.642



    Dependent variable: Effective    Degrees of    Partial sum                         Contribution to sum
    interest rate                     freedom      of squares     F-stat    p-value      of squares (%)

    Buyer's size                             1             0.01    0.09       0.769           0.00
    Buyer's sub-industry                     5             9.96   33.14       0.000           8.40
    Buyer's location                         2             2.66   22.13       0.000           2.24
    Buyer's investment grade                 1             2.57   42.73       0.000           2.17
    Supplier fixed effect                  539            52.44    1.62       0.000          44.22

    Number of obs = 1,049
    Adj R-squared = 0.576




                                                     40
                                                       Table 8
                                                       Net Days
Dependent variable is the logarithm of net days on the contract. Standard errors in regressions (1) and (2) are
corrected for clustering at the buyer level. Regressions (3) and (4) include buyer fixed effects. Regressions (5) and
(6) include supplier fixed effects and are estimated based on the subsample of suppliers that have multiple contracts.
Regressions (2), (4) and (6) include only trade credit contracts with no discounts. Standard errors are reported
between brackets. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

 Dependent variable: Log
                                     Buyer clustered                   Buyer FE               Supplier FE
 net days
                                               Without                       Without                   Without
                                               discount                      discount                  discount
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
 Buyer large size               0.387***       0.388***                                 0.225***      0.172***
                                  (0.102)       (0.110)                                   (0.025)       (0.031)
 Buyer investment grade          0.238**       0.293***                                 0.226***      0.280***
                                  (0.105)       (0.113)                                   (0.025)       (0.030)
 Buyer North America            -0.488***     -0.556***                                 -0.443***     -0.499***
                                  (0.168)       (0.184)                                   (0.043)       (0.054)
 Industry diversified retail       -0.071        -0.136                                     0.036        -0.067
                                  (0.127)       (0.155)                                   (0.060)       (0.071)
 Industry diversified mfg           0.095        0.124                                  0.181***      0.169***
                                  (0.166)       (0.186)                                   (0.052)       (0.060)
 Industry grocery               -0.763***     -0.760***                                 -0.534***     -0.535***
                                  (0.136)       (0.163)                                   (0.069)       (0.084)
 Industry hard goods retail         0.134        0.110                                      0.067        -0.001
                                  (0.150)       (0.166)                                   (0.061)       (0.073)
 Industry soft goods retail      -0.262*         -0.230                                    -0.125        -0.103
                                  (0.143)       (0.161)                                   (0.086)       (0.097)
 Industry technology               -0.048        -0.044                                 -0.237***     -0.287***
                                  (0.304)       (0.321)                                   (0.062)       (0.069)
 Industry food and beverage        -0.148        -0.200                                     0.100         0.043
                                  (0.143)       (0.158)                                   (0.131)       (0.141)
 Industry utility               -0.805***     -0.872***                                 -0.552***     -0.661***
                                  (0.122)       (0.156)                                   (0.119)       (0.128)
 Supplier small size                0.149        0.145         0.059***     0.068***
                                  (0.126)       (0.138)         (0.008)      (0.008)
 Supplier medium size               0.009        -0.011         0.018**     0.022***
                                  (0.022)       (0.022)         (0.007)      (0.008)
 Supplier investment grade          0.008        0.006         0.017***     0.017***
                                  (0.016)       (0.017)         (0.005)      (0.005)

 Number of buyers                   56            56              56           56          56            56
 Number of suppliers              24,006        22,028          24,006       22,028       2,267         2,051
 Number of observations           28,187        25,298          28,187       25,298       6,448         5,321
 R-squared                         0.336        0.334            0.036        0.030       0.274         0.284




                                                          41
                                                Table 9
                      Heterogeneous Effects of Buyer and Supplier Characteristics

In columns (1)-(3), the dependent variable is log net days and regression estimates are based on an OLS model with
buyer fixed effects. In columns (4)-(6), the dependent variable is a dummy variable that take a value of one if the
trade credit contract includes a discount (two-part contract), and zero otherwise, and regression estimates are based
on a logit model with buyer fixed effects. All columns include buyer fixed effects. Standard errors are reported
between brackets. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dependent variable: Log net days
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
Supplier large size                              -0.128***        0.007      -0.058***     -0.061***      -0.056**
                                                   (0.020)       (0.018)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.026)
Supplier medium size                             -0.060***     -0.048***     -0.042***     -0.042***     -0.070***
                                                   (0.017)       (0.015)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.022)
Supplier invst grade                              0.017***     0.016***       -0.028**     0.047***         -0.006
                                                   (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.013)       (0.014)       (0.019)
Supplier large size * Buyer invst grade           0.082***                                               0.072***
                                                   (0.022)                                                 (0.022)
Supplier medium size * Buyer invst grade            0.020                                                    0.020
                                                   (0.019)                                                 (0.019)
Supplier large size * Buyer large size                         -0.084***                                 -0.079***
                                                                 (0.019)                                   (0.021)
Supplier medium size * Buyer large size                           0.009                                      0.012
                                                                 (0.016)                                   (0.017)
Supplier invst grade * Buyer invst grade                                     0.053***                      0.038**
                                                                              (0.014)                      (0.015)
Supplier invst grade * Buyer large size                                                     -0.035**        -0.012
                                                                                             (0.014)       (0.015)

No. of buyers                                        56            56            56            56           56
No. of observations                                28,187        28,187        28,187        28,187       28,187
R-squared                                          0.003          0.004         0.003         0.003        0.004




                                                         42
                                                     Table 10
                                                     Discounts

Dependent variable is a dummy variable that take a value of one if the trade credit contract includes a discount (two-
part contract), and zero otherwise. Regression estimates are based on a logit model. Standard errors in regressions
(1) through (2) are corrected for clustering at the buyer level. Regression (3) includes buyer fixed effects (note that
by definition, this sample is equivalent to the sample of buyers who have at least one discount). Regressions (4) and
(5) include supplier fixed effects and are estimated based on the subsample of suppliers that have multiple contracts.
Regressions (2) and (5) only include buyers who have at least one discount. Several industries do not have firms
with discounts and are dropped from estimation. Standard errors are reported between brackets. ***, **, * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

    Dependent variable:
                                        Buyer clustered             Buyer FE                 Supplier FE
    Discount
                                                 Buyers who                                          Buyers who
                                                 have at least                                       have at least
                                                 one discount                                        one discount
                                        (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)
    Buyer large size                -1.587**        -0.738                            -1.673***       -1.313***
                                     (0.698)       (0.504)                              (0.179)         (0.199)
    Buyer investment grade            -0.546        -0.568                            -0.779***       -0.835***
                                     (0.681)       (0.684)                              (0.174)         (0.214)
    Buyer North America                1.753         0.839                            3.365***         3.667***
                                     (1.270)       (1.079)                              (0.386)         (0.527)
    Industry diversified retail        0.929        -0.790                            2.504***           0.647
                                     (1.428)       (1.042)                              (0.419)         (0.516)
    Industry diversified mfg          -0.005       -1.706*                               -0.148       -1.442***
                                     (1.097)       (0.947)                              (0.336)         (0.464)
    Industry grocery                 3.189*         -0.152                            5.632***         3.373***
                                     (1.657)       (1.129)                              (0.559)         (0.710)
    Industry hard goods retail     2.937***          0.472                            3.838***         1.644***
                                     (0.963)       (1.061)                              (0.387)         (0.484)
    Industry soft goods retail        -0.068        -1.364                                0.647          -0.466
                                     (1.130)       (1.033)                              (0.753)         (0.862)
    Supplier small size            -1.215***        -0.601           0.225**
                                     (0.344)       (0.419)           (0.095)
    Supplier medium size           -0.466***      -0.409**            -0.098
                                     (0.158)       (0.175)           (0.066)
    Supplier investment grade      -0.280***        -0.099            -0.065
                                     (0.093)       (0.107)           (0.064)

    Number of buyers                   56             34                34                56               34
    Number of suppliers              24,140          7,927            7,927              399              305
    Number of observations           29,019         10,604            10,604            2,067            1,433
    Pseudo R-squared                  0.336          0.118            0.002             0.295            0.150




                                                          43
                                                        Table 11
                                                     Interest Rates

Dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the effective interest rate on the trade credit contract, with the
                                                              360/( net days − discount days )
effective interest rate computed as (1 (1 − discount rate) )                       − 1 . In columns 4-6, the effective
interest rate is computed by setting the spread between net days and discount days to one for contracts with net days
equal to discount days (these contracts are dropped from the regressions in columns 1-3). We winsorize interest
rates at 100% before taking logs. Standard errors in regression (1) and (4) are corrected for clustering at the buyer
level. Regressions (2) and (5) include buyer fixed effects (note that by definition, this sample is equivalent to the
sample of buyers excluding discounts). Regressions (3) and (6) include supplier fixed effects and are estimated
based on the subsample of suppliers that have multiple contracts. Several industries do not have firms with discounts
and are dropped from the regressions. The regressions also exclude contracts with missing discount or net days
information from the regressions. Standard errors are reported between brackets. ***, **, * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Dependent variable:                                                                     Effective interest rate with spread set to
                                              Effective interest rate
                                                                                         one if net days equals discount days

                                      Buyer         Buyer FE       Supplier FE             Buyer       Buyer FE      Supplier FE
                                    clustered                                            clustered
                                        (1)            (2)              (3)                  (1)           (2)             (3)
Buyer large size                      -0.177                          0.043                -0.174                        0.076
                                     (0.473)                         (0.093)              (0.461)                       (0.092)
Buyer investment grade                0.396*                        0.666***               0.397*                      0.676***
                                     (0.205)                         (0.105)              (0.203)                       (0.105)
Buyer North America                 0.622***                        0.806***             0.622***                      0.811***
                                     (0.202)                         (0.240)              (0.201)                       (0.241)
Industry diversified retail           0.190                           -0.241               0.190                         -0.230
                                     (0.311)                         (0.309)              (0.309)                       (0.310)
Industry diversified mfg              -0.211                          -0.177               -0.210                        -0.157
                                     (0.375)                         (0.277)              (0.372)                       (0.279)
Industry grocery                    1.643***                        0.972***             1.643***                      0.982***
                                     (0.303)                         (0.320)              (0.301)                       (0.321)
Industry hard goods retail            0.171                         -0.667**               0.206                       -0.655**
                                     (0.464)                         (0.305)              (0.458)                       (0.305)
Industry soft goods retail          1.078***                          0.620              1.083***                        0.626
                                     (0.352)                         (0.535)              (0.343)                       (0.537)
Supplier small size                   0.099          -0.089**                              0.101        -0.084**
                                     (0.137)          (0.036)                             (0.134)        (0.037)
Supplier medium size                 -0.069*        -0.062***                             -0.067*       -0.054**
                                     (0.036)          (0.024)                             (0.037)        (0.024)
Supplier investment grade             0.035            0.036                               0.033          0.037
                                     (0.064)          (0.024)                             (0.061)        (0.024)

Number of buyers                        34              34                28                  34            34             28
Number of suppliers                   2,080           2,080              531                2,115         2,115           540
Number of observations                2,584           2,584             1,035               2,624         2,624          1,049
R-squared                             0.353           0.007             0.216               0.347         0.005          0.213




                                                              44
                                                   Figure 1
                        Net Days for Suppliers and Buyers of Different Size and Ratings

Figures 1a through 1d report the average net days for different subgroups of supplier-buyer pairs based on supplier
size, supplier creditworthiness, buyer size, and buyer creditworthiness.


         Figure 1a                                                                                  Figure 1b
                                                                                                                    62.3             63.6
                      66.3              60.6
                                                       56.6
                                                                                             80.0
 80.0
                                                                                                                              43.9
 60.0                                                                                        60.0         40.2
             40.1              42.3             40.7
 40.0                                                                                        40.0
 20.0                                                              Large                                                                         Large
                                                                              Buyer size     20.0
                                                              Small/Medium                                                                                 Buyer size
  0.0                                                                                                                                       Small/Medium
             Small           Medium            Large                                          0.0
                        Supplier size                                                                     No                 Yes
                                                                                                         Supplier investment grade




         Figure 1c                                                                                  Figure 1d      61.9              65.3

                     66.1
                                        60.8           58.3                                  70.0
  80.0
                                                                                             60.0
  60.0                                                                                       50.0          36.0               34.7
              33.2               36.7           36.3
  40.0                                                                                       40.0

                                                                    Yes       Buyer          30.0
  20.0                                                                     investment        20.0                                                Yes        Buyer
                                                              No              grade
   0.0                                                                                                                                                   investment
                                                                                             10.0
                                                                                                                                            No              grade
             Small            Medium           Large
                                                                                              0.0
                            Supplier size                                                                 No                 Yes
                                                                                                         Supplier investment grade




                                                                                        45
                                             Figure 2
             Discount Frequency for Suppliers and Buyers of Different Size and Ratings

Figures 2a through 2d report the fraction of contracts that receive discounts for different subgroups of supplier-buyer
pairs based on supplier size, supplier creditworthiness, buyer size, and buyer creditworthiness.


       Figure 2a                                                                                      Figure 2b
                                                    0.27
                                                                                                                       0.27
           0.26                              0.28                                                   0.3                                    0.24
 0.3                        0.25
                                      0.14                                                          0.3                                           0.10
                                                                                                                              0.10
 0.2                                                                                                0.2
                    0.01                                                                            0.2
 0.1
                                                                Large                               0.1                                                       Large
                                                                                Buyer size
                                                             Small/Medium                           0.1                                                                 Buyer size
 0.0                                                                                                                                                     Small/Medium
          Small        Medium              Large                                                    0.0
                     Supplier size                                                                                No                 Yes
                                                                                                                Supplier investment grade




       Figure 2c                                                                                          Figure 2d
                                                              0.27
                                                                                                                  0.18        0.12    0.17
                                                                                                    0.2                                           0.11
 0.3                                                  0.26
                                           0.17
                                   0.18                                                             0.2
 0.2
                       0.04
             0.09                                                                                   0.1
 0.1                                                                      Yes        Buyer
                                                                                  investment                                                                  Yes        Buyer
                                                                     No              grade          0.1
 0.0                                                                                                                                                                  investment
                                                                                                                                                         No              grade
           Small             Medium                 Large
                                                                                                    0.0
                           Supplier size                                                                         No                  Yes
                                                                                                                Supplier investment grade




                                                                                               46
