NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOO-SYSTEMIC-TO-FAIL:
WHAT OPTION MARKETS IMPLY ABOUT SECTOR-WIDE GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES
Bryan T. Kelly
Hanno Lustig
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 17149
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17149

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

We thank Mikhail Chernov, Peter Christoffersen, John Cochrane, George Constantinides, Itamar Drechsler,
Darrell Duffie, Ralph Koijen, Marc Martos-Vila, Pascal Maenhout, Ian Martin, Richard Roll, Stephen
Ross, and seminar participants at Chicago Booth, the University of Southern California, the University
of California at Los Angeles, the University of Toronto, the University of Utah, the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco and the Stanford University economics and finance departments for comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Bryan T. Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Too-Systemic-To-Fail: What Option Markets Imply About Sector-wide Government Guarantees
Bryan T. Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 17149
June 2011, Revised July 2011
JEL No. G01,G12,G2,G38
ABSTRACT
Investors in option markets price in a substantial collective government bailout guarantee in the financial
sector, which puts a floor on the equity value of the financial sector as a whole, but not on the value
of the individual firms. The guarantee makes put options on the financial sector index cheap relative
to put options on its member banks. The basket-index put spread rises fourfold from 0.8 cents per dollar
insured before the financial crisis to 3.8 cents during the crisis for deep out-of-the-money options.
The spread peaks at 12.5 cents per dollar, or 70% of the value of the index put. The rise in the put
spread cannot be attributed to an increase in idiosyncratic risk because the correlation of stock returns
increased during the crisis. The government’s collective guarantee partially absorbs financial sector-wide
tail risk, which lowers index put prices but not individual put prices, and hence can explain the basket-index
spread. A structural model with financial disasters quantitatively matches these facts and attributes
as much as half of the value of the financial sector to the bailout guarantee during the crisis. The model
solves the problem of how to measure systemic risk in a world where the government distorts market
prices.
Bryan T. Kelly
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
bryan.kelly@chicagobooth.edu
Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17149

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Economic downturns that follow in the wake of financial crises are deep and persistent.1 Governments seek to mitigate the risk and repercussions of financial disasters by providing implicit and
explicit guarantees to financial institutions that are deemed integral to the stability of the financial
system. The size and the effect of these too-systemic-to-fail government guarantees remain highly
uncertain and intensely researched. We argue that equity options markets are uniquely suited
to gauge the market’s perception of too-systemic-to-fail guarantees. Since guarantees only kick
in during a financial crisis, their effect should be most visible in the prices of assets that mostly
reflect tail risk, like put options. We find that investors price in substantial government bailout
guarantees for the financial sector as a whole.2
During the financial crisis, put options on the financial sector index reflected markedly less
aggregate tail risk than did individual put option prices on the financial firms that make up the
index. This notable absence of priced aggregate tail risk at the sector level is consistent with
investors’ perception of a strong collective bailout guarantee for the financial sector. By putting a
floor under the value of the financial sector, the government eliminates part of the sector-wide tail
risk, but it does not eliminate idiosyncratic tail risk. Consistent with this absorption of sector-wide
tail risk, the government’s guarantee of the sector flattened the well-documented volatility skew
for deep-out-of-money put options on the financial sector index. We do not find similar effects on
the volatility skew in other sectors of the economy. This explains why out-of-the-money (OTM)
index put options were cheap during the crisis relative to the basket of individual put options.
We use the difference between the cost of a basket of options and an index option to estimate
the size of the guarantee extended to the financial sector during the crisis. Figure 1 plots the dollar
difference in the cost of insuring the downside risk of all firms in the financial sector and the cost
of only insuring against the sector-wide downside risk. It also displays the market capitalization
of the financial sector itself. The cost differential peaks at $139 billion on October 13, 2008, or
1

See, for example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).
In principle, bailouts of bondholders and other creditors do not imply that the value of equity is protected.
However, in practice, given the uncertainty about the resolution regime, especially for large financial institutions,
the collective guarantees tend to benefit shareholders as well.
2

3

10.5% of the financial index’s market value. Using a structural model, we find that the collective
bailout guarantee accounts for as much as half of the market value of the financial sector over our
2003-2009 sample.
Absent government guarantees, the high basket-index spread in the financial sector is puzzling.
Standard option pricing logic suggests that the dramatic increase in the correlation of stock returns
during the crisis should raise the price of OTM index options relative to the price of a basket of
individual options with the same moneyness. This is exactly what we find for call options in all
sectors of the economy. In contrast, the cost of the basket of individual stock puts soars relative to
the cost of the index puts for the financial sector. This increase in the basket-index put spread is
much larger for the financial sector than for any other sector. The basket-index spread for OTM
put options on the financial sector index reaches a maximum of 12 cents per dollar insured in
March 2009, or 70% of the cost of the index put. To generate this increase in the basket-index
spread for OTM put options, the standard option model would have to assume a large increase
in idiosyncratic risk relative to aggregate risk. But this would counter-factually imply a sharp
decrease in stock return correlations.
A collective government guarantee for the financial sector can explain the puzzle. Intuitively,
the government’s collective bailout guarantee truncates the distribution of the total equity value
of the financial sector, but not that of the individual stocks in the sector. Consider two OTM put
options, one on the sector index and one on a representative individual stock. Assume that they
share the same strike price which is below the index truncation point. An increase in the volatility
of aggregate shocks will increase the correlation among stock returns and it will increase the put
prices of individual stocks. However, it has no effect on the index put price. We generalize this
intuition to our structural model and show that only a calibration with a bailout guarantee can
simultaneously generate a high put spread and an increase in correlation between stocks.
Furthermore, a careful study of the evolution of the put spread for the financial index lends
direct support to our government guarantee hypothesis. The spread increases by on average 1.61
cents (27%) in the first five days after government announcements that increase the probability
of a bailout, while it decreases on average 0.85 cents (13%) after announcements that have the
4

opposite effect. The largest increase in the spread (60%) was registered in the first five days after
the U.S. Congress approved the TARP bailout.
We use a calibrated dynamic asset pricing model with crash risk to study the impact of sectorwide bailout guarantees on individual and index option prices. In particular, we use a version of the
Barro (2006) and Rietz (1988) asset pricing model with a time-varying probability of rare disasters.
Our model features both Gaussian and financial disaster risk.3 Our structural option pricing model
without the bailout guarantee nests the workhorse Black-Scholes option pricing models as well as
other option pricing models with fat-tailed return processes (e.g. Bates, 1991).
In our model, the collective government guarantee bounds the aggregate equity loss rate for
the financial sector in a disaster, but not for individual firms in the sector. We model the financial
crisis as an increased probability of a financial disaster. First, we show that a version of this
(state-of-the-art) structural model without bailout guarantees cannot explain the joint stock and
option moments for the financial sector that we document. It has the same defect as the much
simpler Gaussian model sketched above, in that it predicts a decrease in the correlation between
stock returns at the parameter values that generate an increased put spread. Second, we show
that a model with a bailout guarantee can account for the facts, including the large decrease in
the implied volatility skew for index put options compared to individual options. We estimate
a reduction in the average loss rate for shareholders during financial disasters from 55.7 to 37.2
percent of equity. Third, we use the structural parameters of our model to infer the effect of the
bailout option on financial firms’ cost of capital. The downside protection lowers the equity risk
premium in the financial sector by 50 percent. The collective bailout guarantee accounts for half of
the value of the financial sector according to our model estimates. Fourth, we show robust results
with respect to various aspects of the model.
We investigate and rule out three other potential alternative explanations for the sharp rise
in the basket-index spread during the crisis. We consider mispricing due to capital constraints,
counter-party risk, and short sale restrictions. A trade that takes advantage of the basket-index
spread does not tie up capital and occurs through exchanges with a AAA-rated clearing house in
3

Financial disasters are more frequent but smaller than the consumption disasters in Barro (2006).

5

the middle. The short sale ban was in place only for a very short time, applied equally to individual
and index options, and market makers were exempted from it. We study liquidity differences among
different types of options (index versus individual, puts versus calls, or financial firms versus nonfinancials), and argue that several of the facts are inconsistent with a liquidity explanation. Third,
we consider and rule out a decline (in absolute value) in the price of correlation risk.
Our paper contributes to the growing literature on tail risk measurement and how this risk is
priced. In recent work, Kelly (2011) uses the cross-section of stock returns to construct a measure of
aggregate tail risk. Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011) use option prices to make inference about
the size and frequency of consumption disasters. Drechsler and Yaron (2011) study stock returns
and option prices in a long-run risk model with jumps. Our work uses the relative valuation of
sector and stock-specific option prices to distinguish between firm-specific and aggregate tail risk.
We find that there was less aggregate tail risk priced in index option markets during the crisis than
there would have been absent a bailout option.
Our paper also contributes to the options literature that studies the relationship between individual and index options. Driessen, Maenhout, and Vilkov (2009) argue that index options provide
a hedge against increases in correlations, which constitute a deterioration in the investment opportunity set, because their prices rise when correlations increase. Individual options do not have this
feature. That is what typically makes index options expensive. We show that index put options
in the financial sector are relatively cheap during the crisis because they are essentially subsidized
through the government guarantee. Carr and Wu (2009) and Schurhoff and Ziegler (2011) also
study the price of index versus individual options. In earlier work, Bates (1991) uses OTM put
and call index option prices to study the market’s expectations about the 1987 stock market crash.
Other studies have measured the effect of guarantees on the cost of bank credit. Giglio (2010)
and Longstaff, Arora, and Gandhi (2009) infer joint default probabilities for banks from the pricing
of counter-party risk in credit default swap markets. Recently, Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009)
and Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Yang (2010) compare the prices of index options and CDX
tranches prior and during the financial crisis. Veronesi and Zingales (2010) study the value of
government bailouts to bondholders and stockholders of the largest financial firms during the
6

crisis. We focus exclusively on the equity side, and we find evidence of a large collective equity
bailout guarantee in the financial sector. From our model, we conclude that option prices tell
us that the bailout option substantially reduces the cost of capital for systemically risky financial
firms. Consistent with this result, Gandhi and Lustig (2010) quantify the effect of too-big-to-fail on
the cost of equity capital of large banks by analyzing stock returns on size-sorted bank portfolios.
They find that large banks have risk-adjusted returns that are 5% per annum lower than those
of the smallest banks, and they attribute this difference to the implicit guarantee for large banks.
In a seminal paper on this topic, O’Hara and Shaw (1990) document large positive wealth effects
for shareholders of banks who were declared too-big-to-fail by the Comptroller of the Currency
in 1984, and negative wealth effects for those banks that were not included. Since we find strong
evidence of ex-ante subsidies to shareholders, this implies that there are even larger subsidies to
other creditors of large banks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After defining index and basket put and call
spreads and their relationship in Section 2, we document their empirical behavior in the financial
sector and in all other non-financial sectors in Section 3. Section 4 finds supporting evidence for our
collective bailout hypothesis in the events of the 2007-2009 crisis. Section 5 develops a structural
asset pricing model which features a time-varying probability of financial disasters. A technical
contribution of the paper is to derive option prices in the presence of a bailout option essentially in
closed-form. Section 6 calibrates the model and shows that it is able to account for the observed
option and return data, but only when a bailout guarantee is present. Section 7 studies and rules
out three potential alternative explanations: mispricing, liquidity, and fluctuations in the price of
correlation risk. The last section concludes. Technical details are relegated to a separate appendix.

2

Prices of Index Options Versus Option Baskets

Two potential ways to insure equity in the financial sector are 1) insuring each financial institution
or 2) insuring the financial index. In this section we propose a comparison of these two insurance
schemes that is useful for identifying investors’ perceptions of government guarantees.
7

We focus on a traded sector index i comprised of different stocks j. Index denotes the share price
level of the index, which is a constant fraction 1/scale of the total market value of its constituent
stocks. The dollar cost of the index, i.e., the total market cap of all the firms in the index, is given
P i
by Index$ = N
j=1 sj Sj , where Ni is the number of different stocks that constitute index i, while

Sj and sj are the price per share and number of shares outstanding, respectively, for stock j in
$

index i. This defines scale = Index
. We use P utbasket
to denote the price of a basket of put options
i
Index
P i
index
on all stocks: P utbasket
= N
to denote the price of a put option on
i
j=1 sj P utj . We use P uti
the sector index. Similarly, we use Callibasket to denote the price of a basket of call options on all

stocks in the sector index and Calliindex to denote the price of a call option on the index. We study
two different ways of comparing basket and index options.
∆-Matched Basket The first approach ensures that the index and the individual options have
the same option ∆.4 First, we choose strike prices Kj (j = 1, 2, . . . , Ni ) for individual stocks to
match the targeted ∆ level. Second, we choose the strike price K for the index to match that same
∆. Third, we choose the number of index options with strike K such that the total dollar amount
insured by the index (denoted K index,$ ) is equal to the dollar amount insured by the basket:

K

index,$

=

Ni
X

s j Kj .

j=1

The advantage of this approach is that both the index and individual options in the basket have
the same moneyness. However, no-arbitrage does not bound the basket-index spread at zero from
below.
Strike-Matched Basket The second approach ensures that the strike price on the index matches
the share-weighted strike of the basket. First, we choose all the strike prices Kj (j = 1, 2, . . . , Ni )
for individual stocks that are part of the index to match a certain ∆. Second, we choose the strike
4

The ∆ of an option is the derivative of the option price with respect to the underlying asset price. While
put options have negative ∆, we use the convention of taking the absolute value, so that all ∆s are positive. ∆
measures the moneyness of an option, with low values such as 20 indicating OTM options and high values such as
80 indicating in-the-money (ITM) options. At the money options have a ∆ of 50.

8

price of the index options K index,$ (in billions) such that the strike price of the index (in dollars)
equals the share-weighted sum of the individual strike prices:

K index,$ =

Ni
X

s j Kj .

j=1

Third, we choose a strike price for the index K such that the total dollar cost of insurance equals
K index,$ :
K index,$ = K × scale.
The advantage of this approach is that the cost of the basket has to exceed the cost of the index
option by no arbitrage, which bounds the basket-index spread below from zero. The disadvantages
are that the ∆ of the index option can differ from the moneyness of the option basket and that
this approach is computationally more involved.5
No-Arbitrage Basket-Index Relationship We compare the cost of the index option and the
basket of options under the second approach. At expiration T , the payoff of the basket of options
P i
is: P utbasket
= N
T,i
j=1 sj max(Kj − ST,j , 0). We can compare this payoff to the payoff from the index
P i
put option: scale × P utindex
= max(K index,$ − N
T,i
j=1 sj ST,j , 0), where the strike price of the index
P i
in dollars is the weighted strike price of the underlying stocks in the basket K index,$ = N
j=1 sj Kj .

Proposition 1. The cost of the basket of put options has to exceed the cost of the index put option:

P utbasket
≥ scale × P utindex
, ∀t ≤ T.
t,i
t,i

(1)

P Ni
Proof. The payoffs at maturity satisfy the following inequality:
j=1 sj max(Kj − ST,j , 0) ≥
P i
max(K index,$ − N
j=1 sj ST,j , 0). First note that, for each j, sj max(Kj − ST,j , 0) ≥ sj (Kj − ST,j ).
P i
P i
index,$
This implies that N
− N
j=1 sj max(Kj − ST,j , 0) ≥ K
j=1 sj ST,j . However, this also means
PNi
P
i
that j=1 sj max(Kj − ST,j , 0) ≥ max(K index,$ − N
j=1 sj ST,j , 0), because the left hand side is non5

Since data are on a discrete grid of ∆s, different option ∆s can satisfy this condition on consecutive days. To
avoid oscillation in the basket price, we set a given sector’s basket ∆ equal to the mode of the day-by-day best ∆
match for that sector.

9

negative. Since the payoff from the option basket exceeds that of the index option, its cost must
be weakly higher as well.
Intuitively, the basket of put options provides insurance against states of the world in which
there are large declines in the price of any individual stock, including declines that affect many
stocks simultaneously. The index put option only provides insurance in those states of the world
that prompt common declines in stock prices. The difference P utbasket
− P utindex
between these
T,i
T,i
two put prices is the cost of insurance against large declines in individual stock prices but not in
the overall index. Hence, the basket-index spread is non-negative. The same inequality applies to
the basket of calls and the call on the index.6
Cost Per Dollar Insured To compare prices across time, sectors, and between puts and calls,
we define the cost per dollar insured (cdi) as the ratio of the price of the basket/index option
divided by its strike price: P utbasket
cdi,i =

P utbasket
i
PNi
j=1 sj Kj

and P utindex
cdi,i =

scale×P utindex
i
.
PNi
s
K
j
j=1
j

From equation (1),

index
we know that the cost of basket insurance exceeds the cost of index insurance, P utbasket
cdi,i ≥ P utcdi,i ,

if we construct the index strike to match the share-weighted strike price. We define the basketindex
basket
index put spread per dollar insured as: P utspread
= P utbasket
and Callispread
i
cdi,i − P utcdi,i . Callcdi,i

are defined analogously.

3

The Basket-Index Spread in the Data

This section documents our main stylized facts.

3.1

Data

We use daily option data from January 1, 2003 until June 30, 2009. Index option prices are on
the nine SPDR7 sector exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and on the S&P500 ETF, traded on the
6

This property is unique to equity options. In the case of credit default swaps, the cost of a basket of credit
default swaps has to be equal to the CDX index to rule out arbitrage opportunities.
7
SPDRs are a large family of ETFs traded in the United States, Europe, and Asia-Pacific and managed by State
Street Global Advisors.

10

CBOE. As ETFs trade like stocks, options on these products are similar to options on individual
stock. Options on ETFs are physically settled and have an American-style exercise feature. The
nine sector ETFs have the nice feature that they have no overlap and collectively cover the entire
S&P500. Appendix A contains more details and lists the top 40 holdings in the financial sector
ETF.8 We also use individual option data for all 500 stocks in the S&P500. The OptionMetrics
Volatility Surface provides daily European put and call option prices that have been interpolated
over a grid of time-to-maturity (TTM) and option ∆, and that perform a standard adjustment
to account for the American option feature of the raw option data. The European style of the
resulting prices allows us to compare them to the options we compute in our structural model
later. Interpolated prices allow us to hold maturity and moneyness constant over time and across
underlyings. The constant maturity options are available at various intervals between 30 and 730
days and at grid points for (absolute) ∆ ranging from 20 to 80. We focus primarily on options
with 365 days to maturity and ∆ of 20. Implied volatility data are from the interpolated implied
volatility surface of OptionMetrics. We use CRSP for returns, market capitalization, and number of
outstanding shares for sector ETFs and individual stocks. We calculate realized volatility of index
and individual stock returns, as well as correlations between individual stock returns from CRSP
return data. Our database changes as the index composition of the S&P500 changes. Whenever
a firms gets added or deleted from the S&P500 and hence from its sector ETFs, we also drop it
from the individual option data base so as to maintain consistency between the composition of the
option basket and the index option.9

3.2

∆-Matched Basket

This section describes the moments in the data for the basket-index option spread. We find that
OTM put options on the index were cheap during the financial crisis relative to the individual stock
options, while OTM index calls were relatively expensive. This pattern is much more pronounced
8

Our sample length is constrained by the availability of ETF option data. For the financial sector (but not for
all non-financial sectors), we are able to go back to January 1999. The properties of our main object of interest, the
basket-index put spread for financials, do not materially change if we start in 1999.
9
Our results remain unchanged when we focus on the subset of firms that remain in the financial sector index
throughout our sample.

11

for the financial sector than for other non-financial sectors.
Panel I in Table I provides summary statistics for the basket-index spread per dollar insured
for the ∆-matched approach using index and individual options with ∆ = 20. Columns (1)-(2)
report results for the financial sector. Columns (3)-(4) report results for a value-weighted average
of the eight non-financial sectors. Columns (5)-(6) report the differences in the spread between
the financial and non-financial sectors. All spreads are reported in cents per dollar insured. An
increase in the spread between the basket and the index means index options become cheaper
relative to the individual options. We report statistics for three samples: the entire sample (top
panel, January 2003 until June 2009), the pre-crisis sample (middle panel, January 2003 until July
2007), and the crisis sample (bottom panel, August 2007 until June 2009).
Over the full sample, the mean spread for OTM puts is 1.69 cents per dollar in the financial
sector and 1.11 cents in the non-financial sectors. The basket-index spread for OTM calls are
an order of magnitude smaller than those for puts: 0.24 cents for financials and 0.21 cents for
non-financials. Put spreads are more volatile than call spreads: The standard deviation of the
basket-index spread over time is 1.89 cents for puts compared to only 0.16 cents for calls in the
financial sector. The largest basket-index put spread for financials is 12.45 cents per dollar, recorded
on March 6, 2009. It represents 70% of the cost of the index option on that day. On that same
day, the difference between the spread for financials and non-financials peaks at 9.07 cents per
dollar insured. The largest put-based basket-index spread for non-financials is 4.1 cents per dollar,
recorded on November 21, 2008. In contrast, the largest basket-index call spread is only 0.49 cents
for financials and 0.36 cents for non-financials.
The bottom half of Panel I focuses on the crisis subsample. The mean spread backed out
from OTM puts is 3.79 cents per dollar for financials and 1.57 for non-financials. While there
is an across-the-board increase in the put spread from pre-crisis to crisis, the increase is much
more pronounced for financials (4.7 times versus 1.7 times). Put spread volatility increases in the
crisis, especially for financials, whose standard deviation rises from 0.20 pre-crisis to 2.39 during
the crisis. Non-financial put spread volatilities increase from 0.44 to only 0.90. A very different
pattern emerges for OTM call spreads. They are substantially lower in the crisis than in the pre12

crisis period. The crisis call spread is 0.06 cents for financials and 0.11 cents for non-financials. The
volatility increases only modestly from 0.06 to 0.17 (0.05 to 0.10) for financials (non-financials).
Figure 2 plots the cost of the basket of put options per dollar insured (full line), the cost of the
financial sector put index (dashed line), and the basket-index spread (dotted line) for the entire
sample. Before the crisis, the basket-index spread is essentially constant and very small, less than
1 cent per dollar. During the crisis, the put spread increases as the index option gradually becomes
cheaper relative to the basket of put options. The cost of the basket occasionally exceeds 30 cents
while the cost of the index put rarely rises above 20 cents per dollar. At the start of 2009, the
difference exceeds 12 cents per dollar of insurance. The basket index spread also becomes more
volatile. By fixing ∆ as the crisis unfolds, we are looking at put contracts with lower strike prices
during the crisis, and hence at options with lower prices. This tends to lower the basket-index
spreads. None of the eight non-financial sectors has anywhere close to such a large put spread
increase during the crisis.
Figure 2 plots the cost per dollar insured of basket and index call options, as well as the call
spread. During the crisis, index options become more expensive relative to the basket of call
options. In addition, the volatility of the basket-index spread decreases. At some point, the call
spread becomes negative (-0.44 cents at the lowest point).10 We find essentially the same results
for call spreads in all other sectors.
Figure 3 compares the put spread of financials and non-financials over time (the dotted lines
from the previous two figures). For non-financials (solid line), the basket-index spread remains
very low until the Fall of 2008. For financials (dashed line) on the other hand, the put spread
starts to widen in the summer of 2007 (the asset-backed commercial paper crisis), spikes in March
2008 (the collapse of Bear Stearns), and then spikes further after the Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae
bailouts and the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in September 2008. After a decline in November and
December of 2008, the basket-index spread peaks at 12 cents per dollar in March 2009. The dotted
line plots the difference in put spread between the financial sector and non-financial sectors. This
10

Recall that the zero lower bound for the spread only holds for strike-matched and not ∆-matched options, so
that this negative number does not present a puzzle.

13

difference is positive throughout the crisis, except for a few days in November of 2008. It increases
from the summer of 2007 to October 2008, falls until the end of 2008, and increases dramatically
from January to March 2009. Section 4 provides a detailed interpretation of this pattern based on
crisis-related government announcements.
Different Sectors Table II compares the basket-index spread for different sectors. The only two
industries which experienced large increases in the basket-index spreads during the crisis were the
consumer discretionary sector and the materials sector. The consumer discretionary sector was
highly exposed to aggregate tail risk. Discretionary spending of U.S. consumers experienced the
largest post-war decrease during the last quarter of 2008. One major component of this sector is
car manufacturers (Ford and GM) and parts suppliers (e.g., Goodyear and Johnson Controls), but
it also includes retail, home construction (e.g., D. R. Horton and KB Home), hotels (e.g., Marriott
and Harrah’s) and other businesses with substantial direct and indirect real estate exposure. The
basket-index spread peaked at 9 cents per dollar insured for this industry. The average increased
from 1.84 cents to 3.28 cents per dollar insured. It is conceivable that this sector would benefit
more than other sectors when the collective guarantee for banks kicks in. In fact, the auto industry
benefited directly from a federal government bailout. The materials sector ETF has similarly large
exposure to businesses benefitting from government guarantees. Examples include US Steel, whose
large customers include the transportation and construction industries, and Weyerhaeuser, which
produces building materials and operates a large real estate development segment.

3.3

Strike-Matched Baskets

Panel II in Table I reports results for our second approach to compare basket-index spreads: the
index strike matches the share-weighted strike price of the basket. In this case, no-arbitrage implies
that the basket-index spreads are non-negative. Essentially, we see the same pattern as with the
∆-matching approach. The correlation between these two measures is 0.995. However, the basketindex spreads are larger when we match the share-weighted strike price. The reason is that the
higher volatility of individual stock returns leads to a lower (higher) strike price for OTM put (call)
14

options when we match ∆s. Put differently, individual options in the second approach have higher
∆s than index options, which increases spreads.
The average put spread during the crisis is 5.85 cents per dollar for financials (compared to 3.79
cents in Panel I), and the volatility is 3.01 (compared to 2.39). The maximum spread is now 15.87
cents per dollar insured (compared to 12.46). This number represents 89% of the cost of the index
put on March 6, 2009 (compared to 70%). On that same day, the difference between the put spread
for financials and non-financials peaks at 10.17 cents per dollar. The maximum spread for calls is
only 1.27 cents per dollar. The minimums reported are all positive, which means the no-arbitrage
constraint is satisfied. Since our results do not seem sensitive to how we perform the basket-index
comparison, we report only the ∆-matched basket-index spread results in the remainder of the
paper.

3.4

The Effect of Time To Maturity

Panel III of Table I studies the cost of insurance when the T T M is 30 days instead of 365 days. As
we show later, these shorter maturity option contracts are more liquid. Naturally, all basket-index
spreads are smaller for shorter-dated options, because the cost per dollar insured increases with
the T T M. Yet, we observe the same patterns as in Panel I. We limit our discussion to Panel III;
the strike-matched results in Panel IV are very similar.
Starting with the basket-index spread for puts on financials, we find an average of 0.62 cents
per dollar in the crisis, up from 0.17 cents pre-crisis. This represents an increase by a factor of
3.7, only slightly lower than the 4.7 factor with T T M = 365. Per unit of time (that is, relative to
the ratio of the square root of maturities), the put spread increase during the crisis is larger for
T T M = 30 options than for T T M = 365 options. The 30 day spread reaches a maximum of 2.46
cents per dollar or 52% of the cost of the index option on that day. The call spread for financials
decreases from an average of 0.16 cents pre-crisis to an average of 0.10 cents during the crisis, a
slower rate than for longer-dated options. For non-financials, there is an increase in the put spread
by a factor of 1.8 (from 0.13 before the crisis to 0.23 cents during the crisis). This is similar to

15

the increase in long-dated puts of 1.8 times, and larger when taking into account the shorter time
interval. The call spread for non-financials increases slightly during the crisis (from 0.11 to 0.14
cents), while it falls for longer-dated options (from 0.25 to 0.11 cents). This is the only qualitative
(but quantitatively small) difference with longer-dated options.

3.5

The Effect of Moneyness

Table III reports the cost of insurance for the basket versus the index as a function of moneyness
(∆). It follows the format of Table I, and their first panel is identical. While option prices are
naturally higher when options are closer to being in the money (ITM), it turns out that spreads
also increase in size. However, the proportional increase in the basket-index spread from pre-crisis
to crisis is much larger for OTM put options than for at-the-money (ATM) puts.
Starting with financials, options with the lowest moneyness (∆ = 20) see the largest proportional increase in put spread from pre-crisis to crisis. That factor is 4.7 for ∆ = 20, 3.5 for ∆ = 30,
3.0 for ∆ = 40, and 2.5 for ATM options (∆ = 50). Similarly, the proportional decrease in call
spreads is larger for OTM than for ATM options. For non-financials, the put spread increase during
the crisis is much smaller and decreases in moneyness. The difference in the put spread between
financials and non-financials (reported in column 5) increases only marginally during the crisis,
from 2.22 cents at ∆ = 20 to 2.37 cents per dollar at ∆ = 50. Since ATM option prices are obviously higher for high-∆ options, the financials minus non-financials put spreads are much larger
in percentage terms for OTM options. To illuminate this point, Table IV reports the percentage
spread, measured as the basket-index spread divided by the cost of the index option. For put
options on financials, the percentage spread during the crisis is 37% for ∆ = 20 but only by 26%
for ∆ = 50. Similarly, the maximum percentage put spread falls from 81% to 52% as moneyness
increases. For call options on financials, the largest percentage spreads are in the pre-crisis sample.
Finally, we only see large increases in the average percentage spreads for OTM put options with
∆ = 20 on financials.

16

3.6

Correlation and Volatility

The crisis was characterized by a substantial increase in the correlation of individual stock returns.
Panel I of Tables VI and VIII reports the average pairwise correlations for financials and nonfinancials stocks, respectively, computed from daily return data. Correlation among stocks in the
financial sector index is 51.3% on average over the entire sample. This number increased from
45.8% pre-crisis to 57.6% during the crisis. For non-financials, the correlations are lower. The
average correlation is 45.2%. This number increased from 33.7% pre-crisis to 56.8% in the crisis.
Figure 4 plots correlations for financials and non-financials. The correlations for financials are
invariably higher. We argue below that the increase in correlations during the crisis is evidence
that points towards the collective bailout hypothesis.
Panel I of Tables VI and VIII also reports realized volatility of individual stock and index returns
for financials and non-financials. Panel I of Tables V and VII reports option-implied volatilities
in financials and non-financials. Over the entire sample, the implied volatility is 2.9 percentage
points higher than the realized volatility for financials. In the pre-crisis sample, this difference is
9.8 percentage points (21.7% versus 11.9%). However, in the crisis-sample, this difference shrinks
to 4.7 percentage points (48.5% versus 43.8%). The ratio of the two falls from 1.8 to 1.1. In the
options literature, the difference between implied volatility and the expectation of realized volatility
is called the volatility risk premium. To the extent that the sample realized volatility is a good
proxy of the conditional expectation of realized volatility, this is evidence that the volatility risk
premium in financials decreases during the crisis.11 It is yet another important indication that index
put options on the financial sector are cheap during the crisis. For non-financials, in contrast, the
volatility risk premium barely decreases during the crisis. The difference between implied volatility
and average realized volatility is 9.5 percentage points in the pre-crisis sample compared to 9.1
percentage points during the crisis. Similarly to puts, call options on financials indicate a large
decrease in the volatility risk premium from 3.0 percentage points to -6.0 percentage points in the
crisis. The decrease is again smaller for non-financials.
11

In any GARCH model, lagged volatility is the key predictor of future volatility.

17

Bending the Implied Volatility Skew The government effectively bends the implied volatility
skew for index put options, much more than for individual options, in the financial sector. As is
clear from Figure 5, the average implied volatility difference between the basket and the index
is higher for deep out-of-the-money put options during the crisis. The difference between the
implied volatility of the basket and that of the index reaches a maximum of 11.5% for ∆ = 20, and
gradually decreases to 9% for ∆ = 50. This downward sloping pattern arises because a government
guarantee has a larger relative impact on put prices with lower strike prices. In the pre-crisis
sample, the basket-index skew spread in implied volatility was essentially flat across moneyness.
The same applies for the basket-index spread in the other sectors, both pre-crisis and during the
crisis. Finally, Figure 6 plots the implied vol spread inferred from calls. Here we see the exact
opposite pattern. During the crisis, the basket-index implied volatility difference for calls actually
has a positive slope. This is because OTM index call options were substantially more expensive
than the basket, while the prices of ATM index calls were much closer to the basket price. This is
consistent with elevated aggregate tail risk during the crisis and high return correlations, exactly
what we would expect to see (including for puts) in the absence of a bailout guarantee.

4

The Basket-Index Spread and the Government

In this section, we provide direct evidence that the dynamics of the basket-index spread during the
crisis are closely tied to government announcements that relate directly to the collective bailout
hypothesis. In a financial disaster, the banking sector is insolvent because the sector’s asset value
drops below the value of all debt issued. Under the collective bailout hypothesis, the government
bounds the value of total losses to equity holders in a financial disaster. In principle, bailouts of
bondholders and other creditors do not imply that the value of equity is protected. However, in
practice, given the uncertainty about the resolution regime, especially for large financial institutions, the collective bailout ensures a positive value of equity in the financial sector. In the presence
of a collective bailout guarantee, an increase in the probability of a financial disaster increases the
put basket-index spread because the cost of downside insurance for the entire sector, which is sup18

ported by the government, increases by less than the cost of downside insurance for all the stocks
in the basket. If the guarantee is specific to the financial sector, we do not expect to see the same
pattern in other sectors.
To link the put spread directly to (the market’s perceptions of) the government’s bailout actions, we study government announcements during the financial crisis of 2007-2009. We focus
on significant announcements for which we can determine ex-ante the sign of the effect on the
likelihood (and size) of a collective bailout.
Announcement Effects We identify five events that increase the probability of a government
bailout for shareholders of the financial sector: (i) October 3, 2008: Revised bailout plan (TARP)
passes the U.S. House of Representatives, (ii) October 6, 2008: The Term Auction Facility is
increased to $900bn, (iii) November 25, 2008: The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF) is announced, (iv) January 16, 2009: Treasury, Federal Reserve, and the FDIC Provide
assistance to Bank of America, (v) February 2, 2009: The Federal Reserve announces it is prepared
to increase TALF to $1trn. We refer to these as positive announcement dates. These announcement
dates are indicated in the top panel of Figure 7, which plots the basket-index spread.
We also identify six negative announcements that (we expect ex-ante to) decrease the probability
of a bailout for shareholders: (i) March 3, 2008: Bear Stearns is bought for $2 per share, (ii)
September 15, 2008: Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy, (iii) September 29, 2008: House votes
no on the bailout plan, (iv) October 14, 2008: Treasury announces $250bn capital injections, (v)
November 7, 2008: President Bush warns against too much government intervention in the financial
sector, and (vi) November 13, 2008: Paulson indicates that TARP will not used for buying troubled
assets from banks. These announcement dates are depicted against the basket-index spread in the
bottom panel of Figure 7.
Figure 8 plots the basket-index put spread for financials around the announcement dates. The
panel on the left shows the five positive announcements (dashed lines), while the panel on the right
shows the six negative announcements (dashed lines). The solid line depicts the average effect
across events. We find that the basket-index spread increases 1.61 cents (27%) in the first 5 days

19

following a positive announcement, while it decreases 0.85 cent (13%) in the first 5 days following
a negative announcement, on average across announcements. The pre-announcement movements
suggest that some are anticipated by the market.
We obtain similar average responses when we examine the financial minus the non-financial
basket-index spread around announcement dates instead. Figure 9 plots the basket-index spread
of financials less that of non-financials around the same events. The basket-index spread increases
0.82 cents (24%) in the first 5 days following a positive announcement, while it decreases 0.93 cents
(23%) in the first 5 days following a negative announcement. Hence, these announcement dates
mainly affect the financial spread not the non-financial spread.
The largest positive effect occurs after the House approves the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-343) on October 3, which establishes the $700 billion Troubled
Asset Relief Program (TARP). The spread increases 3 cents or 60% in the first five days after the
announcement. Furthermore, the approval of TARP started a sustained increase in the basketindex spread in the ensuing period.
Both the failure of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers initially reduce the basket-index put
spread. In the case of the Lehman failure, the spread goes back up in the following days. Possibly,
the government underestimated the consequences of the failure and markets subsequently increased
the perceived probability of a bailout. The largest negative effect was registered on October 14,
when the U.S. Treasury announced the TARP would be used as a facility to purchase up to $250bn
in preferred stock of U.S. financial institutions. The Treasury essentially shifted TARP’s focus from
purchasing toxic assets to recapitalizing banks which resulted in dilutions of existing shareholders.
As a result, the put spread declined about 2.5 cents per dollar insured (about 35%) in the first five
days after the announcement.12
This decline in the spread was reversed only in early January when the FDIC, the Fed and the
Treasury provided assistance to Bank of America, without diluting existing shareholders. The put
spread started its largest increase in the beginning of February 2009 and peaked in the beginning
12

This announcement started a major decline in the spread that was reinforced by speeches delivered by president
Bush and Secretary Paulson in early November. Clearly, there was a fear that bank shareholders would not receive
the government bailout they had hoped for.

20

of March.13
Markets were gradually reassured that the government was indeed committed to bailing out
the financial sector without wiping out equity holders. Our measure of the value of the bailout
guarantee suggests that the market was not initially reassured by the TARP program and its
implementation, which consisted mostly of cash infusions from sales of preferred shares. Only
when the Treasury and the Federal Reserve explicitly announce programs to purchase toxic assets
such as mortgage-backed securities does the collective bailout guarantee become valuable.
Non-financials

During the financial crisis, as market-wide volatility increased, index put options

on non-financials also became cheaper relative to individual stock options. The non-financials put
spread (dotted line in Figure 7) hovers around 1 cent until Lehman Brothers fails in September
2008. After that, it increases to 3.9 cents on October 10, and it reaches a maximum of 4.1 cents on
November 21. This suggests that, for a brief period, the market was expecting bailouts in certain
non-financial sectors as well.14 Nevertheless, the magnitude of the put spread in non-financials is
much smaller than in financials.

5

Model with Financial Disaster Risk

There are several reasons why a structural model is essential to interpreting the evidence presented
thus far. It is well known that financial risks fluctuate over time, sometimes dramatically. Persistent fluctuations in return volatility have been considered a central feature asset markets since at
13

On February 10, 2009, Treasury Secretary Geithner announced a Financial Stability Plan involving Treasury
purchases of convertible preferred stock in eligible banks, the creation of a Public-Private Investment Fund to
acquire troubled loans and other assets from financial institutions, expansion of the Federal Reserve’s Term AssetBacked Securities Loan Facility (TALF), and new initiatives to stem residential mortgage foreclosures and to support
small business lending. The Federal Reserve Board announced that it was prepared to expand TALF to as much
as $1trn and to broaden eligible collateral to include AAA-rated commercial mortgage-backed securities, privatelabel residential mortgage-backed securities, and other asset-backed securities. The expansion of TALF would be
supported by $100bn from TARP. In the last week of February there was discussion of assurances to prop up the
banking system, including Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
14
For example, on November 18, the CEOs of General Motors, Chrysler, and Ford testify before Congress and
request access to TARP for federal loans. This access is granted on December 19, 2008. As we discussed above, the
consumers discretionary and materials sectors, which contain car manufacturers and homebuilders, experienced the
largest increase in put spread among all non-financial sectors.

21

least the work of Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge (1988). Time series dynamics in skewness (see
Harvey and Siddique, 1999), jump risk (see Chan and Maheu, 2002) and tail risk (see Kelly, 2011)
of equity returns have also been documented. Because these features have a first order impact on
option prices (and therefore on the basket-index spread), an option pricing model is necessary to
disentangle the effects of risk fluctuations from those of bailout guarantees. Furthermore, to ensure
that we are capturing the effects of government guarantees rather than model misspecification,
we work with state-of-the-art modeling tools that have demonstrated success in describing options
prices (see Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes, 2007, 2009). These tools capture the aforementioned
properties (volatility fluctuations, asymmetries, and tail risks) that are now considered essential
ingredients of accurate option pricing (Bates, 2003). Finally, in order to back out the effects of the
guarantee on the cost of capital of financial institutions and their market value, we embed a these
building blocks in a fully specified macro-finance dynamic asset pricing model.
The critical difference between banks and other non-financial corporations is their susceptibility
to bank runs during financial crises. Historically, runs have been made by depositors, but in
the modern financial system they are made by other creditors such as investors in asset-backed
commercial paper, repos, and money market mutual funds (see Gorton and Metrick, 2009). This
leads us to consider banking panics or financial disasters as a source of aggregate risk. To model the
asset pricing impact of financial disasters, we use a version of the Barro (2006), Rietz (1988) and
Longstaff and Piazzesi (2004) asset pricing models with a time-varying probability of disasters, as
developed by Gabaix (2008), Wachter (2008) and Gourio (2008). The model features two sources
of priced risk: Gaussian risk and financial disaster (tail) risk. While non-financial corporations are
also subject to financial crises, their exposure is more limited and they do not (or at least much
less) enjoy the collective bailout guarantee that supports the financial sector.
We first describe the model environment and solve for equilibrium prices. A technical contribution of the paper is to derive analytical option pricing expressions in such a setting with bailout
guarantees. We then compare the calibrated model to the empirical evidence documented above.

22

5.1

Environment

Preferences We consider a representative agent with Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences over
non-durable consumption flows. For any asset return Ri,t+1 , this agent faces the standard Euler
equation:

1 = Et [Mt+1 Ri,t+1 ] ,

− ψα
C
t+1
α−1
Mt+1 = β α
Ra,t+1
,
Ct
where α ≡

1−γ
1
1− ψ

, γ measures risk aversion, and ψ is the elasticity of inter-temporal substitution

(EIS). The log of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) m = log(M) is given by:

mt+1 = α log β −

α
∆ct+1 + (α − 1)ra,t+1 .
ψ

All lowercase letters denote logs. We note and use later that

α
ψ

+ 1 − α = γ.

Uncertainty There is a time-varying probability of disaster, pt . This probability follows an Istate Markov chain. Let Π be the 1 × I steady-state distribution of the Markov chain and P the
I × 1 grid with probability states. The mean disaster probability is ΠP. The Markov chain is
uncorrelated with all other consumption and dividend growth shocks introduced below. However,
the volatility of Gaussian consumption and dividend growth risk potentially varies with the Markov
state. This allows us to capture higher Gaussian risk in bad states associated with high disaster
probabilities.
In state i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , I}, the consumption process (∆ct+1 ) is given by a standard Gaussian
component and a disaster risk component:

∆ct+1 =




µc + σci ηt+1



c
µc + σci ηt+1 − Jt+1

if no disaster
if disaster,

where η is a standard normal random variable and J c is a Poisson mixture of normals governing the
23

size of the consumption drop (jump) in the disaster state. We adopt the Backus, Chernov, and Martin
(2011) model of consumption disasters. The random variable J c is a Poisson mixture of normal
n

random variable. The number of jumps is n with probability e−ω ωn! . Conditional on n, J c is normal
with mean (nθc ) and variance nδc2 . Thus, the parameter ω (jump intensity) reflects the average
number of jumps, θc the mean jump size, and δc the dispersion in jump size.15 Finally, we allow for
heteroscedasticity in the Gaussian component of consumption growth: σci depends on the Markov
state i.
Individual Dividends in Financial Sector In state i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , I}, the dividend process of
an individual bank is given by:

∆dt+1 =




µd + φd σci ηt+1 + σdi ǫt+1



d
a
µd + φd σci ηt+1 + σdi ǫt+1 − Jt+1
− λd Jt+1

if no disaster
if disaster

where ǫt+1 is standard normal and i.i.d. across time. It is the sum of an idiosyncratic and an
d
a
aggregate component, which we introduce in the calibration below. The term exp(−Jt+1
− λd Jt+1
)

can be thought of as the recovery rate corresponding to a disaster event. The loss rate varies across
banks. It has an idiosyncratic component J d and a common component J a . The parameter λd
governs the exposure of the bank to aggregate tail risk. The idiosyncratic jump component is a
Poisson mixture of normals that are i.i.d. across time and banks, but with common parameters
(ω, θd , δd ). We set θd = 0, which implies that the idiosyncratic jump is truly idiosyncratic; during
a disaster the average jump in any stock’s log dividend growth is equal to the common component,
−λd E[J a ].16
Collective Bailout Option The key feature of the model is the presence of the collective bailout
option which puts a floor J on the losses of the banking sector. The aggregate component of the loss
Note that when J c is activated, we have already conditioned on a disaster occurring. Therefore, the parameter
ω is not the disaster frequency but rather the mean of the number of jumps, conditional on a disaster. There is a
non-zero probability e−ω of zero jumps in the disaster state. In what follows we normalize ω to 1.
16
The cross-sectional mean of λd is 1.
15

24

rate is the minimum of the maximum industry-wide loss rate J and the actual realized aggregate
loss rate J r :
a
r
Jt+1
= min(Jt+1
, J).

We model J r as a Poisson mixture of normals with parameters (ω, θr , δr ). For simplicity, we assume
that the jump intensity is perfectly correlated among the three jump processes (J c , J i , J r ), but the
jump size distributions are independent. We can think of the no-bailout case as J → +∞, so that
J a = J r . We do not model the government budget constraint, but we note that the resources that
are spent in providing this backstop can be financed by issuing government debt and do not have
to reduce current aggregate consumption.

5.2

Valuing Stocks

In sections B.1 and B.2 of the separate appendix, we derive a system of equations that can be
solved for the equilibrium log wealth-consumption ratio and price-dividend ratios, respectively. An
important object is the equity risk premium, which is the expected excess log stock return (adjusted
for a Jensen inequality term). This is equal to minus the covariance between the log SDF and asset
return:
2
−Cov(m, r) = γφd σci
− ζm,i + γCov(J d 1D , J c 1D ) + γλd Cov(J a 1D , J c 1D ),

where 1D is an indicator variable that is activated by the occurrence of a disaster. Appendix
B.3 derives the right-hand-side terms as a function of the structural parameters. The first term
represents the standard Gaussian equity risk premium, the second term reflects compensation for
the risk that emanates from the Markov switches, while the third and fourth terms are compensation
for disaster risk. The third term is zero by virtue of our normalization θd = 0, so that the last
term represents the entire disaster risk premium. It depends on the risk aversion coefficient, the
probability of a disaster, and the extent to which aggregate consumption and financial stocks’
dividends fall in a disaster. The latter depends on θr and λd as well as on the bailout guarantee,

25

J. Absent the bailout guarantee, the disaster risk premium would be γλd pi (2 − pi )θc θr , which is
always higher than the equity premium in the presence of a guarantee.

5.3

Valuing Options

The main technical contribution of the paper is to price options in the presence of a bailout
guarantee.
Options on Individual Banks We are interested in the price per dollar invested in a put
option (cost per dollar insured) on a bank stock. For simplicity, we assume that the option has a
one-period maturity and has European exercise style. We denote the put price by P ut:


D
P utt = Et Mt+1 (K − Rt+1 )+ = (1 − pt )P utN
+ pt P utD
t
t ,
where the strike price K is expressed as a fraction of a dollar (that is, K = 1 is the ATM option).
The put price is the sum of a disaster component and a non-disaster component. The no-disaster
option price in state i:

D
P utN
i

=

I
X

D
πi,j P utN
ij ,

j=1

D
where P utN
ij , the option price conditional on a transition from i to j, has the familiar Black-Scholes

form. Similarly, the disaster option price in state i:

P utD
i

=

I
X
j=1

πi,j

∞
X
e−ω ω n
n=1

n!

P utD
ijn .

(2)

where P utD
ijn is the option price conditional on a transition from i to j and n jumps. Because of
the truncation of payoffs by the bailout, the valuation of these disaster options is non-standard.
The closed-from expressions for option prices are provided in section B.4 of the separate appendix.
We verify there that the above put price collapses to the simpler case of no bailout options, that

26

is J a = J r . This is the case as J → +∞.
Options on the Financial Sector To aggregate from the individual firms to the index, we use
P
a generic set of index weights wj (j = 1, · · · , Ni ) for the sector i’s constituents, where Jj=1 wj = 1.
We assume that all individual firms in an index face the same dividend growth parameters (thus

they are ex-ante identical except for size wj ). Assuming in the model that all stocks initially trade
at $1, the one-period dividend growth rate of the index in the model is given by:

∆d

index

≈

J
X

wj ∆dj .

j=1

The weights allow us to take into account a finite number of index constituents as well as sector
qP
concentration, as measured by
wj2 . The Gaussian dividend growth shock ǫ, which is not priced,

has standard deviation σdi . We assume that a fraction ξd of its variance is aggregate, with the
remainder being idiosyncratic. It follows that the Gaussian variance of the index is given by

index
σdi

v
u
Ni
X
u
t
wj2 (1 − ξd ).
= σdi ξd +
j=1

The gains from diversification make the Gaussian variance of the index lower than that of its
constituents. Similarly, the idiosyncratic tail risk of the financial sector index is much lower than
that of any individual stock:
δdindex

v
u Ni
uX
= δd t
wj2
j=1

and θdindex = θd = 0. The growth rate of the sector’s dividends is then given by:
∆dat+1 = µd + φd σci ηt+1 + σdindex ǫt+1 ,

if no disaster

d,index
a
∆dat+1 = µd + φd σci ηt+1 + σdindex ǫt+1 − Jt+1
− Jt+1
,

where we have assumed

PJ

j=1 wj λd,j

if disaster


a
= 1. Since J d,index has mean zero, exp −Jt+1
is the recovery

rate of the index in case the rare event is realized.
27

6

Quantitative Model Predictions

The goal of this section is threefold. First, we argue that a (state-of-the-art) structural model with
bailout guarantees can explain the pattern in option prices and stock returns we document in the
previous section. Second, we show that a model without a bailout guarantee cannot. Third, we use
the structural parameters of the model to infer the effect of the government guarantee on financial
firms’ expected return and stock price. We finish by showing robustness of our main conclusions
to variations in the details of the model.

6.1

Parameter Choices

We calibrate the model at the annual frequency to match it with option prices of one-year maturity.
Disaster probabilities

We set the number of Markov states I equal to 2 and treat the first state

as the pre-crisis state and the second state as the crisis state. We think of the pre-crisis period
(January 2003-July 2007) as a period of low probability of a financial disaster. We think of the
crisis (August 2007-June 2009) as a period of elevated probability of a financial disaster (as well
as the actual realization of a financial disaster). Since we want to match data for this particular
78 month period, we choose the elements of the transition probability matrix so that the Markov
chain resides in a crisis 29.5% of the time (the same 23 out of 78 months as in the data). This leads
us to set π11 = .79 and π22 = .50. We calibrate the steady-state probability of a financial disaster
to a much longer time series. In particular, we match the 13% historical frequency of financial
disasters in the U.S. since 1800 documented in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). Given the Markov
transitions and pss = 13%, we set the probability of a financial disaster equal to 7% in state 1 and
28% in state 2 so as to have a big spread in probabilities.
Consumption We set µc equal to real per capita total consumption growth during the pre-crisis
period, which is 2.21% in our sample. Coincidentally, that is also the average over the full 19512010 sample. Unconditional average consumption is µc −pss θc in the model. We choose θc = .065 to
match average annual real consumption growth of 1.37% over our 2003-2009 sample. That means
28

that annual consumption drops 4.3% (2.2%-6.5%) in real terms in a disaster. This consumption
drop is close to the 5.9% annual consumption drop during a typical financial crisis in developed
economies, as reported in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).17 We choose σc1 = .0035 to match the
standard deviation of real per capita consumption growth (annualized from overlapping quarterly
data) of 0.35% in the pre-crisis period. We set δc = .035 to allow for non-trivial dispersion around
the size of the consumption disaster and we allow for a doubling of Gaussian consumption risk to
σc2 = .0070. This delivers an unconditional consumption growth volatility of 0.92% per year given
all other parameters. This is close to the observed volatility of 0.81% in our sample and exactly
matches the 0.92% in the 1951-2010 sample. Seen from the model’s perspective and interpreting
the period 2007-2009 as the realization of a disaster, the observed consumption growth rate of
-0.7% (or 2.9% lower than in the non-disaster state) was one standard deviation above the mean
growth rate in disasters.
Preferences We set the coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to 10 and the inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution equal to 3. The combination of a high risk aversion and a high EIS allows
us to simultaneously generate a meaningful equity risk premium and a low risk-free rate. The high
risk aversion will also be necessary to match the high OTM put prices observed during the crisis.
We set the subjective time discount factor β = .9555. The unconditional real risk-free rate that
results is 2.44% per year. It is 3.43% in state 1 and 0.07% in state 2, reflecting the additional
precautionary savings motive when a disaster is more likely. This compares to an observed average
yield on a one-period zero coupon government bond of 0.66% in the pre-crisis period and 0.05% in
the crisis period, after subtracting realized inflation.18 The unconditional volatility of the risk-free
rate is low at 1.54% per annum, matching the 1.59% volatility in our sample.
17

Reinhart and Rogoff find that the (worldwide) average financial crisis is associated with a 35.5% fall in GDP
over six years. Barro and Ursua (2008) find that consumption disasters are typically of the same magnitude as GDP
contractions during crises.
18
Lowering average interest rates, as well as the difference between the interest rates in state 1 and 2, is possible if
we further increase the EIS, while simultaneously increasing the time discount factor. We opt not to do this because
the EIS is already high. Furthermore, we need strictly positive interest rates in both states in order to be able to
compute Black-Scholes implied volatilities for comparison with OptionMetrics data. Our parameter choices are a
compromise that still delivers the low interest rate environment of our sample period.

29

Dividends Next, we calibrate the parameters that govern the dividend growth rate of the firms
in the financial sector. The mean growth rate of any firm, and therefore of the index, is µd = .08 in
order to match the high observed dividend growth rate on the financial sector index in the pre-crisis
period. We set φd = 3, a standard choice for the leverage parameter. This delivers a negligible
Gaussian equity risk premium (γφd σc2 ) of four basis points in state 1 and 15 basis points in state
2. The equity risk premium in the model predominantly reflects compensation for disaster risk.
The key objects of the model are the parameters that govern Gaussian risk and, especially, tail
risk. Sector risk depends in part on the degree of diversification in the sector. We therefore use a
representative set of index weights for the financial sector index constituents (that of 04/09/2010,
qP
P
79 firms on that day) for wj where Jj=1 wj = 1. The concentration metric
wj2 is 0.22 for

the financial sector (on that day).19 We keep σd constant across Markov states in our benchmark

calibration for simplicity. We set ω = 1, which implies that the average number of jumps during
a disaster is one, θd = 0, which implies that the idiosyncratic jump is truly idiosyncratic, and
λd = 1, which implies that the average exposure to the aggregate tail risk process is one. These are
innocent normalizations. The parameters that remain to be calibrated are Θ = (σd , ξd , J, θr , δr , δd ).
Together these parameters determine the equity risk premium, the volatility of dividend growth
and returns at the individual and index level, the pairwise correlation between stock returns, and
all option prices. It is the parameters in Θ that we vary between our benchmark calibrations with
and without a government guarantee.

6.2

Economy with a Government Guarantee

In our first analysis, we ask whether we can match average prices on deep OTM puts and calls
(∆ = 20, T T M=365) on the financial sector index, the basket of financial stocks, and their spread
in both the pre-crisis (state 1 in the model) and the crisis period (state 2). Simultaneously, we are
interested in matching the correlation between return pairs and the volatility of index and individual
returns in both states. These comprise 12 distinct moments. Our benchmark calibration for the
19

Using the holdings from a different day has only minor quantitative effects on our results. This measure would
only be half as large (0.11) if all 79 firms had equal size.

30

financial sector sets

ΘF = (σd , ξd , J, θr , δr , δd ) = (0.15, 0, 0.921, 0.815, 0.55, 0.516).

Because the disaster probability is modest in state 1, Gaussian risk is what mostly drives the
standard deviation of the index and the correlation among stocks in the pre-crisis period. The
choice ξd = 0 implies that all the unpriced Gaussian dividend growth risk is idiosyncratic. This
creates relatively more idiosyncratic risk, increasing the basket-index spread for both calls and puts
in both states 1 and 2. It also allows us to lower the pairwise return correlation (by increasing
σd ) without causing much of an increase in the volatility of the index return. The choice σd = .15
allows us to match the 46% pairwise correlation between stock returns in the pre-crisis period. It
generates financial index return volatility of 19%, which is reasonably close to the 12% volatility
observed in the pre-crisis period.
We choose a high value for the aggregate tail risk parameter, θr = .815, as well as a high
dispersion, δr = .55. This means that, absent bailout options, the financial sector would suffer a
return drop of 81.5% in logs or 55.7% in levels, with a wide confidence interval around it. However,
the bailout option J substantially limits the losses for the index. The mean loss θa , which takes
into account the bailout, is 46.5% in logs or 37.2% in levels. At the same time, there is substantial
idiosyncratic tail risk, δd = .516, meaning that some firms fare much better than others in a
financial disaster. Importantly, the bailout only applies to aggregate and not idiosyncratic tail
risk. Our parameters are such that there is enough residual aggregate tail risk (after the bailout)
to make all options expensive enough, and enough idiosyncratic tail risk to make individual options
more expensive than index options. However, there cannot be too much idiosyncratic tail risk or
else the pairwise correlation of stock returns would fall from state 1 to state 2, counter-factually
implying very low correlation during a crisis. We return to this point in the next subsection.
As Panel B of Table V shows, our model is able to quantitatively account for observed option
prices. It matches basket and index put prices in the crisis (state 2) perfectly. It also reproduces
the correct level of put prices in the pre-crisis period (state 1), but it understates the put spread

31

in state 1. The model is able to account for a large run-up in the put spread between the pre-crisis
period and the crisis period. In the model, this is caused by a four-fold increase in the probability
of a financial disaster. Similarly, the model generates the right prices for deep OTM call options.
In particular, it captures the feature of the data that the call spread decreases from the pre-crisis
to the crisis period. The model slightly overstates the call spreads. The option-implied volatility
from the put index increases from 31.2% pre-crisis to 46.7% in the crisis inside the model. The
latter number is only slightly above the model’s realized index volatility in a disaster of 46.4%.
The difference between option-implied and realized volatility shrinks substantially during the crisis:
from 12% to 0.3%. In the data, the pattern is the same with implied volatility 9.8% above realized
volatility pre-crisis, with this difference falling to 4.7% in the crisis. Panel B of Table VI shows
that the model also generates an increase in the volatility of index returns, thanks to the large
amount of aggregate tail risk. Finally, the model generates a substantial increase in the pairwise
correlation of returns from pre-crisis to crisis. While it still understates the rise in the data, the
increase is important and goes hand in hand with the bailout option. Intuitively, in state 1 the
correlation mostly reflects Gaussian risk and the Gaussian correlation is low because all ǫ shocks are
idiosyncratic. Because of the substantial amount of aggregate tail risk (relative to the idiosyncratic
tail risk), the correlation between returns in the disaster state is higher (40% versus 16% in the
non-disaster state). Since state 2 gives the disaster state more weight, the correlation rises from
state 1 to 2. Absent a bailout, this amount of aggregate tail risk would lead to index option prices
that are far too high compared to the data.
The large amount of idiosyncratic Gaussian and tail risk deliver individual stock returns that
are volatile: 27% in the pre-crisis and 44.5% in the crisis. Conditional on a disaster, individual
stock return volatility is 69.5%, not unlike the observed 72.9% realized volatility of individual
financial firms during the crisis period. Implied volatility from the put basket is 61.3% during the
crisis in the model, substantially below realized volatility of 69.5%. The same is true in the data,
where implied volatility is 59.5%, below the realized volatility of 72.9%.
Finally, we find that the model generates the same implied volatility skew patterns for the
basket-index spread as in the data. Pre-crisis, the implied volatility of the basket of options minus
32

that of the index option is low and stable across moneyness. During the crisis, the basket-index
skew shifts up and becomes much higher for ∆ = 20 options than for ∆ = 50 options.

6.3

Economy without a Bailout Guarantee

Having shown that we can match the option prices of interest in the presence of a bailout guarantee,
we now show that the bailout guarantee is essential. To that end, we set J = +∞, and search over
the remaining parameters of Θ to best match the 12 moments of interest. We find the best match
at the following parameter values:

ΘN B = (σd , ξd , J, θr , δr , δd ) = (0.15, .628, +∞, 0.2825, 0.25, 0.65).

This calibration features a higher level of idiosyncratic tail risk and a much lower level of aggregate
tail risk. The aggregate dividend falls 25% during a disaster, with substantially less dispersion
around it. It also has a lower level of Gaussian tail risk because 2/3 of the ǫ shocks are now
common across firms.
As Panel C of Table V shows, the model without a bailout guarantee matches put option prices
in the crisis equally well. It also does a reasonably good job matching put prices in the pre-crisis
period, but understating the put spread just like the model with bailouts. The match for call prices
is worse than for the model with bailouts. In particular, this model shows a negative call spread in
the pre-crisis which rises during the crisis. The opposite is true in the data. The implied volatility
from basket calls and puts is about the same, while it is much lower for calls than for puts in the
data. The latter again reflects the high degree of idiosyncratic tail risk in this calibration.
The main problem with this calibration, however, is that the correlation between stock returns
goes down in the crisis, as can be seen in Panel C of Table VI. The reason is that correlations
between stocks are very low during disasters in this model. In order to generate high spreads
with no bailout, idiosyncratic tail risk must be set excessively high while aggregate tail risk is low.
To match the pre-crisis correlation, the model must make most of the Gaussian risk systematic.
This decline in correlation is a highly counter-factual and undesirable feature of the model without
33

bailouts. Another counter-factual consequence of this is that idiosyncratic tail risk is so high that
the price-dividend ratio of individual stocks blows up (it is 225,602 in levels while the one for the
index is a reasonable 19).

6.4

Economy without Disaster Risk

Not only are we not able to explain the data in a model with financial disasters without government
guarantees, we are also unable to account for the data in a model without disasters. To make this
point, we study a standard Black-Scholes model with only Gaussian risk. To give this model a
chance of explaining the data, we increase Gaussian consumption growth volatility to σc (1) = 0.01
pre-crisis and σc (2) = 0.05 during the crisis. We allow for the Gaussian risk to vary across two
Markov states and set parameters σd (1) = 0.133, σd (2) = 0.698, ξd (1) = .705, ξd (2) = 0.315 so as to
match the observed individual and index return volatility in the financial sector exactly. Matching
the high individual return volatility of 72.9% in the crisis requires a large amount of idiosyncratic
risk in state 2. Matching the index volatility of 43.8% during the crisis, requires assuming that
31.5% of Gaussian dividends shocks are common. Because the index volatility is relatively high
compared to individual volatility, we need to choose a much higher fraction of common shocks in
the pre-crisis period. This parameter configuration has the consequence of a very high 84% stock
return correlation pre-crisis, which falls to 37% during the crisis. Again, this pattern is highly
counter-factual. This calibration generates basket and index put prices that are essentially zero
pre-crisis. During the crisis, it generates basket prices that are too high and index prices that are
too low, so that the put spread is 7.8 in the model compared to 3.8 in the data. Call spreads go
up in the model, but down in the data. We conclude that a Gaussian risk model cannot account
for the patterns observed in the data and suffers from the same correlation problem as the disaster
model without bailout guarantees.

34

6.5

Non-Financial Sectors

Next, we ask whether the model can explain the options prices and return moments for the nonfinancial sectors. We documented a smaller increase in put spreads between the pre-crisis and
crisis averages, as repeated in the top panel of Table VII. Table VIII also shows a much smaller
increase in the volatility of individual stock and index returns for non-financials than for financials.
Volatilities are higher in the pre-crisis than for financials, but substantially lower during the crisis.
Also, return correlations are lower, but increase to the same high level as for financials, implying a
stronger overall increase. Matching these return facts necessitates a recalibration of the dividend
growth parameters for the non-financial sector. All other parameters stay at their benchmark
values. We choose

ΘN F = (σd , ξd , J, θr , δr , δd ) = (0.17, 0.14, ∞, 0.219, 0.15, 0.23).
This calibration features no bailout option, substantially less idiosyncratic and aggregate tail risk,
and slightly more unpriced Gaussian risk, a larger fraction of which is aggregate. This allows us
to match the return volatility and correlation moments well, as shown in Panel B of Table VIII.
The option prices in Panel B of Table VII also provide a good match to the put prices in the crisis.
They generate the 1.6 cents put spread of the data. They also generate a large increase in the
put spread from pre-crisis to crisis. The model also captures the decline in the call spread that
we found in the data, but overstates OTM call price levels and spreads somewhat. These results
suggests that, to a first-order approximation, it is appropriate to think of the bailout guarantee
as being confined to the financial sector. However, a modest bailout guarantee may be needed to
explain the maximum (as opposed to the average) put spread in the non-financial sector.
We argued that the presence of a bailout option should more strongly affect put than call
spreads, crisis than pre-crisis period, and financial than non-financial firms. To quantify this
prediction, we construct a triple difference of basket-index spreads: we subtract from the change
over time in put spreads the change over time in call spreads. We then subtract that number for
the financial sector from that for the non-financial sector. In the data, the triple difference is 2.44
35

cents per dollar insured. The calibrated model generates a very similar positive triple difference of
2.32.

6.6

Cost of Capital and Systemic Risk Measurement

We now use the model’s parameters to gauge the effect of the bailout option on the cost of capital of
financial firms and to compute a measure of the total value of the subsidy implied by the collective
bailout guarantee.
The benchmark model’s equity risk premium for the financial sector index is 4.7% per year in
the pre-crisis and rises to 14.0% during the crisis. The bailout guarantee plays an important role in
keeping the equity risk premium down. Without it, and holding all other parameters constant, the
equity risk premium would be exactly twice as large. We conclude that option prices tell us that
the bailout option substantially reduces the cost of capital for systemically risky financial firms.
Similarly, we find that the price-dividend ratio in the model with bailout guarantees is 49.5% lower
pre-crisis (in state 1) and 61% lower in the crisis state (state 2) than it would be absent guarantee.
This implies that the bailout guarantee accounts for fully half of the value of the financial sector
when calibrated to our sample.
Our model also enables us to measure systematic risk in the presence of a bailout guarantee.
In particular, our calibration of the financial sector model with bailout guarantees delivers the
aggregate amount of tail risk is that the financial sector takes on. Absent guarantees, the average
financial firm would suffer a return fall of 55.7% in a financial disaster, compared to 37.2% with
guarantees. The guarantee also affects the higher-order moments of the recovery distribution. The
high and variable aggregate tail risk would presumably incur much higher (systemic) regulatory
capital charges if detected and measured properly. The structural model allows us to do so.

6.7

Robustness

In section C of the separate appendix we consider several refinements of our benchmark model.
First, we consider a calibration of the model that better matches the correlation increase during the

36

crisis at the cost of a slightly worse fit of option prices. Second, we study a version of our economy
that simultaneously matches put options of different moneyness. The basic implications from our
benchmark economy carry over to this richer economy. Third, we consider a 3-state model that
delivers larger increases in the basket-index spread by adding a third state with a much higher
disaster probability.
So far, we have abstracted from bank heterogeneity. In section C.4, we extend the model to
allow for banks of different sizes. Our model can account for the heterogeneity in option price
and return features of each group of banks. We find that the cost of capital for large banks would
increase by 12% points, 1.5 times the 9% point increase for the small banks. This suggests that large
banks’ options were “cheap” because they disproportionately enjoyed the government guarantee.

7

Alternative Explanations

We consider three alternative explanations to collective bailout options: mispricing and short sale
restrictions, liquidity, and time-varying correlation risk premia. We conclude that none is consistent
with the patterns in the data.

7.1

Mispricing and short-sale restrictions

Recent research has documented violations of the law of one price in several segments of financial
markets during the crisis. In currency markets, violations of covered interest rate parity have been
documented (see Garleanu and Pedersen, 2009). In government bond markets, there was mispricing
between TIPS, nominal Treasuries and inflation swaps (see Fleckenstein, Longstaff, and Lustig,
2010). Finally, in corporate bond markets, large arbitrage opportunities opened up between CDS
spreads and the CDX index and between corporate bond yields and CDS (see Mitchell and Pulvino,
2009). A few factors make the mispricing explanation a less plausible candidate for our basket-index
put spread findings.
First, trading on the difference between the cost of index options and the cost of the basket does
not require substantial capital, unlike some of these other trades (CDS basis trade, TIPS/Treasury
37

trade). Hence, instances of mispricing in the options basket-index spread due to capital shortages
are less likely to persist (see Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino, 2007; Duffie, 2010).
Second, if we attribute our basket-index spread findings to mispricing, we need to explain the
divergence between put and call spreads. This asymmetry rules out most alternative explanations
except perhaps counter-party risk. The state of the world in which the entire financial sector, or
the whole economy, is at risk is the state of the world in which OTM index put options pay off.
However, these are exchange traded options and hence are cleared through a clearing house; no
clearing house has ever failed. All options transactions on the CBOE are cleared by the Options
Clearing Corporation. This is the first clearinghouse to receive Standard & Poor’s highest credit
rating. Hence, these options are very unlikely to be affected by counterparty default risk.
Finally, our analysis of implied volatility on index options has established that these index
options are cheap during the crisis even when comparing implied and realized volatility. This
comparison does not rely on individual option prices, which may be more subject to mispricing.
A related alternative explanation involves short sale restrictions on financial sector stocks. A
short sale ban could push investors to express their bearish view by buying put options instead
of shorting stocks. Market makers or other investors may find writing put options more costly
when such positions cannot be hedged by shorting stock. The SEC imposed a short sale ban
from September 19, 2008 until October 8, 2008 which affected 800 financial stocks. From July
21, 2008 onwards, there was a ban on naked short-selling for Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, and 17
large banks. However, exchange and over-the-counter option market makers where exempted from
both SEC rules so that they could continue to provide liquidity and hedge their positions during
the ban. Both the short window of the ban compared to the period over which the put spread
increased (recall it peaks first on October 13 after the ban is lifted and again in March 2009) and
the exemption for market makers make the short sale ban an unlikely explanation for our findings.

38

7.2

Liquidity

Another potential alternative explanation of our findings is that individual put options are more
liquid than index put options, and that their relative liquidity rose during the financial crisis. The
same explanation must also apply to call options. We now argue that these liquidity facts are an
unlikely explanation for our findings, often pointing in the opposite direction.
Table IX reports summary statistics for the liquidity of put options on the S&P 500 index, sector
indices (a value-weighted average across all 9 sectors), the financial sector index, all individual stock
options (a value-weighted average), and individual financial stock options. The table reports daily
averages of the bid-ask spread in dollars, the bid-ask spread in percentage of the midpoint price,
trading volume, and open interest. The columns cover the full range of moneyness, from deep
OTM (∆ < 20) to deep ITM (∆ > 80), while the rows report a range of option maturities. We
separately report averages for the pre-crisis and crisis periods. It is worth pointing out that a
substantial fraction of trade in index options takes place in over-the-counter markets, which are
outside our database. Hence, these bid-ask and volume numbers overstate the degree of illiquidity.
However, absent arbitrage opportunities across trading locations, the option prices in our database
do reflect this additional liquidity.
Deep OTM put options with ∆ < 20 have large spreads, and volume is limited. OTM puts
with ∆ between 20 and 50 still have substantial option spreads. For the long-dated OTM puts
(maturity in excess of 180 days), the average pre-crisis spread is 5.5% for the S&P 500, 12.8% for
the sector options, 10.8% for the financial sector options, 6.8% for all individual stock options, and
7.0% for individual stock options in the financial sector. Financial sector index options appear, if
anything, more liquid than other sector index options. The liquidity difference between index and
individual put options is smaller for the financial sector than for the average sector.
Interestingly, during the crisis, the liquidity of the options appears to increase. For long-dated
OTM puts, the spreads decrease from 5.5% to 4.7% for S&P 500 options, from 12.8 to 7.8% for
sector options, from 10.8% to 4.5% for financial sector options, from 6.8 to 5.5 % for all individual
options, and from 7.0% to 5.8% for financial firms’ options.20 At the same time, volume and
20

Absolute bid-ask spreads increase during the crisis but this is explained by the rise in put prices during the

39

open interest for long-dated OTM puts increased. For example, volume increased from 400 to 507
contracts for the S&P 500 index options, from 45 to 169 for the sector options, from 287 to 1049
for financial index options, and from 130 to 162 for individual stock options in the financial sector.
During the crisis, trade in OTM financial sector put options invariably exceeds not only trade in
the other sector OTM put options but also trade in the OTM S&P 500 options. The absolute
increase in liquidity of financial sector index puts during the crisis and the relative increase versus
individual put options suggests that index options should have become more expensive, not cheaper
during the crisis.
Short-dated put options (with maturity less than 10 days) are more liquid than long-dated
options; they experience a larger increase in trade during the crisis. We verified above that our
results are robust across option maturities. When expressed in comparable units, the increase in
the basket-index put spread seemed larger for short-dated maturities, if anything.
Table X reports the same liquidity statistics for calls. Calls and puts are similarly liquid yet
display very different basket-index spread behavior. Finally, the increase in the basket-index spread
during the crisis is also (and even more strongly) present in shorter-dated options, which are more
liquid. All these facts suggest that illiquidity is an unlikely candidate.

7.3

Time-Varying Price of Correlation Risk

Index put options are typically considered expensive relative to individual options. Returns on index put options are large and negative: -90% per month for deep OTM put options (see Bondarenko,
2003). CAPM alphas are large and negative as well, and Sharpe ratios on put writing strategies
are larger than those on the underlying index. However, this does not imply these options are
mispriced (see Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes, 2009). Stochastic volatility models and models
with jumps can explain many features of these returns.
Driessen et al. (2009) attribute the expensiveness of index options to a negative correlation
risk premium. The value of an index option increases when correlations of the basket constituents
increase. This is because an increase in correlation constitutes a deterioration in the investment
crisis. Absolute bid-ask spreads increase by less than the price.

40

opportunity set, and index options provide investors with a hedge against such increases. A related stylized fact is that the implied index volatility is always higher than the expected realized
index volatility, but the implied volatilities for individual stocks are not significantly higher than
their expected realized volatilities. These features arise from models with (i) a zero risk price for
idiosyncratic variance risk and (ii) a negative risk price for correlation risk.
We showed that the patterns for financial sector put options during the crisis were exactly
the opposite. Implied volatility is often lower than the realized volatility for the index but not
for the individual stocks during the crisis, and the index put option decreases in price relative to
the individual options despite an increase in return correlations. These patterns for puts could
in principle be consistent with a decrease in the price of correlation risk (in absolute value) over
time. But, if anything, one would expect the price of correlation risk to increase in absolute value
during the crisis. Furthermore, such a decreased price of correlation risk would have counter-factual
implications for call spreads, which would be predicted to increase as well. The data instead show
a decline in call spreads during the crisis.

8

Conclusion

Our paper uncovers new evidence from option prices showing that the government absorbs aggregate tail risk. By providing guarantees for the financial sector, the government effectively bends
down the implied volatility skew for index put options on the financial sector. We propose a
structural model that can disentangle true exposure to aggregate tail risk from exposure implied
by market prices and thus accounts for distortions due to the implicit promise of bailouts. Our
model identifies the magnitude of the collective bailout guarantee to the financial sector from the
difference between the price of a basket of put options on individual financial firms and the price of
a put option on the financial sector index. It ascribes the increase in the put spread to an increased
probability of a financial disaster. During such periods, there is an increase in the relative amount
of aggregate versus idiosyncratic tail risk, which helps to explain the increased return correlation
between stocks. Put spreads can only rise because of a collective bailout guarantee which makes
41

index options artificially cheap. Our model calibration suggests that the government’s backstop
massively reduced the cost-of-capital to the financial sector over our 2003-2009 sample. The substantial amount of aggregate tail risk the sector takes on would lead to a fifty percent reduction in
its market value if the guarantee were taken away.

References
Backus, D., M. Chernov, and I. Martin (2011): “Disasters implied by equity index options,”
Journal of Finance, forthcoming. 6, 24, 11, 14
Barro, R. (2006): “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121, 823–866. 5, 22
Barro, R., and J. F. Ursua (2008): “Consumption Disasters in the 20th Century,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98. 29
Bates, D. S. (1991): “The Crash of ’87: Was It Expected? The Evidence from Option Markets,”
Journal of Finance, 44, 1009–1044. 5, 6
(2003): “Empirical option pricing: a retrospection,” Journal of Econometrics, 116(1),
387–404. 22
Bollerslev, T., R. F. Engle, and J. M. Wooldridge (1988): “A Capital Asset Pricing
Model with Time-Varying Covariances,” The Journal of Political Economy, 96(1), 116–131. 22
Bondarenko, O. (2003): “Why Are Put Options So Expensive?,” Working Paper University of
Illinois. 40
Broadie, M., M. Chernov, and M. Johannes (2007): “Model Specification and Risk Premia:
Evidence from Futures Options,” Journal of Finance, 62(3), 1453–1490. 22
(2009): “Understanding Index Option Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(11),
4493–4529. 22, 40
42

Carr, P., and L. Wu (2009): “Variance Risk Premiums,” Review of Financial Studies, 22,
1311–1341. 6
Chan, W. H., and J. M. Maheu (2002): “Conditional Jump Dynamics in Stock Market Returns,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 20(3), 377–389. 22
Collin-Dufresne, P., R. S. Goldstein, and F. Yang (2010): “On the Relative Pricing of
long Maturity S&P 500 Index Options and CDX Tranches,” Working Paper Columbia Graduate
School of Business. 6
Coval, J., J. Jurek, and E. Stafford (2009): “Economic Catastrophy Bonds,” American
Economic Review, 99 (3), 628–666, HBS Working Paper. 6
Drechsler, I., and A. Yaron (2011): “What’s Vol Got To Do With It,” Review of Financial
Studies, 24, 1–45. 6
Driessen, J., P. J. Maenhout, and G. Vilkov (2009): “The Price of Correlation Risk:
Evidence from Equity Options,” The Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1377–1406. 6
Duffie, D. (2010): “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital,”
Journal of Finance, 65(4), 1237–1267. 38
Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937–968. 23
Fleckenstein, M., F. A. Longstaff, and H. N. Lustig (2010): “Why Does the Treasury
Issue Tips? The Tips-Treasury Bond Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper, 16538. 37
Gabaix, X. (2008): “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
Macro-Finance,” NBER Working Papers 13724, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 22
Gandhi, P., and H. Lustig (2010): “Size Anomalies in Bank Stock Returns: A Fiscal Explanation,” Working Paper UCLA Anderson School of Management. 7

43

Garleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen (2009): “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations from
the Law of One Price,” Working Paper Haas School of Business at UCBerkeley. 37
Giglio, S. (2010): “Credit Default Swap Spreads and Systemic Financial Risk,” Working Paper
Harvard University. 6
Gorton, G., and A. Metrick (2009): “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” NBER
working paper 15223. 22
Gourio, F. (2008): “Time-series predictability in the disaster model,” Finance Research Letters,
5(4), 191–203. 22
Harvey, C. R., and A. Siddique (1999): “The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,”
The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34(4), 465–487. 22
Kelly, B. (2011): “Tail Risk and Asset Prices,” Chicago Booth Working Paper. 6, 22
Longstaff, F., N. Arora, and P. Gandhi (2009): “Counterparty Credit Risk and the Credit
Default Swap Market”,” Working Paper UCLA Anderson School of Management, July. 6
Longstaff, F. A., and M. Piazzesi (2004): “Corporate Earnings and the Equity Premium,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 74, 401–421. 22
Mitchell, M., L. H. Pedersen, and T. Pulvino (2007): “Slow Moving Capital,” American
Economic Review, 97, 215–220. 38
Mitchell, M., and T. Pulvino (2009): “Arbitrage crashes and the speed of capital,” Working
Paper AQR. 37
O’Hara, M., and W. Shaw (1990): “Deposit Insurance and Wealth Effects: The Value of Being
”Too Big to Fail.”,” Journal of Finance, 45(5), 1587–1600. 7
Reinhart, C. M., and K. Rogoff (2009): This Time is Different. Princeton University press.
3, 28, 29

44

Rietz, T. A. (1988): “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
22, 117–131. 5, 22
Schurhoff, N., and A. Ziegler (2011): “Variance risk, financial intermediation, and the crosssection of expected option returns,” Working Paper University of Zurich. 6
Veronesi, P., and L. Zingales (2010): “Paulson’s gift,” Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3),
339–368. 6
Wachter, J. (2008): “Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market
Volatility?,” NBER Working Papers, 14386. 22

45

46

Table I: Basket-Index Spreads on Out-of-the-Money Options
Financials
Puts

Calls

Non-financials
Puts

Calls

F Minus NF
Puts

Calls

Financials

P Minus C

Puts

Panel I: ∆-Matched T T M = 365

Non-financials

Calls

Puts

Calls

F Minus NF
Puts

Calls

P Minus C

Panel II: Strike Matched T T M = 365

mean
std
min
max

1.693
1.891
-0.133
12.458

0.238
0.157
-0.437
0.487

1.106
0.686
-0.122
4.128

0.208
0.094
-0.253
0.359

0.588
1.435
-1.899
9.070

0.030
0.100
-0.498
0.440

0.558
1.506
-1.732
9.568

2.936
2.516
1.019
15.872

0.990
0.100
0.632
1.273

2.686
1.076
1.265
7.579

2.019
0.246
1.663
2.754

0.250
1.693
-2.031
10.168

-1.029
0.194
-1.943
-0.709

1.279
1.846
-0.887
12.111

Pre-Crisis

mean
std
min
max

0.810
0.197
0.078
2.269

0.315
0.056
0.032
0.487

0.911
0.442
-0.033
3.090

0.249
0.052
0.101
0.359

-0.098
0.335
-1.899
0.953

0.067
0.052
-0.225
0.198

-0.165
0.326
-1.732
0.870

1.710
0.345
1.061
3.763

0.951
0.070
2.322
5.097

2.259
0.587
4.070
9.651

1.896
0.128
1.265
4.567

-0.549
0.329
-2.031
0.444

-0.945
0.085
0.942
2.082

0.396
0.269
1.943
3.101

Crisis

mean
std
min
max

3.792
2.393
-0.133
12.458

0.055
0.166
-0.437
0.370

1.572
0.904
-0.122
4.128

0.111
0.100
-0.253
0.285

2.220
1.705
-0.538
9.070

-0.057
0.130
-0.498
0.440

2.277
1.791
-0.740
9.568

5.851
3.006
1.019
15.872

1.082
0.101
0.632
1.273

3.702
1.274
1.776
7.579

2.313
0.206
1.867
2.754

2.149
2.076
-1.203
10.168

-1.230
0.230
-1.943
-0.709

3.379
2.253
-0.223
12.111

Full Sample

mean
std
min
max

0.302
0.334
-0.150
2.458

0.139
0.064
-0.312
0.272

0.158
0.136
-0.831
0.651

0.116
0.054
-0.202
0.240

0.145
0.274
-0.415
1.865

0.023
0.085
-0.433
0.324

0.122
0.302
-0.424
2.031

0.683
0.612
0.170
3.977

0.430
0.156
-0.010
1.081

0.576
0.251
-0.529
1.976

0.559
0.156
0.241
1.308

0.107
0.414
-0.385
2.663

-0.129
0.076
-0.613
0.204

0.236
0.405
-0.207
2.777

Pre-Crisis

mean
std
min
max

0.170
0.063
-0.072
0.376

0.155
0.054
-0.227
0.270

0.129
0.110
-0.831
0.511

0.105
0.052
-0.103
0.240

0.042
0.119
-0.316
0.996

0.051
0.072
-0.347
0.324

-0.009
0.095
-0.424
0.869

0.400
0.074
0.170
0.757

0.352
0.047
0.535
1.710

0.476
0.137
0.948
2.257

0.483
0.070
-0.529
0.947

-0.076
0.118
-0.385
0.860

-0.131
0.071
0.236
0.954

0.055
0.090
0.636
1.384

Crisis Sample

mean
std
min
max

0.617
0.476
-0.150
2.458

0.100
0.071
-0.312
0.272

0.228
0.163
-0.139
0.651

0.144
0.048
-0.202
0.238

0.389
0.367
-0.415
1.865

-0.044
0.077
-0.433
0.253

0.434
0.386
-0.185
2.031

1.360
0.782
0.245
3.977

0.618
0.165
0.159
1.081

0.814
0.297
0.359
1.976

0.743
0.151
0.361
1.308

0.546
0.527
-0.181
2.663

-0.126
0.085
-0.613
0.204

0.671
0.518
-0.014
2.777

47

Full Sample

Panel III: ∆-Matched, T T M = 30

Panel IV: Strike Matched, T T M = 30

This table reports summary statistics for the basket-index spread in the cost of insurance per dollar insured. Numbers reported are in cents per dollar
of the strike price. The full sample covers 1/2003-6/2009. The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009. ∆ is 20.
In the top panel, Time to maturity is 365 days. In Panel I, we choose the index option with the same ∆ as the individual options. In Panel II, we choose
the index option with the same share-weighted strike price as the basket.

Table II: Basket-Index Spreads on Out-of-the-Money Options in Other Sectors
Sector
Financials

Mean
Max

Put Spread
Full Sample Pre-Crisis
1.69
0.81
12.46
2.27

Crisis
3.80
12.46

Consumer Disc.

Mean
Max

2.27
9.02

1.84
4.67

3.28
9.02

Materials

Mean
Max

1.69
7.70

1.18
2.95

2.91
7.70

Technology

Mean
Max

1.95
6.68

1.68
4.13

2.59
6.68

Healthcare

Mean
Max

1.40
5.95

1.09
3.78

2.13
5.95

Industrials

Mean
Max

1.81
4.73

1.65
3.74

2.19
4.73

Consumer Staples

Mean
Max

1.35
5.91

1.15
2.52

1.84
5.91

Utilities

Mean
Max

0.63
4.10

0.53
2.56

0.86
4.10

Energy

Mean
Max

0.95
3.47

0.89
3.41

1.07
3.47

This table reports the average basket-index put spread in the cost of insurance per dollar insured for the nine S&P
500 sector ETFs. Numbers reported are in cents per dollar of the strike price. The full sample covers 1/2003-6/2009.
The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009. |∆| is 20, time to maturity is
365 days and spreads are calculated using ∆-matched options. Sectors are listed in descending order by mean crisis
spread.

48

Table III: Summary Stats for Spreads on Options sorted by Moneyness
Financials
Puts

Calls

Non-financials
Puts

F Minus NF

Calls

Puts

Calls P Minus C

Financials
Puts

Calls

Non-financials
Puts

∆ = 20
Full

F Minus NF

Calls

Puts

Calls P Minus C

∆ = 30

mean
std
min
max

1.693
1.891
-0.133
12.458

0.238
0.157
-0.437
0.487

1.106
0.686
-0.122
4.128

0.208
0.094
-0.253
0.359

0.588 0.030
1.435 0.100
-1.899 -0.498
9.070 0.440

0.558
1.506
-1.732
9.568

2.133
2.030
0.227
14.090

0.459
0.289
-1.036
0.843

1.514
0.761
-0.023
5.345

0.421
0.155
-0.285
0.683

0.621 0.039
1.507 0.201
-2.214 -1.186
11.002 0.789

0.582
1.646
-1.839
11.691

Pre-Crisis mean
std
min
max

0.810
0.197
0.078
2.269

0.315
0.056
2.593
5.462

0.911
0.442
3.265
8.090

0.249
0.052
-0.033
3.090

-0.098
0.335
-1.899
0.953

0.067
0.052
0.942
2.082

-0.165
0.326
1.410
2.201

1.193
0.293
0.227
2.454

0.593
0.105
0.101
0.843

1.292
0.480
-0.023
3.762

0.489
0.084
0.269
0.683

-0.096 0.104
0.338 0.106
-2.214 -0.442
1.483 0.342

-0.201
0.290
-1.839
1.308

3.792
2.393
-0.133
12.458

0.055
0.166
-0.437
0.370

1.572
0.904
-0.122
4.128

0.111
0.100
-0.253
0.285

2.220 -0.057
1.705 0.130
-0.538 -0.498
9.070 0.440

2.277
1.791
-0.740
9.568

4.370
2.573
0.479
14.090

0.142
0.336
-1.036
0.753

2.042
1.006
0.307
5.345

0.258
0.165
-0.285
0.577

2.328 -0.116
1.807 0.277
-0.520 -1.186
11.002 0.789

2.444
2.007
-0.577
11.691

Crisis

49

mean
std
min
max

∆ = 40
Full

∆ = 50

mean
std
min
max

2.581
2.085
0.522
14.287

0.763
0.452
-1.743
1.406

1.968
0.789
0.029
5.450

0.702
0.229
-0.241
1.303

0.615 0.062
1.558 0.350
-2.825 -2.154
9.231 0.927

0.553
1.794
-2.213
11.385

3.083
2.131
0.486
15.589

1.161
0.649
-2.770
2.178

2.487
0.836
0.348
6.021

1.079
0.344
-0.322
2.254

0.599 0.083
1.619 0.546
-4.086 -3.579
9.959 1.300

0.516
1.969
-2.737
13.513

Pre-Crisis mean
std
min
max

1.620
0.305
0.522
2.955

0.957
0.175
0.093
1.406

1.740
0.519
0.029
4.771

0.791
0.152
0.367
1.303

-0.116 0.167
0.441 0.191
-2.825 -0.908
2.033 0.584

-0.283
0.378
-2.213
1.705

2.114
0.328
0.586
4.015

1.403
0.278
0.375
2.178

2.262
0.586
0.348
5.895

1.184
0.266
0.173
2.254

-0.145 0.221
0.514 0.277
-4.086 -1.349
2.290 1.187

-0.365
0.394
-2.737
1.734

4.867
2.655
0.643
14.287

0.303
0.563
-1.743
1.294

2.511
1.022
0.325
5.450

0.490
0.243
-0.241
0.984

2.356 -0.188
1.855 0.489
-0.734 -2.154
9.231 0.927

2.544
2.215
-0.469
11.385

5.387
2.748
0.486
15.589

0.586
0.877
-2.770
2.084

3.019
1.069
0.719
6.021

0.830
0.380
-0.322
1.594

2.368 -0.244
1.946 0.820
-1.287 -3.579
9.959 1.300

2.613
2.546
-1.246
13.513

Crisis

mean
std
min
max

This table reports summary statistics for the basket-index spread in the cost of insurance per dollar insured. Numbers reported are in cents per dollar
insured. The full sample covers 1/2003-6/2009. The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009. We choose the
index option with the same ∆ as the individual options.

Table IV: Percentage Basket-Index Spreads on Options with Varying Moneyness
Financials

Non-financials

Puts

Calls

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max

29.69%
9.38%
80.53%
26.67%
5.78%
43.71%
36.86%
12.04%
80.53%

18.41%
11.95%
51.73%
24.68%
6.80%
51.73%
3.47%
7.46%
20.97%

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max

28.22%
7.66%
68.84%
26.84%
6.19%
44.00%
31.50%
9.61%
68.84%

19.29%
12.03%
48.15%
25.47%
7.09%
48.15%
4.41%
7.62%
22.08%

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max

27.99%
7.17%
57.82%
27.87%
6.78%
47.14%
28.22%
8.04%
57.82%

19.72%
11.91%
51.69%
25.69%
7.46%
51.69%
5.39%
7.57%
23.14%

Puts

Calls

25.23%
7.45%
64.48%
26.04%
7.47%
64.48%
23.28%
7.02%
44.97%

13.70%
7.09%
27.34%
16.91%
4.94%
0.36%
6.05%
5.38%
16.81%

∆ = 20
Full Sample
Pre-Crisis Sample
Crisis Sample

∆ = 30
Full Sample
Pre-Crisis Sample
Crisis Sample

24.16%
5.73%
54.68%
25.19%
5.50%
54.68%
21.67%
5.48%
37.75%

14.97%
6.80%
28.54%
18.18%
4.46%
0.68%
7.25%
4.98%
18.57%

∆ = 40
Full Sample
Pre-Crisis Sample
Crisis Sample

24.27%
5.23%
50.85%
25.67%
4.96%
50.85%
20.89%
4.23%
33.41%

15.35%
6.46%
29.28%
18.29%
4.54%
1.30%
8.29%
4.68%
19.69%

∆ = 50
Full Sample
Pre-Crisis Sample
Crisis Sample

mean
std
max
mean
std
max
mean
std
max

28.17%
7.26%
51.71%
29.02%
7.13%
47.47%
26.11%
7.19%
51.71%

19.49%
11.35%
55.53%
24.93%
7.62%
55.53%
6.43%
7.53%
24.35%

24.73%
5.42%
51.46%
26.49%
5.03%
51.46%
20.48%
3.69%
32.70%

15.52%
6.41%
29.75%
18.21%
4.92%
2.24%
9.07%
4.73%
21.26%

This table reports summary statistics for the basket-index spread. Numbers reported are in percent of the cost
of the index put. The full sample covers 1/2003-6/2009. The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis
sample covers 8/2007-6/2009. ∆ is 20. We choose the index option with the same ∆ as the individual options.

50

Table V: Option Prices in Benchmark Economy in Financial Sector
The table reports option prices and implied volatility for the financial sector index, for its constituents, and pairwise correlations between
the stocks in the financial sector index. Panel A is for the January 2003-June 2009 data. Panel B is for a model with parameters
σd (1) = σd (2) = 0.15, ξd (1) = ξd (2) = 0, δd = 0.516, J = 0.921, θr = 0.815, and δr = 0.55. Panel C sets σd (1) = σd (2) = 0.15,
ξd (1) = ξd (2) = 0, δd = 0.65, J = +∞ , θr = 0.2825, and δr = 0.25.
Puts
Basket

pre-crisis
crisis

4.0
13.7

pre-crisis
crisis

25.9
59.5

pre-crisis
crisis

4.3
13.7

pre-crisis
crisis

34.1
61.3

pre-crisis
crisis

3.8
13.7

pre-crisis
crisis

32.2
62.9

Calls
Spread
Basket
Index
Panel I: Data
Option Prices
3.2
0.8
1.6
1.3
9.9
3.8
2.4
2.3
Implied Vol
21.7
4.2
19.8
14.9
48.5
11.0
42.8
37.8
Panel II: Model with Bailout
Option Prices
4.1
0.3
1.5
1.2
9.9
3.8
2.5
2.3
Implied Vol
31.2
2.9
17.4
11.0
46.7
14.6
35.0
24.1
Panel III: Model without Bailout
Option Prices
3.4
0.4
1.5
1.6
9.9
3.8
2.6
2.3
Implied Vol
29.2
3.0
17.7
18.2
48.6
14.3
61.0
27.7

Index

Spread

0.3
0.1
4.9
5.0

0.4
0.2
6.5
10.9

-0.1
0.3
-0.5
33.3

Table VI: Returns in Benchmark Economy in Financial Sector
The table reports realized volatility for the financial sector index, for its constituents, and pairwise correlations between the stocks in
the financial sector index. The crisis numbers for the model represent the unconditional moment in state 2, taking disasters into account
probabilistically. The number in italic for the model report the moments in state 2 of the model conditional on a disaster realization.
Panel A is for the January 2003-June 2009 data. Panel B is for a model with parameters σd (1) = σd (2) = 0.15, ξd (1) = ξd (2) = 0,
δd = 0.516, J = 0.921, θr = 0.815, and δr = 0.55. Panel C sets σd (1) = σd (2) = 0.15, ξd (1) = ξd (2) = 0, δd = 0.65, J = +∞ ,
θr = 0.2825, and δr = 0.25.
Index
Volatility
pre-crisis
crisis
pre-crisis
crisis

pre-crisis
crisis

Individual Stocks
Volatility
Correlations
Panel I: Data
11.9
18.1
45.8
43.8
72.9
57.6
Panel II: Model with Bailout
19.2
26.7
42.3
31.9
44.5
51.1
46.4
69.5
40.7
Panel III: Model without Bailout
18.7
26.0
43.8
28.7
44.4
35.8
42.8
76.7
26.7

51

Table VII: Option Prices in Benchmark Economy in Non-Financial Sector
The table reports option prices and implied volatility for the non-financial sector index, for its constituents, and pairwise correlations
between the stocks in the financial sector index. Panel A is for the January 2003-June 2009 data. Panel B is for a model with parameters
σd (1) = σd (2) = 0.17, ξd (1) = ξd (2) = 0.14, δd = 0.23, J = +∞, θr = 0.219, and δr = 0.15.
Puts
Basket

pre-crisis
crisis

4.3
7.9

pre-crisis
crisis

28.6
41.7

pre-crisis
crisis

2.8
7.9

pre-crisis
crisis

27.1
42.6

Calls
Spread
Basket
Index
Panel I: Data
Option Prices
3.4
0.9
1.8
1.5
6.3
1.6
2.2
2.0
Implied Vol
21.7
6.9
23.2
15.9
34.2
7.5
32.1
24.3
Panel II: Model without Bailout
Option Prices
2.3
0.5
1.5
0.9
6.3
1.6
2.0
1.6
Implied Vol
22.4
4.7
17.0
8.4
35.6
7.0
25.1
20.0

Index

Spread

0.3
0.1
7.3
7.8

0.6
0.4
8.6
5.1

Table VIII: Returns in Model and Data in Non-financial Sector
The table reports realized volatility for the financial sector index, for its constituents, and pairwise correlations between the stocks in the
non-financial sector index. The crisis numbers for the model represent the unconditional moment in state 2, taking disasters into account
probabilistically. The number in italic for the model report the moments in state 2 of the model conditional on a disaster realization.
Panel A is for the January 2003-June 2009 data. Panel B is for a model with parameters σd (1) = σd (2) = 0.17, ξd (1) = ξd (2) = 0.14,
δd = 0.23, J = +∞, θr = 0.219, and δr = 0.15.
Index
Volatility
pre-crisis
crisis
pre-crisis
crisis

Individual Stocks
Volatility
Correlations
Panel I: Data
12.2
21.5
33.7
25.1
35.1
56.8
Panel II: Model without Bailout
12.7
20.7
33.2
19.9
27.7
48.2
28.7
39.5
50.1

52

Table IX: Liquidity in Puts

Spr. ($)

0 ≤ ∆ < 20
Spr. (%)
Vol.

O.I.

Spr. ($)

20 ≤ ∆ < 50
Spr. (%)
Vol.

53

Pre-Crisis Sample
S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

0.450
0.133
0.096
0.088
0.095

80.5%
150.5%
142.3%
106.3%
103.5%

1072
80
187
169
142

15783
3205
10494
5447
4534

1.295
0.141
0.109
0.106
0.116

9.4%
35.0%
30.9%
13.2%
13.4%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

0.701
0.141
0.103
0.094
0.103

56.3%
96.0%
71.0%
72.4%
68.4%

373
21
103
66
56

18107
1132
4307
4326
3445

1.719
0.156
0.119
0.133
0.147

6.9%
19.0%
16.8%
8.1%
8.3%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

1.067
0.130
0.095
0.103
0.112

33.7%
60.6%
47.5%
55.3%
49.8%

237
9
24
52
48

12015
857
2448
4432
3782

2.093
0.156
0.105
0.156
0.174

5.5%
12.8%
10.8%
6.8%
7.0%

Crisis Sample
S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

1.120
0.087
0.042
0.108
0.126

61.7%
59.4%
24.7%
55.5%
56.2%

1369
667
4422
344
296

14797
8801
52042
5590
4390

2.663
0.130
0.054
0.153
0.181

9.4%
11.8%
6.5%
7.9%
8.1%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

1.723
0.112
0.055
0.133
0.154

35.2%
31.1%
18.7%
38.2%
37.9%

568
209
1421
119
106

16641
4218
24285
4640
3405

3.003
0.184
0.079
0.214
0.253

6.2%
8.1%
5.3%
5.5%
5.6%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

2.402
0.177
0.057
0.186
0.208

22.3%
22.1%
12.9%
30.4%
30.6%

272
57
238
69
54

12355
1693
7318
2713
1984

3.409
0.300
0.089
0.294
0.338

4.7%
7.8%
4.5%
5.5%
5.8%

O.I.

Spr. ($)

50 ≤ ∆ < 80
Spr. (%)
Vol.

10 Days < TTM ≤ 90 Days
2219
16594
1.821
5.8%
867
7606
0.167
13.7%
1791
19708
0.125
12.4%
836
9225
0.152
6.2%
691
7667
0.169
6.4%
90 Days < TTM ≤ 180 Days
1242
22052
1.982
3.4%
163
3057
0.198
8.7%
452
13713
0.142
7.6%
278
7760
0.196
4.3%
229
6509
0.216
4.4%
180 Days < TTM ≤ 365 Days
400
10895
2.185
2.6%
45
1290
0.203
6.8%
287
7823
0.139
5.6%
170
6880
0.224
3.8%
130
5582
0.247
3.9%
10 Days < TTM ≤ 90 Days
2652
18992
2.974
4.5%
2849
20540
0.226
6.9%
12983
88367
0.107
4.4%
1170
9400
0.244
4.5%
1041
8047
0.288
4.6%
90 Days < TTM ≤ 180 Days
1147
18511
3.179
2.8%
527
8681
0.286
4.9%
3012
49466
0.159
4.0%
339
7705
0.318
3.2%
301
6235
0.376
3.3%
180 Days < TTM ≤ 365 Days
507
13293
3.538
2.1%
169
3428
0.410
4.8%
1049
19391
0.170
3.5%
173
5372
0.423
3.1%
162
4654
0.474
3.3%

80 ≤ ∆ < 100
Spr. (%)
Vol.

O.I.

Spr. ($)

O.I.

693
269
502
473
380

6807
3221
7907
5990
4888

1.959
0.239
0.182
0.230
0.254

3.7%
7.9%
7.0%
3.1%
3.3%

93
26
44
76
65

3138
339
689
1550
1288

198
40
96
123
103

5962
1258
3891
4622
3565

2.076
0.273
0.182
0.242
0.271

1.5%
6.3%
4.9%
2.3%
2.5%

14
3
16
21
18

1949
118
347
1138
807

52
10
53
65
50

2837
593
3313
4040
2972

2.174
0.273
0.188
0.255
0.278

1.1%
4.7%
4.0%
2.1%
2.2%

4
2
4
15
11

1359
129
128
1208
756

871
963
4336
529
452

14305
12846
56684
6857
5741

3.033
0.388
0.206
0.481
0.516

2.4%
4.8%
3.7%
2.9%
3.0%

120
72
376
87
83

9284
3724
19916
2404
2435

212
162
1008
115
94

12697
5310
28769
4908
4085

3.255
0.407
0.227
0.492
0.536

1.3%
3.6%
3.0%
2.2%
2.2%

25
17
129
15
16

7625
1598
8338
1593
1637

60
50
300
55
47

7814
3257
13661
3653
3529

3.593
0.474
0.219
0.623
0.630

1.1%
3.3%
2.4%
2.2%
2.3%

8
44
121
9
9

5226
1818
6042
1269
1459

The full sample covers 1/2003-6/2009. The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009. The stats reported for
individual and sector options are value-weighted.

Table X: Liquidity in Calls

Spr. ($)

0 ≤ ∆ < 20
Spr. (%)
Vol.

O.I.

Spr. ($)

20 ≤ ∆ < 50
Spr. (%)
Vol.

54

Pre-Crisis Sample
S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

0.405
0.123
0.081
0.077
0.083

96.9%
169.3%
177.4%
140.7%
138.1%

1002
23
22
203
179

11990
745
1497
5916
4926

1.204
0.135
0.107
0.100
0.110

10.3%
42.3%
38.2%
14.6%
15.1%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

0.592
0.134
0.085
0.082
0.089

85.7%
122.8%
94.5%
112.2%
111.2%

301
8
12
77
60

10160
434
1012
4798
3468

1.662
0.154
0.120
0.122
0.136

8.2%
24.1%
22.2%
9.5%
9.9%

S&P 500
Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

0.872
0.121
0.088
0.090
0.096

50.0%
89.4%
64.8%
93.6%
96.1%

113
3
7
51
40

6705
455
493
5189
3962

2.001
0.151
0.108
0.143
0.158

6.9%
17.2%
15.1%
8.5%
8.9%

Crisis Sample
S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

0.705
0.080
0.037
0.094
0.110

118.6%
103.7%
47.7%
96.6%
93.6%

580
390
3007
341
293

10797
7908
52259
6754
5739

2.497
0.121
0.050
0.141
0.169

11.4%
14.1%
8.5%
9.5%
10.0%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

1.067
0.099
0.051
0.118
0.136

97.4%
81.2%
50.3%
75.5%
73.9%

183
109
749
100
93

10138
4741
25321
5023
4523

2.913
0.168
0.077
0.197
0.236

8.8%
10.8%
8.2%
7.5%
7.9%

S&P 500
All Sector SPDRs
Financial SPDR
Indiv. Stocks
Fin. Indiv. Stocks

1.625
0.151
0.054
0.159
0.170

66.6%
63.6%
35.2%
62.1%
63.9%

62
45
154
57
54

8211
2964
8949
4033
4381

3.420
0.280
0.088
0.274
0.311

7.7%
11.6%
7.5%
8.0%
8.6%

O.I.

Spr. ($)

50 ≤ ∆ < 80
Spr. (%)
Vol.

10 Days < TTM ≤ 90 Days
1598
12885
1.836
5.3%
262
2970
0.160
14.3%
512
6477
0.129
13.4%
1430
14839
0.144
6.1%
1145
11640
0.160
6.2%
90 Days < TTM ≤ 180 Days
703
17315
1.983
3.0%
59
1481
0.195
9.1%
134
4566
0.148
8.1%
512
11756
0.187
4.5%
395
8320
0.207
4.6%
180 Days < TTM ≤ 365 Days
249
10021
2.198
2.3%
23
1070
0.204
7.0%
48
2362
0.139
5.8%
259
9021
0.215
4.1%
207
6783
0.238
4.3%
10 Days < TTM ≤ 90 Days
1857
16012
2.968
4.3%
3386
19642
0.211
7.2%
17312
93957
0.097
4.8%
1623
11596
0.230
4.8%
1362
9587
0.263
4.9%
90 Days < TTM ≤ 180 Days
637
12846
3.167
3.0%
480
7791
0.278
5.6%
2916
42929
0.139
4.4%
460
9358
0.299
3.9%
375
7207
0.350
4.1%
180 Days < TTM ≤ 365 Days
237
8752
3.500
2.5%
162
4348
0.411
5.8%
836
18346
0.151
4.1%
210
5991
0.395
4.2%
190
5345
0.451
4.5%

80 ≤ ∆ < 100
Spr. (%)
Vol.

O.I.

Spr. ($)

O.I.

930
187
311
928
738

11351
2790
6428
11702
9123

2.006
0.236
0.183
0.229
0.252

1.9%
7.4%
6.7%
3.1%
3.3%

71
16
28
186
142

3476
931
1995
3840
3189

364
50
109
262
187

13038
1365
3734
8052
5686

2.049
0.282
0.214
0.251
0.279

1.1%
5.9%
5.0%
2.4%
2.5%

22
4
7
34
26

3148
306
748
2248
1567

106
19
45
147
109

7283
825
2548
6730
5349

2.224
0.270
0.198
0.271
0.292

0.9%
4.8%
3.7%
2.2%
2.3%

11
2
3
23
16

1200
258
497
2363
1877

1047
1552
8020
838
754

9846
11705
56259
7407
6157

3.047
0.350
0.178
0.446
0.490

1.8%
4.6%
4.0%
3.1%
3.3%

50
98
628
103
104

2157
2581
19025
2423
1742

326
219
1193
216
181

4394
3878
18780
5972
4543

3.219
0.394
0.219
0.496
0.537

1.3%
3.6%
3.5%
2.5%
2.7%

13
19
107
25
19

912
702
3391
1818
1269

126
77
480
118
103

4713
2034
11201
3886
3124

3.485
0.507
0.207
0.609
0.630

1.1%
3.8%
3.0%
2.8%
3.1%

5
6
18
14
13

510
431
1960
891
702

The full sample covers 1/2003-6/2009. The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009. The stats reported for
individual and sector options are value-weighted.

Bailout Value

10,000

Billions of Dollars (logarithmic scale)

Value of Bailout
Market Value

1000

100

10

02/23/04

07/07/05

11/19/06

04/02/08

Figure 1: Dollar Value of the Equity Bailout Guarantee for the Financial Sector
The dashed (full) line shows the dollar value of the equity bailout guarantee inferred from the basket-index spreads for puts. ∆ is 20.
Time to maturity is 365 days. We choose the index options with the same ∆ as the individual options.
Financials−−Puts

cents per dollar insured

40
30

Index
Basket
Spread

20
10
0
−10
10/11/02

02/23/04

07/07/05

11/19/06

04/02/08

08/15/09

04/02/08

08/15/09

Financials−−Calls

cents per dollar insured

3
2.5
2

Index
Basket
Spread

1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
10/11/02

02/23/04

07/07/05

11/19/06

Figure 2: Cost Per Dollar Insured - Financial Sector
index (basket, Callbasket ). The dotted line plots their difference.
The dashed (full) line shows the cost per dollar insured for the index Callcdi,f
cdi,f
∆ is 20. Time to maturity is 365 days. We choose the index option with the same ∆ as the individual options. The top panel looks at
puts. The bottom looks at calls.

55

Spreads−−Puts

14
Financials
Non−Financials
Diff

12

10

cents per dollar insured

8

6

4

2

0

−2

−4
10/11/02

02/23/04

07/07/05

11/19/06

04/02/08

08/15/09

Figure 3: Basket-Index Spread in Cost Per Dollar Insured Inferred from Puts
The dashed (full) line shows the difference in the cost per dollar insured between the basket and the index: P utbasket
− P utindex
cdi,i
cdi,i for
financials (non-financials). The dotted line plots their difference. ∆ is 20. Time to maturity is 365 days. We choose the index option
with the same ∆ as the individual options.

Realized Correlation

0.9
Financials
Non−Financials

0.8

Correlation

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
10/11/02

02/23/04

07/07/05

11/19/06

04/02/08

08/15/09

Figure 4: Realized Equity Return Correlations
The dashed (full) line shows the average pairwise correlations within the financial sector (non-financial sectors). Daily pairwise conditional
correlations for stocks are estimated using the exponential smoother with smoothing parameter 0.95. Pairwise correlations within the
financial sector are then averaged each day, weighted by the pairs’ combined market equity. To address stocks’ entry into and exit from
the S&P 500 index during the sample period, a pair’s correlation is only included in the average on a given day if both stocks were
members of the index that day. To remain comparable to the average pairwise correlation among financial stocks, the non-financials
average correlation reflects only correlations between pairs of stocks within the same sector, omitting cross-sector correlations from the
average. The (within sector) pairwise correlations are then averaged across the eight non-financial sectors, according to their relative
market capitalization.

56

Put Implied Volatility: Basket Minus Index

0.12

Fin. Pre−Crisis
Non−Fin. Pre−Crisis
Fin. Crisis
Non−Fin. Crisis

0.11

0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

20

25

30

35
Moneyness (|∆|)

40

45

50

Figure 5: Implied Vol Skew Inferred from Puts
The figure plots the implied volatility difference (basket minus index) inferred from puts for financials against moneyness. The pre-crisis
sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009.

Call Implied Volatility: Basket Minus Index

0.12

Fin. Pre−Crisis
Non−Fin. Pre−Crisis
Fin. Crisis
Non−Fin. Crisis

0.11

0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

20

25

30

35
Moneyness (|∆|)

40

45

50

Figure 6: Implied Vol Skew Inferred from Calls
The figure plots the average implied volatility difference (basket minus index) inferred from calls for financials and non-financials against
moneyness. The pre-crisis sample covers 1/2003-7/2007. The crisis sample covers 8/2007-6/2009.

57

Positive Announcements

cents per dollar insured

14

yes vote TAF 900 bn BoA
TALF 1 trillion

12
10

TALF

8
6
4
2
0

09/15/07

12/24/07

04/02/08

07/11/08

10/19/08

01/27/09

05/07/09

Negative Announcements

cents per dollar insured

14
Bear Stearns

12

Lehman

no vote
Treas. 250 $bn
Bush speech

10

TARP limits
8
6
4
2
0

09/15/07

12/24/07

04/02/08

07/11/08

10/19/08

01/27/09

05/07/09

Figure 7: Timeline of The Financial Spread and Announcement Dates
index
The solid line shows the basket-index spread for the financials index P utbasket
cdi,f − P utcdi,f . The dotted line shows the spread for
non-financials. ∆ is 20. Time to maturity is 365 days. The vertical lines are the announcement dates.

58

Negative Announcements
3

2

2

change in spread, cents per dollar insured

change in spread, cents per dollar insured

Positive Announcements

3

1

0

−1

0

−1

−2

−2

−3
−5

1

0
days after announcement

−3
−5

5

0
days after announcement

5

Figure 8: The Financial Spread around Announcement Dates
index
The solid line shows the average response of the basket-index spread for the financials index P utbasket
cdi,f − P utcdi,f . The left panel looks
at positive announcement dates. The right panel looks at negative announcement dates. ∆ is 20. Time to maturity is 365 days.

Negative Announcements
3

2

2

change in spread, cents per dollar insured

change in spread, cents per dollar insured

Positive Announcements

3

1

0

−1

0

−1

−2

−2

−3
−5

1

0
days after announcement

−3
−5

5

0
days after announcement

5

Figure 9: The Financial-minus-Non-financial Spread around Announcement Dates
The solid line shows the average response of the basket-index spread for the financials index minus the basket-index spread for the
index
basket
index
non-financials P utbasket
cdi,f − P utcdi,f − P utcdi,nf + P utcdi,nf . The left panel looks at positive announcement dates. The right panel
looks at negative announcement dates. ∆ is 20. Time to maturity is 365 days.

59

