                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SELF REPORTED DISABILITY AND REFERENCE GROUPS

                                          Arthur van Soest
                                         Tatiana Andreyeva
                                           Arie Kapteyn
                                          James P. Smith

                                        Working Paper 17153
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17153


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




This research was funded by the National Institute on Aging under grant 5P01AG008291 . We are
grateful to David Cutler for useful comments The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Arthur van Soest, Tatiana Andreyeva, Arie Kapteyn, and James P. Smith. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Self Reported Disability and Reference Groups
Arthur van Soest, Tatiana Andreyeva, Arie Kapteyn, and James P. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 17153
June 2011
JEL No. J14,J21,J68

                                              ABSTRACT

Social networks and social interactions affect individual and social norms. We develop a direct test
of this using Dutch survey data on how respondents evaluate work disability of hypothetical people
with some work related health problem (vignettes). We analyze how the thresholds respondents use
to decide what constitutes a (mild or more serious) work disability depend on the number of people
receiving disability insurance benefits (DI) in their reference group. We find that reference group effects
are significant and contribute substantially to an explanation of why self-reported work disability in
the Netherlands is much higher than in, for example, the US.


Arthur van Soest                                     Arie Kapteyn
Tilburg University                                   RAND Corporation
P.O. Box 90153                                       1776 Main Street
5000 LE Tilburg                                      P.O. Box 2138
The Netherlands                                      Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and Netspar, and also RAND                           arie_kapteyn@rand.org
avas@uvt.nl
                                                     James P. Smith
Tatiana Andreyeva                                    RAND Corporation
Yale University                                      1776 Main Street
Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity              P.O. Box 2138
309 Edwards Street                                   Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
New Haven, CT 06520                                  smith@rand.org
tatiana.andreyeva@yale.edu
1 Introduction

In contrast to other social scientists, economists have long adhered to an individualistic notion
of behavior, despite early contributions by, for example, Duesenberry (1949) and Veblen (1899).
An important modern contribution to the modeling of social interactions is the seminal work of
Becker (1974). Although of wider relevance, Becker’s work emphasized the interactions among
family members, caused by interdependent utilities as well as a common budget constraint. In
more recent years, economists have increasingly recognized that individual actions are fundamen-
tally in uenced by the attributes and behaviors of those other individuals who form their social
networks; see Topa (2001).
   The span of behaviors that have been examined in this new research on social interactions has
been expanding rapidly and even a very partial list now includes criminal activity (Glaeser, Sac-
erdote & Scheinkman 1996), (Glaeser, Sacerdote & Scheinkman 2000) neighborhood effects on
youth behavior (Case & Katz 1991), models of herd or copycat like behaviors (Banerjee 1992),
’peer effects’ in education (Hanuschek, Kian, Markman & Rifkin 2000), (Ginther, Haveman &
Wolfe 2000), agglomeration economies (Audretsch & Feldman 1996), information exchanges in
local labor markets (Topa 2001), labor supply (Woittiez & Kapteyn 1998), consumption (Kapteyn,
van de Geer, van de Stadt & Wansbeek 1997) (Alessie & Kapteyn 1991), retirement plan choices
(Du o & Saez 2003), spillovers of cash transfers on non-eligibles (Angelucci & Giorgi 2009),
effects of lottery winnings on the consumption of neighbors (Kuhn, Kooreman, Soetevent &
Kapteyn 2009) and social learning through neighbors (Bala & Goyal 1998). As these examples
illustrate, the type of social interactions studied has moved well beyond the immediate family to
much larger circles of friends, neighbors, and like minded consumers and workers. Various rea-
sons are given for why these types of social interactions matter, including information sharing,
demonstration effects, and the formation of tastes and preferences.

                                                2
    Social interactions may also affect what individuals believe to constitute acceptable or normal
behavior based on the standards of the sub-communities in which they live and work. In this
paper, we develop a direct test of this using data from a household survey representative of the
Dutch population on how respondents evaluate work disability of hypothetical people with some
work related health problem (vignettes). Combining this with self-reports on the number of people
receiving disability insurance benefits (DI) among one’s friends and acquaintances, we estimate a
model describing the in uence of DI prevalence in one’s reference group on the subjective scale
used to report own and others’ work disability.
    Both the prevalence of DI benefit receipt and self reported work disability vary substantially
across countries; see Haveman & Wolfe (2000) and Bound & Burkhauser (1999). In particular,
both are much higher in The Netherlands than in the United States. Bound & Burkhauser (1999)
report that in 1995, the number of DI recipients per 1000 workers in the age group 45-59 was 103
in the U.S., compared to 271 in The Netherlands. Kapteyn, Smith & van Soest (2007) report that in
the age bracket 51-64 self reported work disability in The Netherlands is about 58% higher than in
the United States (35.8% in The Netherlands against 22.7% in the U.S.). While the higher level of
Dutch participation in DI programs is not surprising given higher DI benefits and easier eligibility
compared to the US,1 greater Dutch prevalence of self-reported work disability is puzzling as the
Dutch population appears to be healthier than the Americans.2
    Kapteyn et al. (2007) investigated to what extent differences in self reported work disability can
be ascribed to differences in reporting styles across countries. Exploiting the vignette methodology
originally developed by King, Murray, Salomon & Tandon (2004), Dutch and US respondents were
    1
      See for instance Aarts, Burkhauser & de Jong (1996). In 2004, DI recipients in The Netherlands
made up 13% of the labor force (Source: Statistics Netherlands http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb.), while in
the US DI-recipients constituted 4.8% of the civilian labor force (Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/news.release/History/empsit.01072005.news)
    2
      This is suggested by the analysis of a broad set of health conditions by Banks, Kapteyn, Smith & van Soest (2007).



                                                           3
given the same descriptions of work disability problems for hypothetical persons ("vignettes").
Dutch respondents appeared to be much more likely to describe the same work disability problem
as constituting a work disability than American respondents. Kapteyn et al. (2007) found that more
than half of the observed difference in self-reported work disability between the two countries can
be explained by this difference in response styles.
   This result implies that US and Dutch respondents have different norms for evaluating work
disability. Our paper analyzes to what extent this is due to peer group effects: do respondents with
many DI recipients in their peer group have social norms that make them more likely to evaluate
given health problems as constituting a work disability?
   We formalize this notion by introducing the concept of prevalence of DI benefit receipt in one’s
reference group, defined as one’s circle of friends and acquaintances. In a Dutch survey that we
designed and implemented, we asked respondents directly how many people among their friends
and acquaintances receive DI benefits. In this paper, we develop a model that jointly explains
the categorical answer to this question and self-reported work disability. The main feature of the
model is the notion that response scales for reporting no, mild, or severe work disability, can be
affected by a "peer group effect," i.e., by the number of people in the reference group receiving
disability benefits. To identify the determinants of response scales, we exploit anchoring vignettes
as in Kapteyn et al. (2007). Using this additional information helps to solve the identification
problem that is present in many models with peer group effects, known as the re ection problem
(Manski 1993).
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we brie y describe
the micro-data used in our analysis. Section 3 presents the model, which essentially consists of
three equations. One equation explains the answers to the question about DI benefit receipt in
the respondents’ reference group. A second equation models self-reported work disability. The


                                                 4
third equation (or rather set of equations) explains how individual response scales to questions
on work disability (or anchoring vignettes) are affected by the prevalence of DI benefit receipt in
the reference group. Throughout we control for a large number of other variables, such as socio-
demographic characteristics and health conditions.
   Section 4 summarizes our main results. We find that DI benefit receipt in one’s reference group
has a significant effect on response scales in the expected direction. To gauge the size of this effect,
we graph the relation between DI benefit receipt in the reference group against self-reported work
disability. It turns out that to explain the complete difference in response scales between the U.S.
and The Netherlands, the percentage of respondents in The Netherlands reporting to know at least
some DI benefit recipients has to fall by about twenty-five percent. This is an order of magnitude
that seems reasonable given the substantial difference in the number of Dutch and U.S. people on
DI benefits. The final section presents our conclusions.



2 The Data

In this research, we use information obtained from the Dutch CentERpanel. This is an Internet
panel of about 2,250 households who have agreed to respond to a survey every weekend. Re-
spondents are recruited by telephone. If they agree to participate and do not already have Internet
access, they are provided with Internet access (and if necessary, with a set-top box which can be
used together with their television screen). Thus, the CentERpanel is not restricted to households
with Internet access, but representative of the Dutch adult population except the institutionalized.
Sample weights based upon data from Statistics Netherlands are used to correct for unit nonre-
sponse. The sample that we use to estimate our model consists of about 2,000 respondents who
participated in several interviews with questions on work disability in 2003.



                                                   5
      From multiple waves of the data that have been collected in the past, the CentERpanel has
a rich set of variables on background characteristics of the respondent and household, including
their income and labor market status and several salient dimensions of health. In August 2003, we
collected work disability self-reports and vignette evaluations (described below). In October 2003,
we fielded a second wave of vignettes with slightly different wording of the questions, and also
included questions about reference groups. For our analysis we will use the vignette and reference
group data from this October wave. Appendix A lists the vignette questions. All vignettes are
presented with either a female or a male name.3
      For each of the vignettes the respondent is asked the following question:
      “Does . . . have a health problem that limits the amount or type of work he/she can do?”
      with a five point response scale:
      not at all; yes, mildly limited; yes moderately limited; yes, severely limited; yes, extremely
limited/cannot work.
      Table 1 presents the response frequencies for each of the 15 vignette questions. The differences
in distributions of answers correspond quite well with the variation in severity of the conditions
described in the vignettes. For example, in all three domains of affect, pain, and CVD, the con-
dition described in the third vignette seems much more severe than that described in the first, and
respondents ranked them accordingly. Moreover, there was also a great deal of consistency among
respondents in how they ordered vignettes in terms of their severity, showing that respondents un-
derstood these experiments and took their responses seriously; see Banks et al. (2007) for details.


      – TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE –


  3
      Female or male names are assigned randomly. In Appendix A we only show one of the two names per vignette.



                                                        6
   Table 2 presents the distribution of the answers to the question on own work limitations by age
group. These represent answers to the question:
   "Do you have an impairment or health problem that limits you in the amount or kind of work
you can do?".
   The question allows respondents to reply on the five-point scale:
   (1) No, not at all, (2) Yes, I am somewhat limited, (3) Yes, I am rather limited, (4) Yes, I am
severely limited, (5) Yes, I am very severely limited-I am unable to work.
   These response categories are identical to the ones used to gauge the severity of the vignette
work limitations.


   – TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE –


   Table 2 implies that about 37% of the Dutch population reports to have at least a mild work
limitation and about 14% have a work limiting health problem or impairment that they gauge as
moderately limiting or worse. Not surprisingly, work related health deteriorates with age (although
cohort effects may also play some role in this pattern).

   The most interesting groups are probably people in the age groups 45-54 and 55-64. For them,
the prevalence of work limiting health problems is large, and this will often be an important reason
not to participate in the labor market. For the 65-plus, work limiting health problems are even more
prevalent, but these people are almost always retired anyhow, since the Netherlands has mandatory
retirement at age 65 for almost all employees.

   Appendix B presents some of the questions about reference groups asked in the October wave
and used in the empirical analysis. Our operationalization of a reference group is the circle of
acquaintances mentioned in these questions. The first two reference group questions provide in-

                                                  7
formation on the modal age and modal education level in the respondent’s reference group. In the
analysis we will combine the age and education categories into a smaller number of broader brack-
ets. Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for our independent variables, including the responses
to the first two reference group questions listed in Appendix B. For example, 27 percent of all re-
spondents report that most of the people in their reference group are in the age group 36-45. About
48 percent say that most of their acquaintances have a medium education level (while 39 percent
of the respondents has that level).


   – TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE –


   The other reference group questions refer to the number of acquaintances receiving disability
benefits, separately for men and women. These are the crucial variables for our analysis as they
measure DI benefit receipt in the reference group. For men, we will use the number of male
acquaintances on disability benefits; for women, we will only consider the female acquaintances.
We discuss the sensitivity of our results to this definition of the reference group variables below.
   The distribution of reported DI receipt in the reference group by gender and age group is pre-
sented in Table 4. Here and in the rest of the paper we combine the categories of prevalence of
DI-receipt in the reference group to three: "Nobody", "Very Few", "A Few/Many", because the
frequencies for "Few" and particularly "Many" are small. Young people typically know no one
on disability benefits. The number of reference group members on disability benefits is highest
for 55-64 year old respondents, who also most commonly receive disability benefits themselves.
People older than 65 may often have a work disability (see Table 2), but Table 4 shows they hardly
ever receive disability benefits - they receive a state pension and usually one or more additional
occupational pensions. The number of women on disability benefits in women’s reference groups


                                                  8
is typically smaller than the number of men on disability benefits in men’s reference groups, par-
ticularly at older ages. This may be because women in older cohorts often stopped working at an
early age (usually to raise children) and never qualify for disability benefits after that.


   – TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE –


   Plausibly, these reference group variables are endogenous to the respondent’s own work dis-
ability – respondents who have a work disability will often not work and will not only receive
disability benefits, but will also more easily get acquainted with other people on disability benefits.
Hence we will treat the number of acquaintances on disability benefits as a dependent variable,
modelled jointly with work limitations. Table 5 shows cross tabs of self-reported work limitations
and self-reported prevalence of DI-receipt in one’s reference group. For simplicity of presentation,
we combine categories for self-reported work disability to three: "Not Limited", "Mildly Limited",
"Moderately Limited/Severely Limited/Extremely Limited". The table clearly illustrates a positive
relation between self reported work limitations and the number of people in one’s reference group
drawing disability benefits.
   There are several competing explanations for this positive association. First of all, there may
be a causal effect of the prevalence of DI-receipt in one’s reference group on the tendency to report
work limitations. Second, as discussed above, it is possible that respondents with work limitations
are more likely to associate with others who have a work disability (e.g., because of the existence
of networks of people with work disabilities). Third, there may be other (observed or unobserved)
factors that both increase the likelihood that respondents have a work limitation and that they know
others with work limitations. One such factor is age. Fourth, response scales used in answering
the reference group questions might be correlated with response scales in self-reported work dis-


                                                   9
ability. Respondents may, for instance, exaggerate the number of friends or acquaintances on DI
to "justify" their own report of a work limitation (Bound 1991). These explanations are not mu-
tually exclusive. We think these explanations are the most plausible ones, but undoubtedly there
are more. For example, knowing many people on disability benefits might increase genuine work
disability. We are particularly interested in the role played by the first explanation, re ecting a
social interaction effect. In the next section we present a model that aims at isolating the impor-
tance of the first explanation; in the discussion of the results we will also return to the competing
explanations.




3 A Model with Reference Groups

Our econometric model explains the reported number of people receiving disability benefits in the
reference group  (see Table 4), self-reported work disability  (see Table 2), and reported work
disability of the 15 vignette persons  1       15 (see Table 1).


Self-reports of own work disability

Individuals evaluate the extent of their work disability with a self-evaluation of whether their health
problems and working conditions are sufficiently problematic to place them above their own sub-
jective threshold of being somewhat limited or more than somewhat limited. The result of that
evaluation depends on the extent of their true health problems as well as their subjective thresholds
of what constitutes a disability, both of which vary across individuals.
    More formally, self-reported work disability  of respondent  is modeled on a 3-point scale of
not at all limited, somewhat limited, and more than somewhat limited (combining the three most



                                                     10
serious categories "moderate," "severe," and "extreme," to one) as follows:


                                              ∗ =   +                                     (1)


                                  =  if  −1
                                                 ∗ ≤     = 1 2 3                     (2)

For notational convenience, we define  0 = −∞ and  3 = ∞. The remaining thresholds  1
and  2 will be modeled as functions of observable and unobservable respondent characteristics as
described below. The error term  is assumed to be standard normally distributed. (Complete
assumptions on error terms are given below.)
    Since thresholds depend on respondent characteristics, self-reported work disability alone is not
enough to distinguish between variation in ∗ (that is, genuine variation in work related health),
and variation in the thresholds (that is, variation in what constitutes a disability in respondents’
perceptions). Vignettes are used to identify this distinction.


Vignette evaluations

The vignettes provide all respondents with the descriptions of the same set of work disability
problems. As a consequence, variation in how respondents evaluate the given health problems
informs us about variation in the subjective thresholds used by the respondents. More formally,
the evaluations  of vignettes ,  = 1     15, are given by


                                           ∗ =  +  +                                 (3)


                                 =  if  −1
                                                 ∗ ≤     = 1 2 3                    (4)

    Here  is a dummy variable indicating whether the person described in the vignette is female

                                                     11
( = 1) or male ( = 0). This specification follows earlier work by Kapteyn et al. (2007),
who find that respondents (both males and females) tend to be "harsher" on female than on male
vignette persons, i.e.,   0. We assume that all  are independent of each other and of the
other error terms, and follow a normal distribution with mean zero and variance  2 . Thus the 
are interpreted as idiosyncratic noise driving vignette evaluations; they re ect arbitrariness in each
separate evaluation. If respondents have a persistent tendency to give low or high evaluations, this
will not be captured by  but by an unobserved heterogeneity term in the response scales, see
below.


Response scale thresholds

The crucial assumption guaranteeing that vignettes help to identify response scale differences, is
that individuals use the same scales in evaluating themselves as they do with the vignette persons
(response consistency, see King et al., 2004). The thresholds used in the vignette evaluation can
vary across all types of individual attributes. In this study, we expand the set of attributes and
include the number of persons among friends and acquaintances who are on disability benefits ∗ .
The thresholds  1 and  2 are modeled as follows:


                                       1 =   1 +    ∗
                                                        1  +                                  (5)

                                                                  ∗
                                        2 =  1 +   2 + 2                               (6)

We have included the vector  of respondent characteristics (independent of all error terms) to
allow for a rather general way in which response scales vary with individual characteristics. The
distance between the two thresholds is also allowed to depend on these characteristics. The expo-
nential forces it to be positive, as in King et al. (2004). The key parameters of interest are  
                                                                                                 1 and



                                                    12

 2 , the estimated impact of the number of people on DI in one’s reference group on the thresh-

old that is used to evaluate work disability. In particular,  
                                                               1 is expected to be negative: people

who know many people on disability benefits will think of work disability as something common
and will more often evaluate people (including themselves) as work disabled, thus using lower
thresholds.4
       The term   re ects unobserved heterogeneity in thresholds. For computational convenience,
we do not allow for unobserved heterogeneity in the distance between the two thresholds.   is
assumed to follow a normal distribution with variance  2 , independent of  and all other unob-
servables in the model except one: the unobserved component of the threshold driving the answer
to the question how many people in the respondent’s reference group receive disability benefits (1
and 2 ; see below).


DI receipt in the reference group

As explained above, we consider DI receipt in the respondent’s reference group of the respondent’s
own sex and combine the outcomes "few" and "many" because of the small number of observations
with the latter outcome. Thus we obtain an ordered response variable with three possible outcomes,
 = 1 ("none"),  = 2 ("very few") and  = 3 ("a few" or "many"). This will be modeled with an
ordered probit equation:


                                    ∗ =    +                2
                                                        ∼ (0   )                                        (7)

                                   =  if −1
                                                 ∗ ≤    = 1 2 3                                     (8)

       For notational convenience, we define 0 = −∞ and 3 = ∞. Below we will further specify
   4
    In the empirical work, we will allow the parameters           
                                                            1 and  2 to depend on education level, age, and gender.
For notational convenience, we do not make this explicit in the notation.

                                                        13
the thresholds 1 and 2 . The vector  of respondent characteristics driving DI receipt in the
reference group is assumed to be independent of all the errors in the model. Equation (7) has a
"reduced form" nature in the sense that we do not explicitly model how work disability and labor
force status affect disability in the reference group. The exogenous determinants of labor force
status and disability are included among the regressors  to account for this.
       Since it is likely that there are common unobserved factors affecting both the number of peo-
ple one knows on disability benefits and one’s own evaluation of work disability, we allow for a
non-zero correlation coefficient  between  and  
                                                     . This correlation also allows for the role of

actual labor force status (which is not included explicitly in the model but "substituted out"): work
disability drives labor force status, and labor force status drives the composition of the reference
group.
       We allow for a common unobserved heterogeneity component driving the thresholds     =
1 2 and the thresholds in the reference group equation    = 1 2 by specifying: 1 = 01 +  
and 2 = 02 +   . We normalize 01 = 0. The parameter  could be positive (respondents
exaggerating their work disability also exaggerate the number of their acquaintances on DI) or
negative (respondents who think of work disability as something exceptional will tend to interpret
a given number of acquaintances on DI as large).5 02 and  are additional parameters to be
estimated. Define                                                    
                    =   −   . By way of normalization we set Var( ) = 1 We can then

rewrite (8) as
                              =  if −1
                                        0       +     
                                                         ≤ 0   = 1 2 3                                  (9)
   5
    It seems natural to add another error term to the  which is independent of everything else, but this will be
subsumed in  
               .




                                                        14
Error terms and identification

The error terms in the model, including unobserved heterogeneity components, are:      =
1  15  
               , and   . We assume they are all normally distributed and independent of the regres-

sors  and  . The only correlation we allow for is between  and                      
                                                                        . We assume (    ) is

bivariate normal with correlation coefficient . The assumption that   is independent of  implies
that people with higher thresholds do not tend to have larger or smaller genuine work disability (on
a continuous scale), keeping observed characteristics  and  constant. The assumption seems
quite plausible, although one might argue that lower thresholds point at unobserved characteris-
tics such as pessimistic views that can also genuinely reduce respondents’ ability to work. As
we shall see, the assumption is largely innocuous and does not affect identification of the struc-
tural parameters. To judge to which extent our assumptions impose restrictions, and to investigate
identification, it is useful to rewrite the model introduced so far somewhat.
   Combine (1) and (2) to obtain


                            =  if  −1
                                             +  ≤     = 1 2 3                     (10)

Similarly combine (3) and (4):


                          =  if  −1
                                           +  +  ≤     = 1 2 3                (11)


Combining (10) with (5) and (6) leads to the following observational rule for observed work dis-




                                                   15
ability reports:


           = 1 if   +  ≤   1 +    ∗
                                           1  +  

                                                                                                  ∗
           = 2 if   1 +    ∗                                 ∗
                               1  +      +  ≤   1 +  1  +   + 
                                                                                   2 + 2 


                                                                        ∗
           = 3 if   +     1 +    ∗
                                           1  +   + 
                                                           2 + 2 
                                                                                                             (12)


Inserting (7) into (12), this can be rewritten as


                                
    = 1 if  [ −  1 −                  
                             1  ] ≤   +  1   − 

                                                                                              ]+   
    = 2 if   +                                              
                     1   −    [ −  1 −  1  ] ≤   +  1   −  + 
                                                                                 [ 2 + 2         2 



                                                                          ]+   
    = 3 if  [ −  1 −                  
                             1  ]    +  1   −  + 
                                                            [ 2 + 2         2                          (13)


    Similarly, combining (11) with (5) and (6) and inserting (7) yields


 = 1 if  +  −  [ 1 +                       
                                   1  ] ≤   +  1   − 

                                                                                                      ]+   
 = 2 if   +                                                        
                   1   −    +  −  [ 1 +  1  ] ≤   +  1   −  + 
                                                                                     [ 2 + 2              2 


                                                                                ]+   
 = 3 if  +  −  [ 1 +                       
                                   1  ]    +  1   −  + 
                                                                  [ 2 + 2        2                      (14)


For completeness we repeat the equation for reference group disability (8)


                            =  if −1
                                      0       +     
                                                       ≤ 0   = 1 2 3                                  (15)




    We can see from equations (13), (14) and (15) that the stochastic behavior of the system is
determined by the following composite error terms:   +                                 
                                                          1   − ,   + 1   − ,  (=  −  ),



                                                    16
and  
       (in the exponent). All of these error terms are allowed to be correlated with each other; the

only restriction being that the covariance matrix of   +         
                                                             1   −  , ( = 1 15) has a one-factor

structure.
    Next we turn to identification. First consider (15). Making the normalizing assumptions that
10 = 0 and Var(                                                                              
                  ) = 1 the vector  is identified. The vignette equations (14) next identify  
                                                    1                    
  1 +  
           1   and  2 +  2  , where we normalize  = 0 Since  1 +  1  is identified,  is

                                                                                                 
identified from (13). The remaining issue is how to identify         
                                                               1 and  2  Since  1 +  1  and 

are identified, we can identify  
                                  1 if there is at least one exclusion restriction on  1 . In other words,

equation (15) needs to contain at least one X-variable that is not present in equation (5). A similar
exclusion restriction identifies                   
                                   2  Once  1 and  2 are identified,  1 and  2 are identified as well.

    Thus identification of the reference group effect requires exclusion restrictions - variables that
affect DI receipt in the reference group, but do not have a direct effect on the evaluation threshold.
For this we use the directly elicited reference group variables on the typical age and education of
respondents’ acquaintances. These variables are allowed to affect response scales (represented by
the thresholds   ) only through the reference group variable ∗ . Since there are more reference
group variables than needed for identification, we can perform a test exploiting overidentifying re-
strictions to investigate the plausibility of the exclusion restrictions. As we will see in the empirical
results section, the restrictions are not rejected by the overidentification test.
    As in all models with reference group effects, identifying the causal effect of the reference
group variable requires model assumptions, due to endogeneity issues and confounding effects (cf.
Manski 1993). A crucial difference with the case discussed by Manski (1993) is that we have direct
information on reference group disability receipt. As we have seen above, this identifies   , and
hence in combination with at least one exclusion restriction we can identify         
                                                                               1 and  2




                                                    17
3.1 Results

We estimate the model using simulated maximum likelihood. Details of the likelihood function
are presented in Appendix C. The integrals in the likelihood contributions ((21) in Appendix C)
are replaced by smooth simulation-based approximations, by drawing 200 times from the joint
distribution of  and  and using Halton draws.6 Experiments with a substantially larger number
of draws did not lead to appreciable differences in the results, implying that the number of draws
is large enough to provide an accurate approximation of the integral.


3.2 Estimation results

Table 6 presents the estimation results for the equation for own work disability (equation 1) and
for DI receipt in the reference group (equation (7)). The estimates for the threshold equations (5)
and (6) are given in Table 7. Estimates for the vignette equations (3) are not of primary interest;
they are presented and brie y discussed in Table D.1 in Appendix D.


Work disability self-reports

– TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE –


       The equation for own work disability in Table 6 shows that there is virtually no gender differ-
ence (keeping other variables constant). Own work disability decreases with age until age 56 (age
is measured in decades) and increases afterwards; it is lower for higher educated individuals than
for respondents with low education. These effects are not statistically significant, however. Re-
gional differences are not significant either. As expected, work limitations are significantly more
   6
    We have used the program mdraws written by Lorenzo Cappellari and Stephen P. Jenkins. See Cappellari &
Jenkins (2006)



                                                   18
frequent among individuals with serious health conditions, such as strokes, heart problems, can-
cer, diabetes, emotional problems, pain, and lung problems. Having a reference group with more
medium or high education significantly reduces work disability.


DI receipt in the reference group

The reference group DI receipt equation shows that the reported prevalence of DI receipt in the
reference group increases with age until about retirement age (the estimated quadratic age function
reaches a maximum at 67 years of age). This is consistent with the fact that in The Netherlands
individuals over 65 typically do not receive DI benefits, but receive state and occupational pensions
instead. There is virtually no relation between DI receipt in the reference group and education.
On the other hand, DI receipt in the reference group increases significantly with several health
conditions (lung disease, emotional problems, pain), in line with the argument that people with
a health problem will more often be acquainted with other people in poor health. Also in line
with the raw data (Table 4) is that females are significantly less likely to report to have DI-benefit
recipients in their (female) reference group. Respondents in the western provinces of the country
(the most urbanized region) are less likely to know people on disability benefits than respondents
in the rest of the country.
   The variables affecting the number of people on DI in the reference group are of interest in part
because, as we shall see below, the number of people in the reference group significantly affects
the thresholds used in evaluating work disability. For example, women know fewer people on DI
and because of that will less easily say that a given health problem constitutes a work disability.
Similarly, having pain increases the number of people on DI in one’s reference group, and this
makes people with pain ’softer’ in evaluating disability. These indirect effects come on top of the
direct effects that gender and health conditions may have on the thresholds (see below).


                                                 19
Thresholds

– TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE –


    The results for the threshold equations are presented in Table 7. We note that the overidentify-
ing restrictions stemming from the fact that the reference group variables are not included in these
equations do not get rejected (2 (12) = 11382;  = 503). The top panel presents estimates for
the coefficients on individual characteristics in equations (5) and (6), while the bottom part shows
the estimates of the coefficients of peer group DI receipt ∗ interacted with education, age, and
gender in both threshold equations. The estimates for the first threshold imply that women use
lower thresholds than men with the same other characteristics, and thus more easily regard a given
health problem as work limiting. People with higher education are less likely to evaluate a given
health problem as work limiting than low educated respondents, but the educational differences are
not statistically significant.
    The age pattern is significant, and the age function has a maximum at about 62 years, implying
that until age 62, older people are "tougher", i.e. less likely to call a condition work disabling.
The only significant health condition is pain - respondents who often suffer from pain less easily
evaluate a given health problem as a (mild or worse) work limitation, possibly since they are more
used to performing work or daily activities in spite of the handicap of their health problem.
    For the distance between the first and second threshold ( 2 ), results are quite different. The
age function has a minimum at 56 years of age (if ∗ = 0), while higher education leads to a
smaller distance between thresholds. Heart problems do the same; these are the only type of health
problems with a significant effect.The estimates are difficult to interpret individually, due to the
complexity of the model, where the same variables appear in several equations.
    The model parameters of primary interest are the coefficients         
                                                                    1 and  2 on peer group DI re-



                                                20
ceipt ∗ . Both have been specified as a function of education level, age, and gender (see the bottom
panel of Table 7). Consider first the estimated main effect and the interactions with education. For
males under 35 with lower education,  
                                       1 is estimated at -1.33; for otherwise identical individuals

with medium education the estimate is -1.28 (not significantly different from the -1.33 estimate),
while for the higher educated the estimate is -1.31. Females are significantly less in uenced by DI
receipt in their reference group than males; for example, for a lower educated woman younger than
35, the peer group effect is -1.23 (versus -1.33 for males). The significantly positive interaction
of DI receipt in the reference group with the age dummy for 65+ shows that the response scale of
individuals over 65 is less in uenced by the number of DI recipients in their reference group than
the response scale of younger individuals: the peer group effects are -1.16 for men over age 65,
and -1.05 for women over age 65.
   Since the estimated value of  
                                  1 is negative in all cases, the fraction of people who are on DI

benefits in the reference group will unambiguously shift the reporting threshold for at least a mild
working disability downward. In this sense,  
                                              1 is the more critical parameter of the two. The

estimates for  
                2 show that the distance between the two thresholds increases with the number

of friends and acquaintances on disability benefits, particularly for young males with the lowest
education level. In simulations using the estimates of both         
                                                              1 and  2 , we find that if the number

of people on DI in the reference group increases, this raises both the fraction of those reporting
they are somewhat limited and the fraction of those reporting they are moderately limited or worse,
showing that the effect of ∗ on                             
                                   1 dominates the effect on  2 .

   As mentioned earlier, we defined reference groups separately for men and women in the sense
that for women we took the number of women on DI amongst female acquaintances and for men the
number of male DI recipients among male acquaintances. One question is how sensitive the results
in Table 7 are to this particular specification of reference groups. To test this, we re-estimated the


                                                 21
model using a common definition of reference groups for both sexes.7 The estimated effects of
the number of people on DI in the reference group are even larger using the common reference
by gender than with the benchmark definition used for Table 7. A likelihood ratio test however
indicates that the model with separate reference groups by gender for which we present the results
is significantly better that the alternative model.


Covariance structure of the errors

Table 6 shows that the parameter , the correlation between the error terms in the equations for
own work disability (1) and DI receipt in the reference group (7) is small and insignificant. This is
surprising since we would expect that work disability (and thus the unobserved factors driving it)
positively affects the number of acquaintances on DI receipt.
       Unobserved heterogeneity in thresholds is significant - the estimated standard deviation of  is
0.73 and is very accurately determined (  in Table 7). To judge its size, it can be compared to
the amount of idiosyncratic noise in self-reports and vignette evaluations. The former has stan-
dard deviation 1 (by normalization), the latter has standard deviation 0.51 (see Table D.1). Thus
unobserved heterogeneity in the thresholds explains about 35% of the unsystematic variation in
self-reports and about 60% of the unsystematic variation in vignette evaluations.
       The parameter  is estimated at -0.97. Since                       
                                                      =   −   and Var( )= 1 by means of

normalization, we have Var(                                                  
                             )=0.50. The implied correlation between   and  is equal to 0.71.

The sign of  implies that respondents who use relatively high thresholds for answering questions
about their own work limitations (given their observed characteristics), will tend to use relatively
low thresholds when asked for DI prevalence in the reference group. Thus someone who is unlikely
   7
     All respondents were asked both the number of men and the number of women on DI in their reference group. To
form a common definition for men and women, we used the maximum of the two. Thus if for an individual respondent
there were a lot of individuals of one gender who were more than somewhat limited, that is the value that applies.



                                                       22
to refer to a health problem as work limiting, has a tendency to consider work limitations as more
of an exception, and will sooner consider a given number of people on DI in the reference group
as "many".


3.3 Model performance

Table 8 provides a simple way of checking the fit of the model. Its structure is similar to that of
Table 5, but it reports simulated frequencies using the model instead of actual frequencies in the
data. Comparing Table 8 with Table 5 suggests that the fit of the model is fairly good; judging
from the marginal distributions, the model does a good job in replicating reported reference group
DI-receipt; it does a slightly worse job in reproducing the distribution of self-reported disability.
The biggest deviation between the data and the model predictions occurs in the middle category
(mildly limited). According to the data, 22.4% of the respondents classify themselves as mildly
limited (Table 5), whereas the model predicts 18.7% in that category (Table 8).


   – TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE –




3.4 Simulation of reference group effects

One way to gauge the strength of the reference group effects is to artificially vary the number of
people on DI in an individual’s reference group and then to evaluate how this affects the prevalence
of self-reported work limitations. We do this by varying the intercept in the equation for the number
of people in the reference group on DI (7) and then simulate the reports of DI-benefit receipt in
the reference group and the prevalence of self-reported work disability induced by that new level
of reference group DI-receipt.

                                                 23
    Figure 1 shows the results for both the full sample and for the sample broken down by educa-
tion. In each picture the horizontal axis is the percentage of respondents who say that they know
at least a few DI-benefit recipients, with the vertical lines representing the sample (or subsample)
percentages (except the left vertical line in the first figure, see below). The vertical axis represents
the percentage who report that they suffer from at least a mild work limitation; the horizontal line
indicates the (sub)sample percentage (except the lower line in the first figure).


    – FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE –


    The graphs in the figures illustrate the sensitivity of reporting a work disability to DI receipt
in the reference group. In line with the estimation results in Table 6, the level of the curve is
highest for the low educated and lowest for those with a high education level. This difference in
levels implies that at the same level of perceived reference goup DI benefit receipt, lower educated
respondents are more likely to report at least a mild work limitation than respondents with middle
or higher education. In all cases there is a notable peer group effect of DI receipt in the reference
group on the probability to report a work disability: if the respondent knows more people on DI
benefits, the chances of reporting a disability increase substantially.
    To illustrate the size of the effect, in the picture for the full sample, additional horizontal and
vertical lines have been drawn, both below the sample averages. The horizontal line is based on the
finding of Kapteyn et al. (2007) that if US scales are assigned to Dutch respondents, self-reported
work limitations in the Netherlands would fall by 21%.8 This second horizontal line can thus be
interpreted as self-reported work-limitations in the Netherlands if the Dutch respondents with the
Dutch work limitations would use the American response scales. The second vertical line shows
    8
      This is the finding in their benchmark model; the percentage varies somewhat depending on which model specifi-
cation is chosen.


                                                        24
that if the percentage of individuals saying they know at least a few DI-benefit recipients in their
reference group were to move from its simulated sample mean of 42.9% to about 33.9% (the left
most vertical line), this would move the scales used by the respondents enough to reach the US
scales.



4 Concluding Remarks

Most people do not live in social isolation. Instead, they interact repeatedly with family, friends,
and neighbors. As a consequence of those pervasive interactions, they allow themselves to be
transformed in many ways, a transformation of which they may often be unaware. One type of
transformation involves the formation of social norms about what normal or acceptable behavior
might be. These social norms then fix the scales that they may be using in responding to questions
about their own behaviors and current situations. If they had different neighbors and friends, their
self-descriptions about their lives may well be quite different. While this may be true within a
country where there exists a shared history and culture, it is especially likely to be the case when
cross-national comparisons are made.
   In this paper, we test the importance of these types of social interactions using a specific
application- the probability that people self-label themselves as work disabled. We estimated a
model of self reported disability with an emphasis on how the reporting of disability is affected
by the prevalence of DI receipt in one’s reference group. We find an effect in the hypothesized
direction- larger reported numbers of people in one’s reference group on DI increase the likelihood
of seeing oneself as having a work disability.
   These findings are suggestive of how policy programs affect social norms. If a policy makes
receipt of DI benefits more attractive or easier (e.g., by loosening eligibility requirements) thus



                                                 25
increasing the number of DI recipients, this changes social norms. Individuals are now more likely
to label a given health condition as work limiting and the prevalence of self-reported work will
rise.
    There are of course alternative reasons why self-reported disability and reported DI benefit
receipt in one’s reference group would be correlated. Our model is designed to capture many of
these reasons. These include the possibility that individuals with a work disability are more likely
to associate with others who suffer a similar fate. First, we allow for a considerable number of
observable covariates in common, which by itself will generate correlation between self-reported
disability and reported DI benefit receipt in one’s reference group. But we also allow for correlation
between the errors in the reference group equation and the equation predicting the probability that
one is work disabled.
    Even within this reasonably general model, we find a direct effect of the number of people
in one’s reference group on disability programs on the probability one considers oneself work
disabled. The effects that we estimate are sufficiently strong to explain a good deal of the higher
rates of self-reported work disability in the Netherlands compared to the United States. The Dutch
population appears to have much more lenient thresholds about what constitutes a work disability
(Kapteyn et al. 2007). The results in this paper suggest that this tendency stems from the fact that
the Dutch are much more likely to know people on work disability programs, a direct consequence
of the far more generous programs in The Netherlands as well as its more lenient rules for program
eligibility.




                                                 26
References

Aarts, L., Burkhauser, R. & de Jong, P. (1996), Curing the Dutch Disease: An International Per-
     spective on Disability Policy Reform, Advanced Textbooks in Economics, Avebury: Alder-
     shot.

Alessie, R. & Kapteyn, A. (1991), ‘Habit formation, interdependent preferences and demographic
     effects in the almost ideal demand system’, Economic Journal 101, 404–419.

Angelucci, M. & Giorgi, G. D. (2009), ‘Indirect effects of an aid program: How do cash transfers
     affect ineligiblesŠ consumption?’, American Economic Review 99(1), 468–508.

Audretsch, D. & Feldman, M. (1996), ‘R and d spillovers and the geography of innovation and
     production’, American Economic Review 86, 630–640.

Bala, V. & Goyal, S. (1998), ‘Learning from neighbours’, Review of Economic Studies 65, 595–
     622.

Banerjee, A. V. (1992), ‘A simple model of herd behavior’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     107, 797–817.

Banks, J., Kapteyn, A., Smith, J. P. & van Soest, A. (2007), Work disability is a pain in the *****,
     especially in england, the netherlands, and the united states, in D. Cutler & D. Wise, eds,
     ‘Health in Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of Declining Disability Among the
     Elderly’, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Becker, G. S. (1974), ‘A theory of social interactions’, Journal of Political Economy 83(6), 1063–
     1093.



                                                27
Bound, J. (1991), ‘Self-reported versus objective measures of health in retirement models’, Journal
     of Human Resources 26(1), 106–138.

Bound, J. & Burkhauser, R. (1999), Economic analysis of transfer programs targeted on people
     with disabilities, in O. Ashenfelter & D. Card, eds, ‘Handbook of Labor Economics’, Vol. 3C,
     Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 3417–3528.

Cappellari, L. & Jenkins, S. (2006), Calculation of multivariate normal probabilities by simulation,
     with applications to maximum simulated likelihood estimation. Discussion Paper No. 2112,
     IZA, Bonn.

Case, A. & Katz, L. (1991), The company you keep: The effects of family and neighborhood on
     disadvantaged youth. NBER Working Paper 3705, National Bureau of Economic Research,
     Cambridge, MA.

Duesenberry, J. (1949), Income, Saving and the Theory of Consumer Behavior, Cambridge: Har-
     vard University Press.

Du o, E. & Saez, E. (2003), ‘The role of information and social interactions in retirement
     plan decisions: evidence from a randomized experiment’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     118(3), 815–842.

Ginther, D., Haveman, R. & Wolfe, B. (2000), ‘Neighborhood attributes as determinants of chil-
     dren’s outcomes: How robust are the relationships’, Journal of Human Resources 35(4), 603–
     642.

Glaeser, E. L., Sacerdote, B. & Scheinkman, J. A. (1996), ‘Crime and social interactions’, Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics 111(2), 507–548.


                                                28
Glaeser, E. L., Sacerdote, B. & Scheinkman, J. A. (2000), ‘The social multiplier’, Journal of the
     European Economic Association 1(2-3), 345–353.

Hanuschek, E., Kian, J., Markman, J. & Rifkin, S. (2000), Do peers affect student achievement.
     Unpublished Manuscript University of Rochester.

Haveman, R. & Wolfe, B. (2000), ‘The economics of disability and disability policy’, Handbook
     of Health Economics Vol. 1B J. Newhouse and A. Culyer (eds) pp. 995–1051.

Kapteyn, A., Smith, J. P. & van Soest, A. H. (2007), ‘Vignettes and self-reports of work disability
     in the u.s. and the netherlands’, American Economic Review 97(1), 461–473.

Kapteyn, A., van de Geer, S., van de Stadt, H. & Wansbeek, T. (1997), ‘Interdependent preferences:
     An econometric analysis’, Journal of Applied Econometrics 12(6), 665–686.

King, G., Murray, C., Salomon, J. & Tandon, A. (2004), ‘Enhancing the validity and cross-
     cultural comparability of measurement in survey research’, American Political Science Re-
     view 98(1), 567–583.

Kuhn, P., Kooreman, P., Soetevent, A. R. & Kapteyn, A. (2009), The effects of lottery prizes
     on winners and their neighbors. evidence from the dutch postcode lottery. Working paper,
     RAND Corporation.

Manski, C. F. (1993), ‘Identification of endogenous social effects’, The Review of Economic Stud-
     ies 60(3), 531–542.

Topa, G. (2001), ‘Social interactions, local spillovers and unemployment’, The Review of Economic
     Studies 68(2), 261–295.

Veblen, T. (1899), The Theory of the Leisure Class, New York: Dover.

                                                29
Woittiez, I. & Kapteyn, A. (1998), ‘Social interactions and habit formation in a model of female
     labour supply’, Journal of Public Economics 70, 185–205.




                                              30
APPENDIX

A Vignette Questions

                                     Vignettes for Affect

 1. [Henriette] generally enjoys her work. She gets depressed every 3 weeks for a day or two and
    loses interest in what she usually enjoys but is able to carry on with her day-to-day activities
    on the job.

 2. [Jim] enjoys work very much. He feels that he is doing a very good job and is optimistic
    about the future.

 3. [Tamara] has mood swings on the job. When she gets depressed, everything she does at work
    is an effort for her and she no longer enjoys her usual activities at work. These mood swings
    are not predictable and occur two or three times during a month.

 4. [Eva] feels worried all the time. She gets depressed once a week at work for a couple of
    days in a row, thinking about what could go wrong and that her boss will disapprove of her
    condition. But she is able to come out of this mood if she concentrates on something else.

 5. [Roberta] feels depressed most of the time. She weeps frequently at work and feels hopeless
    about the future. She feels that she has become a burden to her co-workers and that she
    would be better dead.

                                      Vignettes for Pain

 1. [Katie] occasionally feels back pain at work, but this has not happened for the last several
    months now. If she feels back pain, it typically lasts only for a few days.

                                               31
2. [Catherine] suffers from back pain that causes stiffness in her back especially at work but is
   relieved with low doses of medication. She does not have any pains other than this general-
   ized discomfort.

3. [Yvonne] has almost constant pain in her back and this sometimes prevents her from doing
   her work.

4. [Jim] has back pain that makes changes in body position while he is working very uncom-
   fortable. He is unable to stand or sit for more than half an hour. Medicines decrease the pain
   a little, but it is there all the time and interferes with his ability to carry out even day to day
   tasks at work.

5. [Mark] has pain in his back and legs, and the pain is present almost all the time. It gets
   worse while he is working. Although medication helps, he feels uncomfortable when moving
   around , holding and lifting things at work.


                                      Vignettes for CVD


1. [Trish] is very active and fit. She takes aerobic classes 3 times a week. Her job is not
   physically demanding, but sometimes a little stressful.

2. [Norbert] has had heart problems in the past and he has been told to watch his cholesterol
   level. Sometimes if he feels stressed at work he feels pain in his chest and occasionally in
   his arms.

3. [Paul]’s family has a history of heart problems. His father died of a heart attack when Paul
   was still very young. The doctors have told Paul that he is at severe risk of having a serious
   heart attack himself and that he should avoid strenuous physical activity or stress. His work


                                               32
   is sedentary, but he frequently has to meet strict deadlines, which adds considerable pressure
   to his job. He sometimes feels severe pain in chest and arms, and suffers from dizziness,
   fainting, sweating, nausea or shortness of breath

4. [Tom] has been diagnosed with high blood pressure. His blood pressure goes up quickly if he
   feels under stress. Tom does not exercise much and is overweight. His job is not physically
   demanding, but sometimes it can be hectic. He does not get along with his boss very well.

5. [Dan] has undergone triple bypass heart surgery. He is a heavy smoker and still experi-
   ences severe chest pain sometimes. His job does not involve heavy physical demands, but
   sometimes at work he experiences dizzy spells and chest pain.




                                             33
B Reference Group Questions

The questions are preceded by the following introduction: The following questions concern your
circle of acquaintances, that is, the people with whom you associate frequently, such as friends,
neighbors, acquaintances, or maybe people at work.


   • If you think of your circle of acquaintances, into which age category do MOST of these
      people go? Please select the answer that is closest to reality.


   age (in years) is mostly: 1 under 16 2 16 - 20 3 21 - 25 4 26 - 30 5 31 - 35 6 36 - 40 7 41 - 45 8
46 - 50 9 51 - 55 10 56 - 60 11 61 - 65 12 66 - 70 13 71 or over


   • Which level of education do most of your acquaintances have?


   1 primary education 2 junior vocational training 3 lower secondary education 4 secondary
education/pre-university education 5 senior vocational training 6 vocational colleges/first year uni-
versity education 7 university education


   • If you think of the men among your acquaintances, how many of them are on DI?


   1 Nobody 2 Very few 3 A few 4 Many


   • If you think of the women among your acquaintances, how many of them are on DI?


   1 Nobody 2 Very few 3 A few 4 Many




                                                 34
C Likelihood Contributions

Compared to the models in King et al. (2004) and Kapteyn et al. (2007), there are two com-
plications: the thresholds now depend on an unobserved variable ∗ and upon an unobserved
heterogeneity term . Replacing ∗ using (7) and exploiting (5) and (6) gives:


                                              
                             1 =  1 +               
                                          1   +  +  1 ( + )                                (16)

                                                              +  (
                                 2 =  1 +   2 + 2             2       + )                 (17)

(1) and (2) imply
                                 =  if  −1 −       −                                  (18)

Similarly, for the vignette evaluations we get:


                            =  if  −1 −  −        −  −                        (19)


The probability of observing a certain reference group category follows from (9):


                           =  if 0−1 −        0 −                               (20)


Let the reported reference group variable be , the observed work disability self-report , and the
observed vignette evaluations  1        . Then the likelihood contribution of a given respondent
can be written as a two-dimensional integral over the values of  that result in  =  and all




                                                     35
possible values of :

         Z   ∞   Z   0 −                        Y
                                                      
                                                                                              1   
                                     ( = |  )          (  =   |  )( |)d     ( )d   (21)
           −∞    0−1 −                         =1
                                                                                                


where  is the standard normal density and  is the conditional density of  given , which
is univariate normal. Of course, the crucial point here is that, conditional on  and , all vi-
gnette evaluations and the self-report are mutually independent, allowing for the factorization in
(21). The conditional probabilities in (21) follow from (18) and (19), together with the normal-
ity assumptions on the error terms, implying that the  are independent of ,  and  but that
|(  ) ∼ (  1 − 2 ):


                                                                √
                          ( = |  ) = Φ([  −  −  ] [1 − 2 ])
                                                                      √
                                              − Φ([ −1 −  −  ] [1 − 2 ])




                                (  =   |  ) = Φ([  −  −   ] )

                                                      − Φ([  −1 −  −   ] )


where the   are given by (16) and (17) (and depend on  and  ).



D Estimates of the Vignette Equation (Equation (3)

The dummy coefficients in Table D.1 re ect the average severity of the work limitations described
in the vignettes. One can relate the dummy coefficients    = 1     15 to the relative frequencies
in Table 1 – vignettes that are evaluated as more severely on average have higher coefficients. The


                                                            36
estimate of , the coefficient of the dummy for a female vignette name, is small and insignificant.
The estimated idiosyncratic variation in vignette evaluations  (independent across vignettes) is
smaller than the unsystematic variation in self-assessments ( = 1, by means of normalization).
Still, the idiosyncratic terms  are large enough in comparison to the differences in the estimated
coefficients on the vignette dummies  to explain that the same vignettes are often ranked in
different ways by different respondents – in line with what is seen in the data.




                                                 37
E Tables and Figures
Table 1. Frequencies for Vignette Answers (CentERpanel, October 2003)

Affect vignettes                 Affect 1    Affect 2    Affect 3   Affect 4   Affect 5
Not at all limited                 41.2        96.2        11.1      18.7       2.2
Somewhat limited                   49.7        2.8         44.3      44.8       8.4
Moderately limited                  7.2         0.6        31.2      26.0       18.6
Severely limited                    1.4         0.5        12.2       8.9       40.4
Extremely limited/cannot work       0.5         0.0         1.3       1.6       30.4

Pain vignettes                   Pain 1       Pain 2      Pain 3    Pain 4     Pain 5
Not at all limited                 22.5        8.2         0.6       0.3        0.8
Somewhat limited                   61.8        47.1        6.6       6.2        12.9
Moderately limited                 13.4        34.1        25.7      29.4       31.3
Severely limited                    1.9         9.2        49.5      43.2       39.2
Extremely limited/cannot work       0.4         1.4        17.6      20.9       15.9

CVD vignettes                    CVD 1       CVD 2       CVD 3      CVD 4      CVD 5
Not at all limited                 91.2        10.6        1.8       20.7       6.7
Somewhat limited                    7.8        46.2        18.2      44.9       34.1
Moderately limited                 0.9         29.2        32.6      25.0       30.3
Severely limited                   0.1         11.8        33.6       8.8       20.7
Extremely limited/cannot work      0.0         2.3         13.9       0.6       8.3

Notes: Data are weighted. Complete sample N=1980.
       See Appendix 1 for the wordings of the vignette questions.




                                              38
Table 2. Distribution of Self-Reported Work Disability by Age, %

                                                   Age Group
                                15-24   25-34      35-44   45-54 55-64   65+    Total
Not at all limited              86.8    74.1       69.2    55.9   52.8   48.4   63.1
Somewhat limited                 5.4    20.7       17.5    24.2   28.5   34.3   22.8
Moderately limited              5.8      3.2        5.8     7.0   10.5   10.9   7.1
Severely limited                 2.0      0         2.1     2.9    1.8    3.7    2.2
Extremely limited/cannot work     0      1.8        5.4     9.9    6.3    2.8    4.8
Number of observations           68     362        438     460    336    316    1980


Notes: Data are weighted. Complete sample N=1980.




                                              39
Table 3. Sample Statistics for Independent Variables

                                             Mean/percentage
Stroke                                             1.3
Cancer                                             3.8
Lung disease                                       6.0
Heart disease                                      7.1
High blood pressure                               19.2
Diabetes                                           4.8
Emotional problems                                11.0
Arthritis                                         10.4
Problems with vision                               3.8
Often pain                                        25.4
Age in years                                      47.6
Low education level                               39.1
Medium education level                            38.7
High education level                              22.1
Female                                            49.9
Northern provinces*                               14.3
Eastern provinces*                                21.6
Western provinces*                                38.7
Southern provinces*                               25.5
Age in reference group <25                         8.7
Age in reference group 25-35                      20.2
Age in reference group 36-45                      27.0
Age in reference group 46-55                      19.7
Age in reference group 56-65                      14.7
Age in reference group 66+                         9.8
Low education level in the reference group        24.9
Medium education level in the reference group     47.9
High education level in the reference group       27.2

Notes: Data are weighted. Estimation sample N=1764.
All variables other than "Age in years" are dummies. The table gives the percentage
of observations for which the dummy has value 1.

     *Northern provinces are Groningen, Friesland & Drenthe
     *Eastern provinces are Overijssel, Flevoland & Gelderland
     *Western provinces are Utrecht, Noord-Holland & Zuid-Holland
     *Southern provinces are Zeeland, Noord-Brabant & Limburg
                                       40
Table 4. Distribution of Disability in the Reference Group by Age, %

                                                    Men, Age Group
                                 15-24   25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64          65+    Total
None                              82.9    65.6    52.5   55.1     39.4    53.8   56.7
Very few                          17.1    31.5    41.5   36.6     44.1    34.7   35.5
A few/many                         0      2.9     5.9    8.4      16.5    11.4    7.8
No of observations                 29     174     221    248      196     199    1067

                                                Women, Age Group
                                 15-24   25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64          65+    Total
None                              76.4    67.8    60.7   62.6     58.9    55.2   62.6
Very few                          23.6    29.0    35.7   30.4     32.9    38.2   32.4
A few/many                          0     3.2     3.6    7.1      8.2     6.5    5.0
No of observations                 39     188     217    212      140     117    913

Notes: Data are weighted. Complete sample N=1980.
Table 5. Self-Reported Work Disability and Reference Group Disability

                                             Disability in the reference group, %
                                                             None       Very few A few/many   Total
                                                              60.4        35.0        4.6     100.0
                                     Not limited
                                                              70.6        66.2       41.5      66.9
           Self-reported work




                                                              55.4        34.7        9.9     100.0
                                    Mildly limited
           disability, %




                                                              21.7        22.0       30.0      22.4

                                 Moderately, severely
                                 and extremely imited     41.3           39.2      19.6       100.0
                                                           7.7           11.9      28.5        10.7
                                Total                     57.3           35.4       7.4       100.0
                                                          100.0          100.0     100.0      100.0

Notes: Data are weighted. Estimation sample N=1764.



                                                         41
          Table 6. Estimation Results for Own Work Disability
                and DI Receipt in the Reference Group
                                    Self-Reported    Reference Group
                                   Coef.      s.e.    Coef.     s.e.
age                                 -0.189     0.224   0.423     0.138
age squared                          0.017     0.020 -0.031      0.013
medium education                     0.043     0.091   0.089     0.074
higher education                    -0.085     0.105 -0.046      0.075
female                               0.003     0.075 -0.334      0.062
reference group age 25-35            0.339     0.233   0.058     0.057
reference group age 36-45            0.383     0.266   0.107     0.077
reference group age 46-55            0.859     0.296   0.124     0.087
reference group age 56-65            0.599     0.319   0.058     0.079
reference group age >65              0.636     0.333 -0.010      0.084
Medium education in R.G.            -0.246     0.093   0.016     0.027
High education in R.G.              -0.383     0.113   0.009     0.032
northern provinces                   0.061     0.124 -0.081      0.101
eastern provinces                   -0.026     0.104 -0.083      0.089
western provinces                    0.078     0.090 -0.285      0.073
stroke                               1.250     0.337 -0.029      0.244
cancer                               0.357     0.144 -0.193      0.157
lung                                 0.661     0.142   0.281     0.132
heart problems                       0.825     0.132 -0.004      0.118
highblood                            0.029     0.086   0.069     0.075
diabetes                             0.408     0.180   0.118     0.154
emotional problems                   0.639     0.103   0.285     0.099
arthritis                            0.425     0.120   0.197     0.108
vision                               0.076     0.178   0.035     0.163
often pain                           1.260     0.083   0.258     0.077
intercept                           -1.077     0.510 -1.378      0.333
                                    0.053     0.040
                                     1.338     0.051




                                            42
 Table 7. Estimation Results threshold equations
                          Threshold shifts


                     Coef.     s.e.     Coef.     s.e.
age                   0.679    0.320    -0.104    0.037
age squared          -0.055    0.027     0.009    0.003
medium education      0.157    0.102    -0.054    0.017
higher education      0.071    0.091    -0.040    0.016
female               -0.373    0.187     0.024    0.016
stroke               -0.110    0.320    -0.047    0.058
cancer               -0.223    0.208     0.033    0.033
lung                  0.289    0.210     0.020    0.030
heart problems        0.053    0.143    -0.065    0.029
highblood             0.062    0.097     0.016    0.016
diabetes              0.085    0.188     0.019    0.034
emotional problems    0.238    0.186    -0.030    0.022
arthritis             0.195    0.163    -0.021    0.022
vision               -0.038    0.198     0.031    0.036
often pain            0.321    0.157    -0.025    0.017
northern provinces   -0.128    0.128     0.022    0.021
eastern provinces    -0.155    0.111     0.023    0.019
western provinces    -0.347    0.167     0.046    0.017
intercept            -2.068    0.898     0.259    0.108
                     -0.968     0.023

                      0.733     0.072


                              Interactions

                     Coef.     s.e.     Coef.     s.e.
age35_64              0.034    0.042    -0.085    0.029
age65+                0.173    0.051    -0.072    0.028
medium education      0.049    0.045    -0.079    0.031
higher education      0.021    0.072    -0.009    0.040
female                0.106    0.043    -0.111    0.031
intercept            -1.333    0.554     0.249    0.059


                                             43
 Table 8. Model Predictions of Self-Reported Work Disability and Reference Group Disability

                                   Disability in the reference group, %
                                                   None       Very few A few/many   Total
                                                    61.3         32.7        6.0    100.0
    work disability,




                            Not limited
    Self-reported




                                                    74.0         63.2       53.9     68.6
                                                    50.6         39.7        9.7    100.0
                          Mildly limited
                                                    16.6         20.9       23.8     18.7
                       Moderately, severely         42.1         44.6       13.3    100.0
    %




                       and extremely limited         9.4         15.9       22.3     12.7
                               Total                57.1         35.2        7.7    100.0
                                                   100.0        100.0      100.0    100.0

Notes: Data are weighted. Estimation sample N=1764.




                                               44
            Fig. 1: Self-reported work disability and reference group DI
                                           Complete sample                                                                            Low education




                                                                                                      100
              100      80




                                                                                                               80
                                                                                           Percent mild or more
P erc ent mild or more
               60




                                                                                                        60
       40




                                                                                               40
              20




                                                                                                      20
              0




                                                                                                      0
                            0   20            40                60             80    100                             0    20            40              60            80   100
                                 P ercent knowing at l east a few DI -reci pient s                                         Percent knowing at least a f ew DI-recipients


                                           Median education                                                                           High education
                                                                                                      100
              100      80




                                                                                                                80
                                                                                           Percent mild or more
P erc ent mild or more
               60




                                                                                                        60
       40




                                                                                               40
              20




                                                                                                      20
              0




                                                                                                      0




                            0   20            40                60             80    100                             0    20            40              60            80   100
                                 P ercent knowing at l east a few DI -reci pient s                                         Percent knowing at least a f ew DI-recipients




                                                                                                                     45
