                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ASSISTANCE TO THE POOR IN
                         A FEDERAL SYSTEM


                          Charles Brown

                         Wallace E. Oates



                      Working Paper No. 1715




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and projects in Government Budget and State and
Local Public Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #1715
                                                          October 1985




                            Assistance to the Poor   in
                                a Federal System



                                   ABSTRT\CP




     This paper explores the roles of different levels of government in

assisting the poor. Using a model with utility interdependence, the paper

presents some theoretical results on how levels of poor relief vary with the

extent of mobility of the poor under both centralized and decentralized

systems of support. After   surveying   the relevant empirical work and the

experience under the English Poor Laws, the paper argues for a basic role

for central government in this function.




Charles Brown                                               Wallace E. Oates
Institute for Social Research                               Bureau of Business and
University of Michigan                                        Economic Research
Ann Arbor, MI 48106                                         University of Maryland
313/763—6867                                                College Park, MD 20742
                                                            301/454—6306
                                                 Revised Draft
                                                 June 1985



                   Assistance to the Poor in a Federal System

                     Charles C. Brown and Wallace E. Oates*



            Measures adopted to produce greater equality are,
          however, exceedingly unsuitable for local authorities. The
          smaller the locality the more capricious and ineffectual
          are likely to be any efforts it may make to carry out such
          a policy. It seems clearly desirable that all such
          measures should be applied to the largest possible area,
          and that subordinate authorities should be left to act,
          like the individual, from motives of self—interest.
                                            Edwin Cannan (1896)

            Redistribution is intrinsically a national policy.
                                            George Stigler (1957)

            Financial assistance to the poor is a legitimate
          responsibility of states and localities.
                                            President Reagan (1982)


         This paper addresses the question "Which level of government should

assist the poor?" As the first two epigraphs suggest, one strand of the

literature argues that the central government should assume primary

responsibility for this task [e.g., Oates (1972), Ladd and Doolittle (1982)].

This contention is typically developed along two lines:

         (1) The well—being of the poor is of national concern: it is a

national public good in the sense that income levels of the poor enter as



*Department of Economics and Bureau of Business and Economic Research, Univer-
sity of Maryland. We are grateful to Anne Stevens and to the Computer Science
Center at the University of Maryland for their valuable assistance and to the
National Bureau of Economic Research and the Sloan Foundation for their support
of this research. We also appreciate helpful comments on an earlier draft of
this paper from Steven Craig, Edward Gratnlich, and the participants in the Sloan
Workshop in Urban Public Economics at the University of Maryland.
                                                                         2




arguments in the utility functions of the nonpoor. As a result, individual

behavior or "local" programs will involve an externality with the consequence

of suboptimal levels of support.

         (2) Even if preferences were such that concern for the poor were

limited to residents of one's own jurisdiction, the potential mobility of the

poor toward areas with comparatively high levels of assistance would force

individual localities to be excessively parsimonious in their relief programs.

The point here is that:
            The mobility of individual economic units among different
          localities places fairly narrow limits on the capacity for
          local income redistribution.   For example, an aggressive
          policy to redistribute income from the rich to the poor in a
          particular locality may, in the end, simply chase the
          relatively wealthy to other jurisdictions and attract those
          with low incomes. The likely outcome is a community
          homogeneous in poor residents (an unappealing prospect for

          most local jurisdictions) [Oates (1977), p. 5].

Not all of the economic literature, however, subscribes to this position [e.g.,

Pauly (1973), Tresh (1981, Ch. 30)]. And, in fact, actual programs for assis-

tance to the poor have often relied heavily on decentralized finance and

administration. Over several centuries under the Poor Laws, England operated a

system of poor relief with basic control at the level of the local parish. More

recently, existing programs in the United States exhibit a wide diversity of

roles for the different levels of government with the Federal Government

providing certain programs, the states and localities others, and with shared
                                                                       3

responsibility   for some of the major assistance programs (like AFDC). The

institutional structure across these programs is strikingly diverse. This is of

further interest in view of President Reagan's proposal under the New Federalism

to shift the major responsibility for assistance to the poor away from the

central government to the state and local levels.

         Our approach in this paper will consist initially of a positive

analysis. Making use of a variant of a simple and useful model of Larry Orr

(1976) with demonstrated explanatory power, we work through a series of con-

ceptual exercises that describe relative levels of cash transfers to the poor

under various conditions. In these exercises, we find that the mobility of

individuals across jurisdictions is a critical element in determining the

outcome. In particular, we demonstrate that in a partial—equilibrium framework,

the level of assistance varies inversely with the "elasticity of mobility" of

low—income individuals. The extension of the analysis to a general—equilibrium

setting produces some important qualifications to this finding. But using some

numerical simulations, we establish the presumption that with mobile poor the

movement from a centralized to a decentralized system of poor relief is likely

to result in a reduced           level of assistance to the poor. Since the

extent of mobility is basically an empirical matter, we next survey recent

research on migration behavior in response to differentials in levels of support

for the poor and on the response of benefit levels to the potential for such

migration. Following a brief digression on the English Poor Laws, we turn in

the final part to the question posed at the beginning of the paper.

1. A Positive Theory of Poor Relief

         Our variant of Orr's model is based on the following simplifying

assumptions:
                                                                            4


         (1) The nation consists of two kinds of people: the nonpoor (N) and

the poor (P). Within each group, all individuals are identical: they have the

same preferences and the same pre—tax and pre—transfer incomes.

         (2) The concern for the poor is expressed as a dependence of the

utility of the nonpoor on post—transfer income levels of the poor:

            Y1).1 Here, the utility of a nonpoor individual in

local jurisdiction i depends on his own post—tax income, Y, and on the

post—transfer income of the poor, Y (where Y refers to disposable income).

The poor care only about their own disposable income: U' •   U'(Y-).   We

shall assume (as indicated by the superscript 1) that the nonpoor care only

about the poor within their own jurisdiction and not elsewhere.

         (3) All the poor within a particular jurisdiction receive the same

amount of transfer income.

         (4) Transfers within each jurisdiction are financed by equal (lump—

sum) taxes per—capita on the nonpoor.

         (5) The median—voter outcome determines the level of taxes and

transfers. The one restriction here is that N1 > P1: the number of nonpoor

(Ni) exceeds the number of poor individuals (Pi). Otherwise, the poor could

pass a measure to transfer all the income of the nonpoor to themselves. Note

that since all the nonpoor have identical tastes and the same pre—tax and

disposable incomes, they will all desire the same level of transfers to the

poor. And since they (by assumption) constitute the majority, we need examine

only the desired outcome of a "representative" nonpoor individual.




I Following Orr, we adopt here the "altruistic" rationale for support for the
   poor. There are alternatives. Varian (1980), for example, suggests income
   security as a motivation for poor relief: one might support assistance to the
   poor as an insurance policy in case one's own income falls to low levels at some
   future time. Yet another approach is Peltzman's (1980) vote—maximizing politi—
   clan who tries to secure the votes of transfer recipients through redistributive
   measures.
                                                                       5


        We proceed next to a series of conceptual exercises in which we assume

that assistance to the poor is strictly a local function. In this setting, we

shall examine levels of support for a variety of special cases.

         Case I: A Tiebout World. Although it is not strictly legitimate in

terms of our simplified model with no local public goods, it is useful to

envision as one extreme case a Tiebout world in which individuals select their

jurisdiction of residence according to their demand for local public goods

[Tiebout (1956)1. Without expanding the model formally to incorporate such

goods and the taxes to finance them, it is a straightforward matter to posit a

Tiebout outcome in which each jurisdiction contains only people with the same

demand for local public goods. If such goods are normal goods and are financed,

say, by equal cost—sharing, then our Tiebout equilibrium will consist of

income—homogeneous jurisdictions. A jurisdiction will contain either alL

nonpoor or all poor with localities of the former variety providing higher

outputs of local public goods than those of the latter type. The implication of

this outcome for assistance to the poor is clear: there will be none. The

nonpoor have no poor within their jurisdictions to whom to transfer income.

While this is obviously an extreme case, it does call to our attention that

under a system of highly decentralized public finance in which "Tiebout sorting—

out" takes place, the tendency toward income—homogeneous jurisdictions will tend

to reduce the scope for support for the poor [Bradford and Oates (1974)1.

         Case II: Immobile individuals with a historically determined pattern

of residence. For this case, we take the distribution of individuals across

jurisdictions as given and fixed by, say, historical circumstances subject only

to the aforementioned condition that Ni (the number of nonpoor persons In the

th jurisdiction) exceeds P1 (the number of poor in i) for all I. It is a
                                                                         6


straightforward exercise to determine the first—order condition governing the

equilibrium level of transfers in each jurisdiction. We simply maximize the

utility of one of the (identical) nonpoor residents.




(1)

subject
           Max       -
                         u   (,
          to the condition that total receipts by the poor equal aggregate tax

payments by the nonpoor (which can be stated in the form):




(2)        i_1L
            pp 1              (i_i
                              \N        N



Equation (2) indicates that the post—transfer income of a poor individual in I

equals his pre—transfer income, Y, plus the total tax payments of the nonpoor

Ni (Y —          divided by the number of poor. It is important to note that
           Y)
(pi/Ni) is effectively the "price" to a nonpoor individual of raising income

per—capita of the poor by $1.

           The solution to this maximization problem requires that:




                                  au1
                         1          N
(3)              =
                     (P'/N')      ay1



Equation   (3) implies that the nonpoor in i will continue to transfer income to

the poor in i until the marginal utility to the nonpoor of a marginal dollar

of disposable income to themselves equals the marginal utility to the nonpoor

of another dollar transferred to the poor. Note that this latter quantity

depends not only on the income of the poor but on the "effectiveness" of a
                                                                         7


dollar from a nonpoor person in raising the per—capita income of the poor. And

this in turn depends on the relative number of poor and nonpoor in the

jurisdiction. If, for example, the poor are few in number relative to the

nonpoor, then it will be comparatively inexpensive to the nonpoor to raise the

per—capita income of the poor.

         Since we have assumed that the nonpoor have identical pre—tax incomes

and tastes across all jurisdictions and, likewise, that the poor have the same

pre—transfer incomes irrespective of location, it follows that the pattern of

assistance to the poor will depend solely on the price (P'/N3-) of raising the

income level of the poor. Figure 1 depicts this outcome. The demand curve for

assistance will be the same in all jurisdictions, but the population mix between

poor and nonpoor will vary. We see in Figure 1 that jurisdiction j with a

relatively large proportion of poor residents will have an effectively higher

price of assistance (P/Ni) to the nonpoor than in jurisdiction i. The level of

assistance to the poor in j (TJ) will, in consequence, be less than in i.

         We thus observe for Case II, in spite of equal initial income positions

and tastes, equilibria exhibiting varying patterns of assistance to the poor.

Those poor fortunate enough to be in jurisdictions where they constitute a

relatively small fraction of the population will receive relatively large

transfers as compared to their counterparts in localities where the poor are a

larger proportion of the residents.2




2 Such an outcome, incidentally, could be objected to on grounds of social
   justice. As George Stigler (1957) has put it, the redistribution ". .
   decision must be in some sense a national decision, for the proper amount of
   redistribution, even if rich and poor were chained to their communities [our
   emphasis], could not depend upon the accidents of income composition of a
   particular community" (p. 217).
                                             8




     P

     N




pi
                      E
Ni




P1
                                         A
N1                I                  I


         I        I                  I




         01_I—
         I        I                  I
         I        I                  I
         I        I                  I
         I        I                  I
         I        I                  I
         I        I                  I
                                             T
             Ti

                          Figure 1
                                                                       9

         Case III: Mobile Poor. For this case, we alter the environment such

that the poor are free to move among jurisdictions in response to any existing

differentials in levels of support.3   Consider first the polar case of "perfect

mobility": the poor move without any sort of cost (transport or psychic) among

localities. The only feature of the jurisdiction that matters to the poor is

the level of transfer payments. It is immediately clear that an equilibrium in

this case must involve identical levels of support for the poor in all jurisdic-

tions (at least those with any poor in them); otherwise, there would obviously

be further movement of poor individuals from low—support to high—support

localities.

         In order to say more about the character of the equilibrium, we must be

more specific about the behavior of the nonpoor. Suppose that in determining

support levels, the nonpoor respond purely passively and without regard to the

effect of their decisions on the movement of the itinerant poor. At any point

in time, the level of transfers to the poor is that desired by the median voter

based solely on the current number of poor persons in the jurisdiction. In this

instance, it is clear that an equilibrium outcome must be characterized not only

by equal levels of support, but also by the same population mix of poor and

nonpoor in all jurisdictions. Note that if (P1/Ni)    (Pi/Ni) for all (i,j),

then the desired level of support by the nonpoor will be the same in all




3 We shall continue to assume that the nonpoor do not move in response to
   differentials in assistance programs. This seems reasonable, for as Gramlich
   and Laren (1984) observe ".      at today's levels, a 30 percent increase in
   average AFDC benefit levels would raise the disposable income of AFDC recipients
   approximately this amount, but reduce the disposable income of average income
   taxpayers by only one—third of one percent" (pp. 495—6). It would thus seem
   that existing differentials in taxation of the nonpoor to finance transfers to
   the poor are probably too small to exert much effect in themselves on the
  location decisions of the nonpoor.
                                                                         10

localities. This condition :s needed so that there ill be no incentive (1) for

any poor to move or (2) for ny jurisdiction to alter its level of support.

        Moreover, such an equilibrium would also be stable. Any jurisdiction

with a relatively high level of support (which in this model can only result

from a comparatively small fraction of the population that is poor) would

experience an influx of poor persons. This would drive up the "price" of

support for the poor (i.e., P/N) and induce a fall in the desired level of

assistance to the poor. Returning to Figure 1, suppose that (PJ/N) and TJ are

the population mix and support level in all other localities. Further, assume

that jurisdiction I initially has a population mix of (p1/NI) which would result

in a decision to provide a support level of T'. With Ti > TJ, there would occur

an influx of poor into i with a consequent rise in (Pa-/N') and fall in T. In

Figure 1, this process would lead to a movement along the D-curve from A to E,

at which point the influx of poor would cease.

         However, the assumption of purely myopic behavior by the nonpoor does

not seem very compelling. It would seem more reasonable to assume that the

nonpoor recognize that their choice of support level will have some impact on

the migration decisions of the poor. This makes matters somewhat trickier. Any

decisions on levels of assistance to the poor must now take into consideration

not only the existing number of poor residents in the jurisdiction, but also the

impact of the support level on migration behavior. One thing we can say

unequivocally in this instance: an increase in the number of poor in any

jurisdiction [implying a rise in (P1/N1)] is undesirable from the perspective of

the nonpoor residents ——   it   reduces their level of utility. This follows

because, in the model, the effect of an increase in (P1/Ni-) is to raise the

"price" to the nonpoor of any given level of assistance per poor person. An
                                                                         11

increase in the fraction of the population that is poor effectively increases

the price of the second argument in the utility function of the nonpoor.

            This would suggest that, in general, levels of assistance to the poor

will be less in the presence of mobility than if the poor remained in their

"home" jurisdictions. For in the determination of the level of support, the

nonpoor must now subtract from the utility they derive from a higher level of

assistance to the poor not only the cost to themselves of the transfers to

existing poor residents, but also the cost of the payments to the newly arrived

poor who will migrate in response to the higher support levels [Boadway and

Wildasin (1984), pp. 509—11].

            More formally, let us introduce an explicit "migration function," where

the number of poor in a jurisdiction is a function of the level of transfer

payments:




(4)         P   f(T)               where f'(T) ) 0 and f'



The parameter fl is the elasticity of the migration function.4 We note that

our treatment at this juncture is wholly in partial—equilibrium terms; most

importantly, we are assuming that levels of transfer payments in other juris-

dictions are given and do not change in response to adjustments in T in the

locality under consideration. [More on this later.]

            Substituting the budget constraint into the utility function, we can

write:




      To simplify notation in this section, we have omitted the subscripts and
      superscripts identifying the particular jurisdiction. All variables are
      understood to refer to the same, say the ith, jurisdiction.
                                                                             12



(5)
                                    — PT   ,Y    + T}
         UN[YN p] —         UNEYN            p

Differentiating (5) with respect to T and setting the resulting expression equal

to. zero yields:




                                                 dP
(6)      Z(T,) —
                     aYN                (T                     p


                     auN     c
                                       (1+i)            +!--
                     aYN                           }       p

By the implicit—function rule, we obtain:



(7)      —=—
         dT
         dfl
                   az/ar,
                   az/aT


where Z/dT a-uN/aT2              ( 0 by the second—order condition for utility

maximization. Next, we note that:




         az  aUN        P
(8)      —z—-——(       —) <0.
               3YN


From (7) and (8), it follows that:



         dT
(9)           < 0
                                                                          13

            Equation (9) indicates that the level of transfer payments varies

inversely with the elasticity of the migration function; in a loose sense, it

tells us (as expected) that the greater the potential flow of migrant poor in

response to a change in the level of transfers, the lower will be the juris-

diction's level of support for the poor. This result, however, must be inter-

preted quite carefully. Note that the sign of this derivative is determined

while holding T and P constant; we are effectively rotating the migration

function around some initial values for P and T.

         This can be seen in Figure 2, where we have introduced, in addition to

the "demand curve" for transfer payments (D), a migration curve (M). The

M—curve indicates that the number of poor residents (and hence P/N) rises with

the level of support payments.5      Note that an equilibrium pattern of payment

levels and poor residents can only occur at the intersection of the D and N

curves ——   at   point A corresponding to the solid curves. If, for example, T )

T, then more poor would enter the jurisdiction pushing down the level of

transfer payments until T      T0. In terms of Figure 2, our result in equation

(9) says that if we rotate the N curve about the initial position at point A and

increase the elasticity of the function by making the curve steeper (see N'),

then the equilibrium level of T will fall. This occurs because the demand

function itself depends upon the slope of the migration curve: as N becomes

steeper indicating a greater responsiveness of the poor to payment levels, the

D—curve shifts down (to D' in the diagram) reflecting a lower desired level of




   The N—curve in Figure 2 represents the locus of points satisfying the mobility
   function described by equation (4). The D—curve corresponds to equation (6):
   it is the locus of points satisfying the conditions for utility—maximization of
   the non—poor. As is evident from equation (6), the D—curve depends on the
   "elasticity of migration" (ii).
                                     14




P
N




                                 M




    6
         I
         I
         I
                  I'
                  I
                  1
                            — P1

         I        I
         I        I
         I        I
         I        I
         I        I
         I        I
         I        I
                                          —T

        i1   T0



                      Figure 2
                                                                            15

transfers.   The new equilibrium is at B, indicating a fall in support payments from T0

to T'. It is important to be quite precise concerning this interpretation of (9). For

as we shall see in the next section, shifts of the H-curve in one direction may not

yield a predictable effect on the level of support payments.

         Case IV: A Two—Jurisdiction, General—Equilibrium Model. In the

preceding, partial—equilibrium case, we determined the level of support for the

poor that maximizes the utility of the nonpoor in a single jurisdiction, while

holding constant transfer payments in all other jurisdictions. This is not,

however, wholly satisfactory, since there will typically exist some interrelation-

ship among levels of support. In Case IV, we examine the properties of a

simple, two—jurisdiction model where we introduce simultaneous utility—maximi-

zation across the two localities. This provides some further insights into the

way in which the degree of mobility of the poor influences the equilibrium

levels of transfer payments.

         In the preceding case, we "defined" mobility in terms of a mobility

function. We effectively identified an increase in mobility with an increase in

the parameter i,   the   elasticity of the mobility function. Higher mobility was

thus associated with more responsiveness in the location decisions of the poor

with respect to the level of support payments. For our two—jurisdiction case,

we shall use a related, but somewhat different, measure of mobility: the "cost"

of moving from one jurisdiction to the other. We understand such moving costs

to include the net costs of all considerations besides transfers. This would

include not only transport costs (e.g., the price of "bus tickets"), but also

the psychic costs of relocation. In addition, moving costs depend upon such

conditions as the length of the residency period before a low—income individual

becomes eligible for support payments. From this latter perspective, the
                                                                           16

Supreme Court decision striking down state residency requirements can be seen as

reducing the cost of relocation.

         For the kth poor individual in jurisdiction 1, the decision as to

whether to move to jurisdiction j will depend upon the difference in support

payments relative to moving costs. More formally, individual k will emigrate

from i to j if:




(10)     T.-T.>C +a

where a represents a component of moving costs common to all individuals and

C an individual—specific "attachtnent."6   A change dci increases moving

costs by dci for each individual. It is changes in this parameter a that we will

use to generate different equilibria at varying levels of moving costs (or,

inversely, at different levels of mobility). If we let F'(C) and p

represent the cumulative distribution function of C and the initial number of

poor in jurisdiction i, then




(11)     P1(T3—T',a) p —    pii(J_1_)      +   PF(T1—T—u)


The first term on the RHS of (11) is the initial stock of poor, the second the

number of poor who emigrate from i, and the third the number who come to      from

the other jurisdiction.




6 C is related to what Grewal and Mathews (1983) have termed the
   "locational surplus." This surplus is the "algebraical sum of the net benefits
   which a citizen perceives as accruing to him, in terms of his consumption and
   production/employment activities as well as his fiscal transactions with
   governments, by choosing to remain in his present jurisdiction.rather than
   migrating to another jurisdiction" (p.9). In our notation, (C' +
   T1—T) is the locational surplus for the kth low—income household in
   jurisdiction 1.
                                                                                         17

             If   each jurisdiction takes the other's behavior as given, it will

choose T1 (or TJ) to maximize




(12)         U(Y,Y') — U[YN — T1PI(T3_Ti,a),                 Y1 +   Ti]


Differentiating with respect to T1 and setting the result equal to zero gives




                      au'       a' au1
(13)
                 N  N  N
             z E—.—+—--—
                      a' aT ap
                                             —o              (for I —     i,j)
                       N


Changes in a will then lead to changes in T1 and TJ. These can be either

partial or general equilibrium responses. For a partial equilibrium analysis,

we can differentiate (13) for jurisdiction I with respect to T1- and a, and solve



       I.i        i                      I
     dT        az
             + ---—da       0    fordT—      .   For                      .
                                                       a general equilibrium analysis,
  aT'


we differentiate each equation in (13) with respect to T', Ti, and a and solve

the system of equations




I-                    azh/aT2l IdT1                           da
[az2,aT1              az2/aT2J [dT2
                                                                             18




for dT'Jdci and dT2/dcx. To label the resulting algebra "tedious" is an under-

statement. Here, we merely outline the solution; details appear in an appedix

available from the authors on request.

           Differentiating equation (13) leaves us with three sorts of deriva-

tives: first—partials of the utility function, second— and cross—partials of

the utility function, and derivatives of i   with   respect to its arguments. The

first—partials are, of course, positive. Various combinations of the other

derivatives of the utility function can be signed either from the second—order

conditions from each jurisdiction's maximization of (12) or from strongly—held

priors about related comparative—static experiments. In particular, we assume

that



       I                 i
            >0 and           (   0.
                       dY1
       N                 p


           The third source of information comes from actually differentiating P1

with respect to its arguments. Most of our conclusions take advantage of the

fact that the sum of P1 and P2 is constant, and that the assumed response of

migration from I to j is based on the linear function (T—T1—). Finally, we

assume that Fl" is non—negative or, equivalently, that the density of C is

rising. For any symmetric density, this holds when less than half the poor are

migrating. Allowing Fi' to be negative introduces an ambiguity into our results

rather than necessarily reversing them; it turns out that increases in o

necessarily correspond to reductions in the elasticity of P with respect to T

only when F" is positive.
                                                                              19


         In both the partial— and general—equilibrium contexts, our results are

qualitatively Bimilar. It is helpful for purposes of discussion to order the

jurisdictions in a specific way. An increase in a will reduce both of the

migration flows in equation (11), reducing the number of poor in one jurisdic-

tion and increasing it in the other. Let jurisdiction 1 be the one which has

fewer poor when a increases (i.e., the jurisdiction which has an influx of poor

in the initial equilibrium). One can then show that dT1/da is positive——higher

(lower) mobility costs raise (lower) transfers in jurisdiction 1. However, the

sign of dT2/da is ambiguous. Intuitively, an increase in a makes jurisdiction 2

"poorer" in that fewer poor leave (at fixed levels of T- and Ti). This effect

encourages jurisdiction 2 to reduce T2 in response to an increase in a.

         Our two—jurisdiction case thus reveals a further possible outcome. For

the jurisdiction which is on the receiving end of the net migration flow, we

can say unambigously that an increase in the mobility of the poor (i.e., a

reduction in a) will result in a decline in the level of transfer payments.

Increased mobility implies an increased inflow of low—income individuals for any

specified level of transfer payments. The response of the non—poor to this

increase in the potential inflow of transfer recipients will be to lower

support levels. For the other jurisdiction, however, the effect is ambiguous.

Increased mobility implies a greater net outflow of the poor; with fewer poor,

the "price" (P/N) of raising the disposable income of the poor falls. This

effect encourages an increase in the level of transfers and works against the

incentive to reduce payments in response to the higher level of mobility. We

cannot, in general, determine the sign of dT/da for such a jurisdiction.
                                                                            20

         More particularly, if we were to limit migration flows to a one—way

movement of the poor from the low—transfer to the high—transfer state, we could

show that the level of transfers would unambiguously decline in the high—support

state but could conceivably either rise or fall in the low—transfer state

(because of the exodus of some of its poor). Gramlich (1985), using a specific

formulation of a model in this spirit with representative values for the

parameters, produces some intriguing results. In his simulation exercises,

increased mobility of the poor results in a dramatically reduced level of

transfers (T) in the high—support state and an increase in T in the low—support

state. Greater mobility of the poor effectively pushes support levels closer

together with a sharp decrease in the average payment across the two juris-

dictions. The decrease in the average payment is an interesting, if perhaps an

unsurprising, finding. We shall present some evidence in the next section

reinforcing this finding. While it is our conjecture that a decrease in the

average payment is probably the "typical" outcome under increased mobility of

the poor, we would note that it is not a proposition that we have been able to

derive as a general result.

         Case V: Centralized Versus Decentralized Support for the Poor. Having

examined the effects of mobility of the poor on levels of support under a system

of local poor relief, we turn next to the issue of central interest in this

paper: a comparison of support levels under centralized and decentralized

systems of assistance.

         It is helpful at the outset to examine some of the properties of the

centralized outcome using the two—jurisdiction model. Consider the following

numerical example:
                                                                                       21

                N1     —200                               P1 —60

               N2—100                                     P2—40
 where N1 and P1 refer to the number of nonpoor and poor households,

 respectively, in jurisdiction             (where i       1,2). We retain the assumption

 that the nonpoor care only about the well—being of the poor within their own

jurisdiction. Centralization of support has two effects. First, it equalizes

the price of support for the poor across the two jurisdictions. Under

centralized support, it is as If both jurisdictions had ratios of poor to

nonpoor of:


               P
                   —                 —   60+ 40       —    1
               N            +            200 + 100         3
                       N1       N2


Note that the distribution of the poor across jurisdictions is Irrelevant to the

centralized outcome (even though it remains true that the nonpoor are only

concerned with the poor within their own locality). Since in our simple model

the nonpoor are everywhere identical, they will all desire the same level of

transfer payments——that corresponding to the price P/N.

          Second, by equalizing levels of transfer payments, centralization

eliminates any movement of poor households in response to interjurlsdictional

differentials in support levels. The mobility issue vanishes. In consequence,

we effectively determine the equilibrium level of transfer payments by returning

to Figure 1 and finding the point on the demand curve corresponding to a price

of P/N.

          Suppose that we take such a point as our initial equilibrium and

consider a shift to a decentralized system of poor relief. In terms of our

numerical example, jurisdiction 1 will now provide for its own poor as will

jurisdiction 2. Decentralization will involve two effects: a price effect and

a mobility effect. The sign of the mobility effect Is unambiguous: as noted
                                                                                22

earlier,   each jurisdiction will incorporate into its choice of a level of

transfer payments the prospect that a higher I will, ceteris paribus, result in

a larger number of poor households. This will depress the level of transfers.

The price effect, however, will differ between the two jurisdictions. In our

example, jurisdiction 2 (with a comparatively large fraction of poor residents)

will experience a fall in the "price" of transfer payments to its poor. This

will tend to offset the mobility effect so that the impact of decentralization

on T2 is uncertain. For jurisdiction 1, in contrast, the price of transfers

rises; this reinforces the mobility effect and leads to an unambiguous fall in

T1. We thus have that:
                              I1 (Ic
                              I
                                  2     c


where T is the initial level of transfer payments       under   the centralized system.

           The average level of transfer payments under the decentralized system

is:
                             T =             +
                                      W1T1       W2T2


where WI is the fraction of total poor residents residing in jurisdiction I. We

have established that Ti < T0, but since 12 may be less than or greater than

      we are unable to demonstrate as a general result that: T < T0.         Neverthe-

less, we might expect this to be the "typical case." That is, we might expect

that in most circumstances, the average level of transfer payments under a

decentralized system of assistance to the poor would be less than the average

payment level under a centralized outcome.

           To obtain some further sense of these relationships, we have undertaken

some numerical exercises using specific functional forms for our two—jurisdic-

tion case. For these exercises, we have normalized the pre—transfer income to
                                                                                              23
the nonpoor at 1.0 and set the pre—transfer income of the poor at 01. We
assumed a utility function of the simplified—CES form:
                                                                   —(l/r)
                                         _N(r)
                                 U-      Y          +bY
                                        [
where a         is the elasticity of substitution between               and Y. We

arbitrarily chose five values of a:          .33, .67 ,   1.0,   2.0, and 3.0. For each a,

we picked b so that '/ equalled 0.20 when transfers were provided under a

fully centralized system.

          We assumed the moving—cost functions F1(T3_Ti_) to be cumulative—

normal distributions, with variance one and means of 1.2817 and 1.0365, respec-

tively. Thus, in a benchmark world where moving costs are zero and transfers in

the two states are equal, F'         •(—1.2817) —   .10 and F2 = •(—1.0365) — .15            [where

$(z) is the standard—normal c.d.f.J. This implies that, in our benchmark case,

the number of poor in each jurisdiction is constant, since F1P1               .10 -     60

6 move from 1 to 2 and F2 P2         .15 •   40   6 move from 2 to 1.

          The results appear in Table 1. The level of transfers under a central-

ized system is independent of a by construction; b was chosen for each a to

generate this property. The first major result is that when                    (no mobility),

decentralization can either raise or lower average transfers. When 0               <    1, the

demand curve in Figure 1 is concave, so that T at P/N               .33 (the centralized

solution) exceeds the weighted average of T at P/N               .3 and T at P/N       .4.




  In a centralized system, P/N equals 1/3 and there are no ôP/T terms in the
  first—order conditions. As a result,

                            —P
                                 —


  Since the left—hand side is fixed at 0.20 and P/N is known, it is easy to solve
  for b as a function of a.
                                                                                  24



                                           Table   1
                Transfers Under Centralized and Decentralized Syates




                              Elasticity of Substitution

                       .33           .67                 1.0      2.0      3.0

Centralized System .09375          .09375              .09375   .09375   .09375



Decentralized
  System: a
     Ti              .10088       .10763               .11458   .13678   .16109

                     .08203       .07201               .06250   .03684   .01504

     T               .09334       .09338               .09375   .09681   .10267




Decentralized
  System: z0
                     .09887       .10332           .10771       .12037   .13228

    T2               .07986       .06849           .05825       .03278   .01299

    T                .09126       .08939           .08792       .08534   .08456
                                                                                   25

When   c>   1, the reverse i8    true.     Of course, these comparisons hold for

"large" finite e's as well as the polar case in the table. With immobile poor,

there is thus no presumption in our model that the average level of transfer

payments will be higher or lower under centralized assistance than under

localized support for the poor.

            The second major result is that increased mobility reduces transfers in

each state (compare the c            and      0 results). This happens for a range of

intermediate values, too, although we cannot show this result need always hold.

Interestingly, our finding that transfers fall in the state with more poor

people contrasts with the implication of the Gramlich—Laren (1984) model [as

developed in Gramlich (1985)1. As noted earlier, Gramlich finds that, in his

simulations, benefits in the poorer state rise. This difference appears to

result from the choice of functional form, especially for the migration func—

tion        At any rate, it is the case in both the Gramlich and our simulations

that in the presence of mobility of the poor, average support payments are

lower under a system of local poor relief than under a centralized system of

assistance. The extent of mobility of transfer recipients seems to be of great

importance to the outcome.

8
    Neglecting   matching grants, the Gramlich—Laren model can be written

                                 1
                    in T1
                             l+cb (a.
                                   i         + cb in T3)

    where c is the price elasticity of demand for T, b is the elasticity of P-
    with respect to Ti/Ti, and the a are constant terms reflecting other
    influences (see Gramlich, p. 49). The equilibrium levels of transfers are


                             a1+ cb (a1+ 82)
                   mT            1+2cb
    The derivative of in Ti with respect to b is:


                    c (aj   — a)
                    (1 + 2cb)2
    Thus, increased mobility (higher b) reduces transfers in the higher—transfer
    state (a > aj), and increases them in the low—transfer state. Note,
    however, that the sum of these derivatives must be zero, which is a very strong
    a priori restriction.
                                                                            26

2.   An Examination of the Evidence

          Our theoretical analysis suggests that migration of the poor in

response to differentials in transfers has the potential to depress the levels

of these payments. But is this, in fact, true? Do the poor migrate in order to

receive higher benefits? And do levels of transfer payments respond to such

migration? These are empirical issues that a substantial number of studies have

addressed over the past 15 years. But before exploring the findings of these

studies, it is important to be a bit more explicit about the matters that are

relevant here. We shall organize our discussion around the following two

issues

          (1) Is there evidence to indicate that the poor do, in fact, migrate

from low—benefit to high—benefit jurisdictions (and in substantial numbers)?

          (2) Can we find any response in the level of transfer payments to such

migration?

This second point is a tricky one. As we shall see, most of the evidence

relates transfer levels to observed migratory behavior; in principle, our models

assume that officials set transfers in response to potential or expected

migration. What really matters here are the perceptions of policy—makers as to

the likely response of the poor to alternative levels of transfers. This is

obviously a somewhat different matter from the relationship of observed trans-

fers to observed migration. [More on this soon.}

          We begin with a brief survey of a large number of econometric studies

of migration behavior in the United States. These studies typically relate

migration over some period between states (or, in some instances, metropolitan

areas) to a set of independent variables including measures of per—capita
                                                                        27



income, unemployment rates, etc., in addition to variables indicating welfare

benefits in (or differentials in benefits between) the jurisdictions. Some of

the early studies were quite crude and aggregative [e.g., Gallaway et al.

(1967)]. Using total migration flows, they typically found the welfare—support

variables to be statistically insignificant. It is also worth noting that

several of these studies used migratory data from the 1950's, when payment

levels and differentials were relatively small and various residency require-

ments were in effect. In contrast, many later studies employed more disag—

gregated data on migratory flows for more recent periods. These studies typically

distinguish between white and non—white migration and, in some instances,

between different age groups. And many of them use data from the decade of the

1960's. Ore would have to characterize the findings of these studies as

somewhat mixed. But our survey indicates that the large majority of them find

some evidence of positive net migration of non—white individuals in response to

differentials in welfare benefits [see, for example, Kaun (1970), Cebula et al.

(1973), and Curran (1977)1.

         Non—white migration, however, is itself an imperfect proxy measure for

benefit—induced migration. As Gratnlich and Laren (1984) note, only about

one—quarter of non—white families are recipients of AFDC payments, and only

about one—half of AFDC recipients are non—white. It would obviously be prefer-

able to target such migration studies on actual (or potential) welfare red—

pients. Some recent studies have done just this. Southwick (1981) has explored

the migratory patterns of AFDC recipients and finds that benefit levels exert a

strong influence on AFDC immigration. In his "Test 5," for example, Southwick

estimates a "migration" elasticity of 2.5: his Table 5 indicates that a 10
                                                                           28

percent increase in AFDC benefits will lead to an estimated increase of 25
percent in the in—migration of welfare recipients.9   Likewise, Blank (1983),

drawing on micro—data for individual AFDC recipients from the Current Population

Survey, finds that benefit levels (as well as employment opportunities) exert a

significant influence on location decisions. Finally, Gramlich and Laren (1984)

have used two quite different techniques to estimate the migratory response to

benefit levels. The first involves the estimation of a simultaneous—equation

model using pooled time—series and cross—sectional data on state AFDC payments

for 1974—81; the second employs micro data from a subsample of the 1980 Census

and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to estimate a "transition matrix"

describing movements among groups of states with differing benefit levels. Both

of these exercises reveal a significant migratory movement of AFDC beneficiaries

from lower to higher benefit states. This movement, incidentally, is not large

in the short—run. Grarnlich and Laren describe it as "sluggish," but over a

longer period, this mobility "can alter the interstate distribution of the AFDC

population substantially" (p. 506).

         The evidence thus provides some support for the view that benefit

differentials exert a significant influence on the location decisions of the

poor. But is this migratory response to differentials in support levels

perceived by state and local policy—makers, and do they react by holding

benefits below what they otherwise would be? As we noted earlier, this is a




   Southwick's elasticity of migration, incidentally, is not quite the same as the
   elasticity of our migration function in the preceding section. For Southwick's
   calculations, the elasticity of migration is defined as the percentage change in
   the number of         poor (not total poor) resulting from a one—percent change
   in the level of transfer payments (in this case he monthly AFDC benefit).
                                                                           29

difficult   issue to get at empirically. Interestingly, there has been a recog-

nition in the empirical literature that actual migration flows may influence

benefit levels. Cloward and Piven (1968), for example, have argued that the

movement of blacks from the South to northern cities led to an increase in the

political power of blacks in the cities with a consequent expansion of welfare

rolls and benefit levels. The claim here is that actual migration is associated

with increases (not decreases) in welfare benefits, in response to the expanded,

and hence politically more influential, group of transfer recipients. The

first empirical test of this hypothesis is embodied in the estimation of a

two—equation model by Cebula (1974); the model contains one equation explaining

migration flows and a second describing the response of benefit levels to these

flows. In the second equation, Cebula found a direct and significant relation-

ship between the level of benefits and the inflow of non—white migrants.

However, later work casts doubt on these initial findings. Criticizing Cebula's

work, Kumar (1977) has estimated a somewhat different model using Cebula's (and

other) data; he finds no significant impact of migration flows on the level of

assistance payments. Likewise, Curran (1977), in the estimation of a three—

equation model of net immigration of non—whites to SMSA's between 1965 and 1970,

can find no evidence that greater immigration of non—whites leads to higher

welfare payments. And, finally, Southwick (1981), estimating a two—equation

model, finds that migration flows of welfare, recipients do not have a signifi-

cant effect on benefit levels. The evidence, on the whole, does not seem to

support this version of the "bi—directional" hypothesis.

         However, as we have indicated, the hypothesis of interest to us is that

potential migration depresses benefit levels. The one attempt to conceptualize
                                                                        30

and measure this relationship is the simultaneous—equation model, noted earlier,

by Gramlich and Laren. Their model incorporates explicitly the differential

between own—state and surrounding—state benefit levels and its effect on the

size of the welfare population. This, in turn, enters into the determination of

the level of welfare benefits (which results from utility-maximization of the

decisive voter). Their estimated benefit equation indicates that the "migration

effect [on benefit levels) is strong and significant no matter how the model is

estimated" (p. 499). In short, the greater the potential migration of benefit

recipients, the lower are the support—payment levels predicted by the Gramlich

and Laren equation.

         Our reading of the evidence, at this juncture, is that it provides some

support both for the view that there is a migratory response to differentials

in benefit levels and that the reccignition of this migration potential depresses

levels of assistance payments. As Gramlich and Laren (1984) put it, "Our

tentative conclusion is that migration of AFDC beneficiaries does appear to be

an important phenomenon, though only in the very long run. It does appear to be

perceived that way by state legislators, who appear to be very much conditioned

by what other states are doing when they set AFDC benefits" (p. 510).



3. A Digression on the English Poor Laws

         Our analysis and some supporting evidence suggest that mobility of the

poor in response to differentials in support is a potentially serious obstacle

to the successful functioning of a system of local finance. This raises the

intriguing question of how England, a relatively small country with short

distances between local parishes, managed to operate a system of local relief
                                                                       31

over several centuries. Although the Elizabethan or Old Poor Law was officially

enacted in 1601, it effectively codified practices that had existed for some

time [Marshall (1968), p. 11]. Under these practices, the basic responsibility

for both the finance and administration of poor relief rested with the parish.

The Old Poor Law required each parish to designate an "Overseer of the Poor"

whose task it was to know all the poor, to administer assistance to them, and to

find work for the unemployed.

         The English dealt with the problem of migration by prohibiting it. The

Law of Settlement and Removal of 1662 (which again formalized earlier practices

reaching back at least to the Labour Ordinance of 1349) made it the responsi-

bility of each parish to provide relief for its own, but only its own, poor.

Under the Law, church wardens and overseers were directed to remove to his

"home" parish any newcomer likely to become a burden to his adopted parish

unless the new arrival could give surety that he wouldn't become indigent or

rented property of the value of ten pounds per year or more [Fraser (1976), pp.

26—271. In fact, the history of the Poor Laws is largely an account of efforts

to deny support to, and to deport, the itinerant poor. Cruel instances abound

of whippings, the splitting of families, and the expulsion of widows and unwed

mothers. In a further Act in 1795, the settlement law was amended such that

only those who applied for local relief were subject to removal. Now only the

poor who actually applied for support put themselves in jeopardy of being

removed. The threat of removal proved a powerful force in persuading strange

paupers to conceal their neediness. The settlement and removal provisions were

a cornerstone of the Poor Laws. Even with the enactment of the New Poor Law in

1834 with its attempt to centralize and standardize somewhat the treatment of
                                                                      32


the poor, settlement and removal was left intact; it survived well into the

twentieth century.'°

          In addition to the hardship that it worked on the poor, the settlement

law proved quite complex and costly to administer. The removal of a poor person

could involve a long and expensive search to determine the person's most

recently acquired "settlement," sometimes involving extensive litigation with

other parishes. Such litigation could drag on encompassing one parish after

another, until the bill became quite sizeable. "It took seven years for a case

brought by the township of Canton in Yorkshire against Marsden in Lancashire

to be settled, and when the Court of the Queen's Bench finally decided the issue

in 1849, the 142 ratepayers of Canton were left with a legal bill of over 300

pounds't [Fraser (1976), pp. 34—35). Added to this was the cost of actual

removal and transport; Tate (1969, pp. 200) notes that constables on the main

roads sometimes spent the whole of their time transporting paupers.

          In view of the cumbersome and expensive character of the English

system, one wonders at its longevity. The laws of settlement and removal, in

particular, were the subject of fierce criticism from various social reformers

and from economists of the stature of Smith and Maithus. The economists opposed

these provisions because they restricted the mobility of labor." However, the

support for maintaining the local system of poor relief was strong. There was




10
     During the 19th century, an alternative to settlement and removal procedures
     became popular. Instead of having a relief applicant and his family returned to
     them under a removal order with little prospect of gainful employment, the
     parish of settlement sometimes elected to reimburse the parish where the relief
     recipient was currently located. As Fraser (1976, pp. 35—36) points out, "A
     complex system of inter—parochial and inter—union accountancy sprang up. .
     Between 1846 and 1859 the Chorlton—on—Medlock Union was reimbursing 36 unions
     and parishes, and was at the same time in receipt of payments from about 100
     unions or parishes on behalf of their non—resident paupers."

     Blaug (1963) and others contend that settlement and removal were not, in
     practice, so serious an impediment to labor mobility as was believed by reformers
     of the time.
                                                                        33


deep distrust of proposals that would replace local with national financing of

relief. The source of this distrust was largely the concern that effective

control be maintained over recipients and levels of support [Fraser (1976),

pp. 42—431. Local experience and direct contact with poor persons were seen as

necessary to restrict assistance to the truly deserving poor. Moreover, local

funding provided a check on levels of assistance that, some feared, would be

lost under a system of national finance. In short, a national system of poor

relief, it was argued, would lead to a "profusion" of assistance to the poor

that would encompass fradulent recipients and dIscourage work effort.



4. The Normative Issue

         Based on our theoretical exercises and our survey of existing empirical

work, what can we say about the question that we posed at the outset of this

paper: Which level of government should provide assistance to the poor? We

noted in the introduction two general lines of argument for vesting a basic

responsibility for this function with the central government. The first is

based on the claim that the income levels of the poor are a national public good

so that transfers to the poor in one jurisdiction effectively benefit the

non—poor throughout the country. It is difficult, however, to muster compelling

evidence to support this contention. Ladd and Doolittle (1982) cite some polls

by the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations that "show that only

15 to 17 percent of the respondents would like the federal government to

withdraw in favor of state and local governments from programs to aid the needy"

(p. 328). From this, Ladd and Doolittle conclude that most people "apparently

believe the federal government has a responsibility to help needy people, which
                                                                         34


in   turn suggests that they believe poverty is a national concern" (p. 327).

Others, however, like Pauly (1973), emphasize the spatial dimension of utility

interdependence, arguing for a predominant concern of the non—poor with their

poor neighbors.

          This is not an easy issue to resolve. Individuals contribute, for

example, to national (and global) charities to assist the poor, but much (and

perhaps more) of such giving has a la'rgely local focus. Our surmise is that the

most appropriate way to characterize the utility functions of the non—poor would

involve as arguments in these functions weighted levels of income of the poor

with heavier weights attached to the poor in one's own jurisdiction [e.g.,

Boadway and Wildasin (1984), pp. 507—509). But we are hesitant to base the case

for centralization of the income—maintenance function on this conjecture without

more compelling evidence in its support. As Buchanan (1974) puts it, "If a case

for federal—government or national—government redistributive activity is to be

based on the grounds of strict utility interdependence, evidence should be

available to indicate that the sociocultural environment is such that the

effective limits are, indeed, those determined by national boundaries rather

than those more limited in space on the one hand and those more extensive on the

other" (p. 35). In the absence of clear evidence for or against the national

public good argument, we turn to the second argument for a central role in

assistance to the poor.

          This second argument is based on migratory behavior. The claim here is

that the potential migration of low—income households in response to support

differentials will depress benefits to suboptimal levels. This contention is

also somewhat tricky. Suppose that we dismiss entirely any utility interdependence
                                                                    35


among individuals in different jurisdictions: the non—poor care only about the

poor within their own locality. We would emphasize that the median—voter

outcome in our earlier models with identical non—poor is not the socially

optimal outcome from the perspective of the maximization of some sort of

social—welfare function. The equilibrium support levels in our model represent

at best a Pareto—efficient outcome viewed exclusively from the perspective of

the non—poor.

         To place this point in context, let us return to our Case II, where the

poor are completely immobile. The equilibrium support level in a particular

jurisdiction represents the level for which we can make no non—poor individual

better off without making another non—poor person worse off; it is the Pareto

efficient level of transfers for the group of non—poor residents in the juris-

diction. Were we to take the preferences of the poor into consideration by, for

example, the maximization of some social—welfare function that included the

welfare of all the residents in the jurisdiction, we would presumably determine

an optimal level of transfers that is greater than that based solely on the

preferences of the non—poor. From this perspective, we would argue that the

equilibrium level of support in our Case II is less than the socially optimal

level; we might take it as a lower bound for the optimal level of transfers.

         When we move away from Case II, we find that the introduction of our

migration function establishes a pecuniary incentive for jurisdictions to reduce

support levels below those in the immobility case. Moreover, existing empirical

work suggests that this migration potential is significant and does exert a

depressing influence on the level of benefits. Unlike the case of the English

Poor Laws, we cannot suppress this mobility by residency requirements, since
                                                                       36

such residency stipulations have been struck down by the U.S. Supreme Court. We

should thus expect the equilibrium level of transfers to fall below the lower

bound for optimal support levels. The presumption must be that levels of

assistance to the poor under a wholly decentralized system (and in the absence

of residency requirements) will be suboptimal——at least in the absence of other

distortions.

           This points to a basic role for the central government in providing for

the poor. But it does not establish the case for an exclusive reliance on

centrally funded and administered assistance programs. As Boadway and Wildasin

(1984, pp. 505—511) argue, one can view this issue as one involving benefit

spillovers across jurisdictional boundaries; a logical response from this

perspective would be a system of matching grants from the central to local

governments to internalize the spillovers. In fact, income—assistance programs

in the United States involve a major role for the central government with a

substantial reliance on matching grants to the states. As Ladd and Doolittle

(1984, pp. 323—327) point out, in 1980 the federal government provided about 74

percent of the funding of public assistance programs in the U.S. Much of this

took the form of matching grants to the states under the AFDC and Medicaid

Programs for which the federal matching share ranged between 50 and 83 percent.

These programs have provided a strong stimulus to levels of benefits. In one

study of the AFDC system, Gramlich (1982) has estimated that the elimination of

the federal matching share would lower benefit levels by an average of about 56

percent.

           These studies raise the important and difficult issues of the appropriate

extent of central incentives for expanded local assistance to the poor. How
                                                                   37


generous should federal matching be and what precise forms should these programs
take?'2 These are hard questions that go beyond the scope of this paper. But

it does seem to us that the theoretical analysis and supporting evidence point

to an important role for the central government in these programs. We are left

uneasy with the new Federalism proposal to establish a decentralized system of

assistance to the poor.




1Z
     There are a great variety of alternative approaches to structuring an
     intergovernmental system of poor relief. For a very useful examination and
     discussion of these alternatives, see Gramlich (1982).
                                                                       38



                                   References




Blank, Rebecca N. "Welfare, Wages and Migration: An Analysis of Locational
         Choice by Female—Headed Households," unpublished paper (Sept. 1983).

Blaug, Mark "The Myth of the Old Poor Law and the Making of the New," Journal
         of Economic History23 (June 1963), pp. 151—84.

Boadway, Robin W., and Wildasin, David E. Public Sector Economics, Second
         Edition (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1984).

Bradford, David F., and Oates, Wallace E. "Suburban Exploitation of Central
         Cities and Governmental Structure," in Harold Hochman and George
         Peterson, eds., Redistribution Through Public Choice (New York:
         Columbia University Press, 1974), pp. 43—92.

Buchanan, James M. "Who Should Distribute What in a Federal System?" in Harold
         Hochmari and George Peterson, eds., Redistribution Through Public
         Choice (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974), pp. 22—42.

Cebula, Richard J. "Interstate Migration and the Tiebout Hypothesis: An
         Analysis According to Race, Sex, and Age," Journal of the Anjerican
         Statistical Association (Dec. 1974), pp. 876—9.

Cebula, Richard J., Kohn, Robert, N., and Vedder, Richard K. "Some Determinants
         of Interstate Migration of Blacks, 1965—1970," Western Economic Journal
         11 (Dec. 1973), pp. 500—5.

Cloward, R. A., and Piven, F. F. "Migration, Politics, and Welfare," Saturday
         Review (Nov. 16, 1968), pp. 31—5.

Curran, C. "Migration and Welfare: An Analysis of Their Relationship,"
         Industrial Journal of EconomIcs (July 1977), pp. 1-16.

Fraser, Derek, ed. The New Poor Law in the Nineteenth Century (New York: St.
         Martin's Press, 1976).

Gallaway, Lowell E., Gilbert, R. F., and Smith, P. E. "The Economics of Labor
         Mobility: An Empirical Analysis," Western Economic Journal 5 (June
         1967), pp. 211—23.

Gramlich, Edward M. "An Econometric Examination of the New Federalism,"
         .Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 2, 1982), pp. 327-70.

           "Reforming U.S. Fiscal Federalism Arrangements," in John Quigley
         and Daniel Rubinfeld, eds., American Domestic Priorities: An
         Economic Appraisal (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985).
                                                                        39

 Gramlich,    Edward N., and Laren, Deborah S. "Migration and Income Redistribution
             Responsibilities," Journal of Human Resources 19 (Fall 1984),
             pp. 489—511.

 Grewal, Bhajan, and Mathews, Russell, "Federalism, Locational Surplus, and the
          Redistributive Role of Subnational Governments," unpublished paper
             (1983).

Kaun, David E. "Negro Migration and Unemployment," Journal of Human Resources
         5 (Spring 1970), pp. 191—207.

Kumar, Rishi "More on Non—White Migration, Welfare Levels, and the Political
         Process," Public Choice 32 (Winter 1977), pp. 151—4.

Ladd, Helen F., and Doolittle, Fred C. "Which Level of Government Should Assist
         the Poor?," National Tax Journal 35 (Sept. 1982), pp. 323-36.

Marshall, J. D. The    Old Poor Law, 1795-1834   (London: MacMillan, 1968).

Oates, Wallace E. fiscal Federalism (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich,
           1972).

________    "An Economist's Perspective on Fiscal Federalism," in W. Oates, ed.
           The Political Economy of Fiscal Federalism (Lexington, Mass.:
           Heath—Lexington, 1977), pp. 3—20.

Orr, Larry L. "Income Transfers as a Public Good: An Application to AFDC,"
         American Economic Review 66 (June 1976), pp. 359—71.

Pauly, Mark V. "Income Redistribution as a Local Public Good," Journal of
         Public Economics 2 (Feb. 1973), pp. 35-58.

Peltzinan, Sam "The Growth of Government," Journal of Law and Economics 23
         (Oct. 1980), Pp. 209—87.

Southwick, Lawrence "Public Welfare Programs and Recipient Migration," Growth
         and Change 12 (Oct. 1981), pp. 22-32.

Stigler, George "The Tenable Range of Functions of Local Government," in Joint
         Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Federal Expenditure Policy for
         Economic Growth and Stability (Washington, D. C.: U.S. Government Printing
         Office, 1957), pp. 213—9.

Tate, William E. The Parish Chest (London: Cambridge University Press, 1969).

Tiebout, Charles "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal of Political
           Economy (Oct. 1956), PP. 416-24.

Tresh, Richard W. Public Finance: A Normative Theory (Piano, Texas: Business
         Publications, 1981).

Varian, Hal R. "Redjatributive Taxation as Social Insurance," Journal of Public
         Economics 14 (Aug. 1980), pp. 49—68.
