NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERAL AID AND EQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF TITLE I IN THE SOUTH
Elizabeth U. Cascio
Nora E. Gordon
Sarah J. Reber
Working Paper 17155
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17155

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

This research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (Award Number 0519126)
and the Spencer Foundation (Award Number 200600131). The authors also gratefully acknowledge
support from the National Academy of Education/Spencer postdoctoral fellowship. We are grateful
to Patricia Anderson, Sandra Black, Julie Cullen, Ethan Lewis, Robert Margo, Leah Platt Boustan,
Douglas Staiger, and seminar participants at Stanford University, the University of Texas, the University
of Wisconsin, and the NBER Economics of Education meeting for helpful comments and to Cyrus
Kosar for excellent research assistance. We thank James Alt for providing the voting data, Douglas
Miller and Jens Ludwig for providing identification of the 300 poorest counties, and Douglas Almond,
Hilary Hoynes, and Diane Schanzenbach for providing REIS data. All errors are our own. The data
presented, the statements made, and the views expressed are solely the responsibility of the authors,
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Elizabeth U. Cascio, Nora E. Gordon, and Sarah J. Reber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Federal Aid and Equality of Educational Opportunity: Evidence from the Introduction of Title
I in the South
Elizabeth U. Cascio, Nora E. Gordon, and Sarah J. Reber
NBER Working Paper No. 17155
June 2011
JEL No. H7,I2,J15
ABSTRACT
Title I of the 1965 Elementary and Secondary Education Act substantially increased federal aid for
education, with the goal of expanding educational opportunity. Combining the timing of the program’s
introduction with variation in its intensity, we find that Title I increased school spending by 46 cents
on the dollar in the average school district in the South and increased spending nearly dollar-for-dollar
in Southern districts with little scope for local offset. Based on this differential fiscal response, we
find that increases in school budgets from Title I decreased high school dropout rates for whites, but
not blacks.

Elizabeth U. Cascio
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
elizabeth.u.cascio@dartmouth.edu
Nora E. Gordon
Georgetown Public Policy Institute
3520 Prospect Street NW, 4th Floor
Washington, DC 20007
and NBER
neg24@georgetown.edu

Sarah J. Reber
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Public Policy
School of Public Affairs
3250 Public Policy Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
sreber@ucla.edu

I.

Introduction
Intergovernmental grants are widely-used tools that may preserve the efficiency benefits

associated with local provision of public goods while addressing equity concerns and crossjurisdictional externalities, as described in the theory of fiscal federalism (Musgrave, 1959;
Oates, 1972, 1999). However, the intent of the granting government may be undermined if
receiving jurisdictions crowd out intergovernmental grants by reducing their own fiscal effort or
spend the grant ineffectively. The latter requirement may be nontrivial in policy contexts in
which the production function for the outcome of ultimate interest is not fully understood.
Perhaps nowhere are these issues more salient in the U.S. than in education finance.
Elementary and secondary education have long been provided by local school districts, but the
importance of intergovernmental grants has increased over the past 50 years as both states and
the federal government have contributed a larger share of total revenue. A large empirical
literature has explored how school finance regimes at the state level have affected school
spending (for example, Fisher and Papke, 2000; Hoxby, 2001). Per-pupil expenditure rose
dramatically in recent decades, and a largely separate empirical literature examines how school
spending during this era has affected student outcomes (see Hanushek, 1986, 1997 for reviews).
Far fewer studies have examined both issues simultaneously or using variation from their policy
origins.1
We do so in this paper, analyzing how Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of 1965 (ESEA) affected school spending and high school dropout rates in the years
immediately following its introduction and the role of local institutional context in mediating
1

Card and Payne (2002) use a national sample to examine how changes in the progressivity of school spending
induced by state school finance reforms changed the distribution of SAT scores by income at the school district
level. A related literature looks within individual states at effects of school finance reforms on local spending and
outcomes: see Clark (2003) on Kentucky, Guryan (2001) on Massachusetts, and Papke (2005, 2008) and Roy (2011)
on Michigan.

1

these effects.2 Title I ESEA had a dramatic effect on federal education spending: During the fall
of 1965, Congress doubled federal expenditure on education by appropriating almost $1 billion
to the new program, equivalent to $7 billion in 2009. The program was intended to assist school
districts in providing programs for “educationally disadvantaged” children, but limited
enforcement made the Title I grants highly fungible in practice, allowing them to take the form
of general education aid (Martin and McClure, 1969).
We focus the present analysis on the impacts of Title I in the former Confederacy, which
we refer to as the South. The South benefited disproportionately from the program and received
grants that were relatively large, representing more than 20 percent of existing school spending
in the average district. There was also wide variation across districts in the capacity to
expropriate these large grants, making it possible for us to test whether the program affected
educational attainment only where it increased spending on schools. The effects of Title I on the
financing of schools and educational attainment are of particular historical interest for the South,
where vast racial inequities in school resources and educational attainment developed after
Reconstruction (Margo, 1990, Card and Krueger, 1992, 1996; Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon,
2006), and where education spending was quite low and educational outcomes poor by national
standards even for whites. It was stark inequalities such as these that Title I sought to remedy.
We begin by evaluating the impact of Title I on school finance, combining the timing of
the program’s introduction with variation across school districts in its intensity, which was tied
to child poverty in 1960. Using newly-collected data and controlling for other local
characteristics, we estimate that Title I grants increased school spending by 46 cents on the dollar

2

Our analysis contributes to a growing literature on the effects of the introduction of other “War on Poverty”
programs, including Medicare (Almond, Chay, and Greenstone, 2006; Finkelstein, 2007), Head Start (Ludwig and
Miller, 2007), and the Food Stamp program (Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2009; Almond, Hoynes, and
Schanzenbach, 2011).

2

in the average Southern district and crowded out local revenue, not state aid. These findings are
robust to the inclusion of a wide range of controls, and the changes in the relationship between
child poverty and fiscal outcomes are closely timed with the introduction of Title I, supporting a
causal interpretation of the findings. At least in the South, the progressivity that characterizes
school finance today began to emerge well before the well-studied state school finance
equalization movement — albeit on a much smaller scale — in the mid-1960s as Title I went
into effect.3
We next show that Southern institutions made crowd-out of Title I less than would have
been predicted based on the income elasticity demand for education spending alone. In
particular, Title I increased school spending significantly more — nearly dollar-for-dollar — in
districts where the Title I grant was large relative to pre-program local revenue. These districts
were arguably constrained by the large state grants and mandatory local contributions for
education characteristic of the South and unable to reduce local effort as much as they would
have liked, if at all. This finding demonstrates the importance of accounting for institutional
environments in predicting and evaluating the effects of intergovernmental grants. For example,
intergovernmental grants should only affect the ultimate outcome of interest in institutional
settings where they increase spending.4
In this vein, we exploit the differential fiscal response by scope for local offset to identify
the effects of Title I-induced spending on high school dropout rates of 18 and 19 year olds. The
results suggest that "money mattered": each additional $100 of Title I-induced annual current
expenditure per pupil (2009 dollars) reduced white dropout rates by about 3 percentage points
3

Margo (1990) and Goldin and Katz (2008) discuss the evolution of school finance earlier in the 20th century.
In a different policy context, Baicker and Staiger (2005) estimate that in states with institutional features that
enabled expropriation, about half of federal Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital funding was crowded out by
state governments, but the program was still a cost-effective means of reducing infant mortality. Van der Klaauw
(2008), on the other hand, shows that "Title I schools" in New York City had no additional resources, so not
surprisingly, there was no effect of Title I revenue on educational outcomes.
4

3

over the 1960s. For blacks, by contrast, the estimates are statistically insignificant and wrongsigned, and, though consistent with moderate benefits of Title I-induced increases in school
spending, precise enough to rule out effect sizes as large as those found for whites.
Overall, our findings suggest that Title I can account for over 20 percent of the growth in
school spending and about one third of the decline in white high school dropout in the South
over the 1960s. Local control over the use of Title I funds may have limited their scope to
improve outcomes for blacks, possibly because there was little to prevent school districts from
directing Title I funds to schools attended by whites, which remained largely separate from those
attended by blacks in the South through 1968.5 Consistent with Reber's (2010) analysis for
Louisiana, however, we also find that, separate from the effects of Title I, spending increased
more and black high school dropout rates fell more in districts with higher black enrollment
shares, where blacks experienced larger improvements in school quality over the 1960s as a
result of desegregation.6
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides background on
the Title I program. Section III describes a simple framework for analyzing intergovernmental
grants, incorporating important institutional features of Southern school finance. Section IV
analyzes the fiscal effects of the program, and Section V examines heterogeneity in these effects
across districts. In Section VI, we assess the impact of Title I-induced expenditure on high
school dropout rates by race. Section VII concludes.
II.

Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act

5

In the 1968 Supreme Court ruling in Green v. New Kent County (391 U.S. 430), districts could no longer defend
racially-identifiable schools by nominally offering “freedom of choice” plans. See Cascio et al. (2008) for more on
the timing of Southern desegregation.
6
This result is most analagous to Reber (2010), but a larger literature suggests that both desegregation and predesegregation narrowing of black-white school quality gaps benefited blacks on a variety of outcomes (Card and
Krueger, 1992; Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon, 2006; Guryan, 2004; Johnson, 2011).

4

Title I funds were first allocated to school districts in the fall of 1965.7 In keeping with its
policy origins as part of President Johnson’s “War on Poverty,” the Title I formula relied heavily
on child poverty counts in determining allocations to school districts. At the program’s start,
districts received a state-specific payment (the “state factor”) per eligible child. Eligibility counts
were largely determined by the number of 5 to 17 year olds with family income below $2000 in
the 1960 Census. The state factor was initially equal to 50 percent of statewide mean current
expenditures, net of federal revenue, per pupil, lagged two years. Starting in fall 1967, however,
variation in the state factor remained only for those states that spent above the national average,
and the allocation per eligible child in all other states (including all of the states in our sample
except Florida) was leveled up to the national average. In the South, this meant that child poverty
was essentially the sole determinant of Title I grants after 1967 (U.S. DHEW, 1969).
The influx of federal funds to the South from Title I was unprecedented. Figure I shows
that the federal government was a negligible source of revenue for the average Southern school
district prior to passage of ESEA in 1965, with the limited federal funds largely disbursed
through Aid to Federally Impacted Areas and the National Defense Education Act. As shown in
the second column of Table I, in 1964, federal revenue in the average Southern district in our
sample only amounted to $65 per pupil (in real 2009 dollars) – about 3.5 percent of per-pupil
current expenditures. By the end of the decade, per-pupil federal revenue had increased
dramatically, by $420 (column (5)), and had come to represent 17 percent of per-pupil current
expenditure in the average Southern district.
There was little about Title I’s enforcement that ensured the program would translate into
increased compensatory services for poor children. In the early years of ESEA, regulations
specified only that Title I funds should “supplement and not supplant” local funds; while the
7

See Bailey and Mosher (1968) for a comprehensive description of Title I administration in its early years.

5

Department of Health, Education, and Welfare conducted district-level audits, it did not require
districts to return funds that were misused. The program was criticized as a fungible supplement
to general revenue as opposed to a targeted and defined compensatory intervention, most
influentially in a 1969 report by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund (Martin and McClure, 1969).
Such criticisms sparked a series of regulations and legislative changes still embedded in the
system today, which is often criticized as being overly restrictive and compliance-focused. But
even today’s complex regulatory framework and serious enforcement efforts cannot prevent
districts from appropriating Title I funds, either for private consumption or for other educational
purposes.8
Thus, Title I essentially took the form of a restricted block grant for education to a local
school district during the period of study. Accordingly, we consider current expenditure on
education to be the "targeted good" of the program. To the extent that Title I did raise current
expenditure, it could easily have been focused on instructional areas or groups of students other
than those nominally designated as its beneficiaries. This is particularly interesting for the South,
where prior to 1968, most districts operated racially identifiable schools and may therefore have
had some ability to direct additional funding disproportionately to whites.
III.

A Framework for Understanding Fiscal Responses to Title I Grants in the South
How much Title I translated into higher current expenditure on education depends on

how much lower levels of government offset Title I revenue by reducing their own contributions
to education spending. Both local and state governments could have responded to the influx of
federal funding, so we consider each in turn.
III.A. Local District Responses to Title I Grants
8

For example, see Gordon (2004) on how maintenance of effort requirements do not prevent crowd out of local
revenue and Roza (2010) on how comparability requirements do not ensure that Title I funds are concentrated in the
poorest schools within districts. Cohen and Moffitt (2009) discuss the range of implementation challenges.

6

We begin with a standard neoclassical model where a local school district (presumably
the median voter) chooses its level of consumption of educational services and all other goods,
including private consumption.9 Districts can reallocate consumption by altering the tax rate. We
incorporate into the standard model two important institutional features of Southern state school
finance systems during the 1960s. First, state aid was significant, accounting for well over half of
the typical school district’s total revenue (Figure I and Table I), compared to about 30 percent
outside the South. The vast majority of this aid (typically upwards of 80 percent) was distributed
through minimum foundation programs (MFPs), which took the form of a restricted block grant
from the school district perspective.10 Second, school districts could not reduce local revenue
below some minimum, since state constitutions or MFPs in all states in our sample imposed a
minimum required contribution to education on local school districts. Both of these factors – the
magnitude of state education aid and minimum required local contributions to education – would
have limited the scope for Southern school districts to crowd out Title I grants.
Figure II illustrates the choice problem for a Southern district before and after Title I
funds were distributed. The innermost budget constraint (BC1) shows the pure local finance case
where prices are normalized to one and the district could allocate total income I freely between
educational services (E) and all other goods (C), including private consumption. BC2 accounts
for state aid and the minimum local contribution with a parallel outward shift of the budget

9

The median voter in the South would have been white and Southern school boards would have been controlled by
whites throughout this period in most or all of the districts in our sample (see U.S. Commission on Civil Rights,
1968). Schools were also largely segregated by race until at least 1969, raising the possibility that funding was not
allocated equally across schools within districts, particularly by race. This is important in interpreting the effects of
Title I on educational outcomes by race, and we return to this issue below. For simplicity, we do not incorporate race
into the model explicitly.
10
Not all of the programs were referred to as MFPs, but those that were not had the same general structure. MFPs
contrast to many modern state school finance regimes which employ various forms of matching and therefore
change relative prices. Grants under state MFPs were not pure block grants in the sense that some district choices
(e.g. the distribution of teacher experience) could affect the amount of the grant. We abstract from these issues here,
since they likely had small effects and in any case are unrelated to the Title I grant.

7

constraint, and thus represents the scenario before Title I. A district had to spend at least as much
as the state grant plus the minimum local contribution on education, so the maximum spending
on C was I less the minimum local contribution; that is, the dashed part of the budget constraint
was inaccessible. The introduction of Title I caused a further parallel shift in the budget
constraint to BC3 (the figure depicts a large Title I grant for illustrative purposes). After Title I,
the district had to spend at least as much as previously required plus the Title I grant on
education, so the dashed part of the new budget constraint was inaccessible.
The Title I grant produced only an income effect. School districts would have liked to
increase their spending on both E and C according to the relevant income elasticities, in which
case the increase in E would have been less than the size of the grant.11 A district would have
increased E more than this only if its optimal bundle was on the inaccessible (dashed) portion of
the budget constraint, in which case, it would have been forced to the corner (point Z). The
presence of state aid and minimum local contributions in the South increased the chances that
some districts were constrained and increased E more than the income elasticity would imply,
and this effect would have been larger when either the state grant or the minimum local
contribution was larger. The figure illustrates an extreme case where spending increases one-forone with Title I: the district at the corner before the implementation of Title I (point X), would
have liked to move to point Y on BC3, given the income elasticity of education demand, but was
restricted to choose the new corner, Z.
Much of the literature on intergovernmental grants finds that grants increase spending on
the targeted good more than would be implied by the income elasticity of demand. This is
referred to as a “flypaper effect,” since the grant disproportionately “sticks where it hits.” In

11

In the language of Bradford and Oates (1971), this assumes that a sole grant to the collectivity of individuals in the
school district has identical impact as a set of individual-level grants summing to the same amount.

8

some cases, these effects have been demonstrated to be statistical artifacts generated by omitted
variables, such as local preferences or other characteristics determining the magnitude of the
grant (Knight, 2002; Gordon, 2004). In others, the effect is attributed either to some disconnect
between the true preferences of voters and spending chosen by governments (e.g., due to
“bureaucratic capture,” when a constituency for a specific program develops and is able to
prevent voters from reducing spending), or to behavioral tendencies that lead voters to view
spending out of local taxes differently than spending out of intergovernmental grants (see Hines
and Thaler (1995) for a review). The framework above suggests that if institutional constraints
limit the scope for offset, grants should generate larger increases in spending on the targeted
good than predicted by the income elasticity even assuming the rational choices of the median
voter are not suppressed or altered by bureaucratic actions.12 We assess the importance of such
constraints in Section V by examining whether spending on education increased more as a result
of Title I among districts that were more likely to face constraints on local offset.
III.B. State Responses to Title I Grants
The objective function of state governments is more complicated than that of a school
district due to its additional policy functions beyond education, and we do not explicitly model it
here. We can say, however, how a state government wishing to replicate the pre-Title I
distribution of total aid (state plus federal) across districts after Title I was implemented would
have responded. First, the state would have reduced the average grant to account for the fact that
on average districts were receiving more federal aid. Second, aid to poorer districts, which
received larger Title I grants, would have been reduced relative to aid to richer districts.

12

Relatedly, Brooks and Phillips (2010) find that federal funds stimulate higher levels of expenditure in local
jurisdictions subject to tax and expenditure limits (TELs); they posit that TELs constrain such jurisdictions to
suboptimally low levels of spending prior to receipt of the intergovernmental grant, explaining the differential
responsiveness.

9

Our empirical strategy allows for identification only of the latter type of response —
whether states changed how progressively they distributed funds. Allocation of funding under
the MFPs typical of the South during this period was formula-based, and the poverty rate did not
directly enter the funding formula in any state in our sample; thus, it might appear difficult for
states to significantly change the progressivity of funding without undertaking a major reform.
On the other hand, the formulas were complex, with inputs that may have been correlated with
poverty rates, and in the early 1960s state aid was indeed moderately progressive.13 Ultimately, it
is an empirical question to what extent states were able and willing to change the progressivity of
their funding formulas in response to Title I.
IV.

Fiscal Reponses to Title I

IV.A. Empirical Strategy
Recall that Title I funds were initially allocated by a simple linear rule: districts received
a constant amount of federal funds for each Title I eligible student. Title I eligibility, in turn, was
determined primarily based on the number of 5 to 17 year-olds with family income below $2,000
in the 1960 Census. A transparent approach to estimating the fiscal impacts of Title I’s
introduction is therefore to explore how the gradient of a fiscal outcome in “initial” district child
poverty, defined using these eligibility counts, changed over the 1960s. The identifying
assumption is that, if the Title I program had not been introduced, there would not have been a
break in this gradient as of 1965.
More formally, we begin with the estimating equation
(1)

ydst =δd + γst + θt child_povertyd + x'd βt + εdst .

13

Reber (2011) shows that the state of Louisiana was able to redistribute state aid substantially in response to
desegregation (directing additional funding to districts with higher black enrollment shares) by subtly manipulating
the parameters of the existing MFP.

10

The dependent variable ydst represents one of four fiscal outcomes, each measured in per-pupil
terms and in real 2009 dollars – current expenditure and revenue by source (federal, state, and
local) – in district d in state s in the fall of year t. child_povertyd is the initial child poverty rate in
district d, which we define as the ratio of the district’s Title I eligibility count in 1965, based
largely on the 1960 Census, to its 1960 enrollment. This measure captures the effective poverty
rate for distribution of Title I funds had district enrollment not diverged from its 1960 level. δd is
a district intercept, which accounts for unobserved differences across districts in school finance
that are fixed over time; γst is a state-by-year specific intercept, which accounts for any yearspecific shocks to fiscal outcomes common to all districts in a state; and xd is a vector including
other district characteristics. We estimate model (1) using annual school finance data from 1961
to 1969 collected from print publications from the nine Southern states where such data are
available.14 All the data and sources are described in detail in Appendix A.
The coefficients of interest in model (1) are the θt ’s, which characterize the time path in
fiscal outcomes in initially richer versus initially poorer districts. If Title I raised school
expenditures, we would expect to see an increase in the poverty gradient in per-pupil current
expenditure — i.e., in the progressivity of spending per pupil — as of 1965. Note, however, that
model (1) does not force the effects of Title I to be isolated to the period in which the program
was in place or to be the same across all years after the program was implemented. Rather,
model (1) is a flexible specification that allows us to explore not only whether the poverty
gradient in school spending changed in 1965, but also whether the poverty gradient in spending

14

These states are Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee,
and Virginia. Most districts in these states are included in our estimation sample, which is described in Appendix A.
We are not able to incorporate districts from Arkansas and Texas – the two other former Confederate states – due to
limitations in available data.

11

was already changing in the early 1960s. If Title I affected fiscal outcomes, pre-program changes
in the poverty gradient should be small relative to post-program changes.
Model (1) allows for time-varying effects of a vector of other initial district
characteristics. We are most concerned about controlling for district characteristics correlated
with initial poverty and associated with changes in demand for school spending in the mid1960s. In this vein, the most important threat to identification stems from school desegregation.
The likelihood that the average Southern district had any blacks in school with whites increased
sharply between 1964 and 1966, in part because the Civil Rights Act (CRA) tied receipt of Title I
funds to desegregation (Cascio, et al., 2010). The desegregation required was limited, and most
likely did not change the (white) median voter’s demand for education funding, as racially
separate schools were maintained over this period. But between 1968 and 1970, the
desegregation required for CRA compliance and by federal courts quickly intensified, and
racially identifiable schools in the South were largely dismantled (Cascio, et al., 2008). The
elimination of separate black and white schools required a major reorganization of schools and
may have changed demand for school spending on public education. Demand may have fallen –
particularly if whites left the public schools in large numbers15 – or increased as whites
attempted to increase the spending in newly integrated schools to the level to which they were
accustomed in their schools before desegregation. Reber (2011) finds evidence in favor of the
latter in a study of Louisiana over this period.
Following Reber (2011), our primary control for the effects of desegregation on district
finances is the district’s initial (1960) black enrollment share. Despite a half-century of progress
towards convergence, black-white school resource gaps remained larger in districts with higher

15

See Clotfelter (1976), Reber (2011), and Baum-Snow and Lutz (2011) for evidence on white flight to private
schools as a result of desegregation in the South.

12

black enrollment shares at mid-century (Margo, 1990; Card and Krueger, 1992; Reber 2011). As
a result, maintaining whites’ school quality required larger increases in funding in blacker
districts. Reber (2011) shows that such funding increases began in Louisiana as early as 1966.
Because black enrollment share is positively correlated with child_povertyd , omitting it would
affect estimates of the θt ’s in model (1). However, once (linear) black enrollment share is
included in the model, controlling for it more flexibly or adding other controls for the intensity of
desegregation in the South during the 1960s does little to affect our estimates.
In addition to 1960 black enrollment share, our main specification also controls for the
share of the vote cast for Strom Thurmond in the 1948 presidential election, a proxy for
segregationist preferences, and for 1960 enrollment, a measure of district size, both of which
predict the pace of desegregation in the South over the period of study (Cascio, et al., 2008). In
robustness checks, we also include controls for the share of whites enrolled in private schools in
spring 1970, the extent of school desegregation, and an indicator for whether the district was
desegregating under court order in fall 1970, each of which might be related to the intensity of
desegregation. Summary statistics for the independent variables are presented in Table II. In the
average district, the 1960 share of children in poverty and the black enrollment share were both
about one third, and average enrollment was just under 7,000 students. The average district was
in a county where 34 percent of the electorate voted for Thurmond in 1948.
We also explore alternative hypotheses for changes in the poverty gradient in school
finances starting in 1965, including increases in black political power following the Voting
Rights Act (VRA) of 1965 and funding increases under Head Start, another program for poor
children implemented in the mid-1960s that sometimes channeled funds through school districts.
As a proxy for the former, we control for the black voter registration rate in the early 1960s, an

13

indicator for how suppressed the vote was before VRA (Alt, 1995).16 As a proxy for the latter,
we include an indicator for whether the district was in one of the 300 poorest counties, which
received special grant-writing assistance for Head Start in the 1960s (Ludwig and Miller, 2007).
Once the black share of enrollment is included in the regression, the coefficients of interest are
little affected by the inclusion of a wide range of controls.
IV.B. Graphical Evidence
We first present the estimates of the flexible model graphically. Figure III plots yearspecific coefficients on child_povertyd from model (1) estimated for the key fiscal variables. In
addition to district and state-by-year fixed effects, our baseline specification includes the yearspecific effects of characteristics that were measured before the implementation of Title I and are
available for the full sample: the 1960 black enrollment share, 1960 district enrollment (natural
log), 1948 Thurmond vote share (quintile indicators), and whether the district is in one of the 300
poorest counties. The standard errors are clustered on county to account for possible correlation
in the error terms over time within county.17 The point estimates are represented by dots; the x's
denote 95% confidence intervals.18
Panel A shows that the poverty gradient in per-pupil federal revenue was little changed in
the early 1960s but increased in 1965, the first year in which Title I funds were distributed. The
estimates for per-pupil current expenditure, shown in Panel B, follow the same pattern: the
progressivity of school spending trended little in the early 1960s but increased in 1965,
suggesting that Title I played a causal role in tipping the balance of school expenditure from

16

The exact year black voter registration is measured differs across states subject to data availability.
We cluster standard errors on county because we use county-level information to predict district-level poverty
rates (see Appendix A), and because Thurmond vote share is measured at the county level.
18
Only the trend in the coefficients on child_povertyd , and not the level, is identified in model (1); we therefore
rescale the graph so that the 1961 coefficient is equal to the coefficient on child_povertyd in 1961 from a crosssectional regression including all of the same controls except district fixed effects.
17

14

richer to poorer districts in the South. However, the increase in the poverty gradient in per-pupil
school expenditure was less than the increase in the poverty gradient in per-pupil federal
funding: Title I funds did not translate one-for-one to higher spending on education. Panel C
shows that the distribution of state aid was somewhat progressive throughout the 1960s, but the
progressivity did not change after 1965, suggesting that state governments did not offset Title I
grants.19 On the other hand, Panel D shows that the poverty gradient in local effort became more
negative after 1965, suggestive of local effort declining in response to Title I.
In sum, Figure III shows that, relative to richer districts, poorer districts experienced
larger increases in federal revenue and current expenditure per pupil and larger declines in local
revenue per pupil over the 1960s. These changes were closely timed with the introduction of
Title I in 1965, suggesting that the introduction of Title I increased spending on education, but
less than one for one, as local districts responded by reducing their own effort.
IV.C. Change Regressions
To facilitate tests of statistical significance for changes in the poverty gradient associated
with Title I, to assess the sensitivity of the results to further controls, and to present results with
more interpretable scaling, we estimate regressions for changes in the school finance variables
around the time of Title I implementation. Differencing (1) across any two years, we arrive at:
(2)

∆yds = γs + θchild_povertyd + xd 'β + ∆εds .

19

Our research design does not allow us to identify the effects of Title I on average state aid, but what evidence
there is suggests that state offset on this margin was likely minimal. First, as shown in Figure I, there is a strong
upward trend in state revenue over the late 1960s, although of course this trend may have been even steeper in the
absence of Title I. Second, if states that received more Title I funding responded by reducing average state funding,
we might expect to see a negative relationship between the state-level poverty rate and average state funding. In fact,
the state fixed effects in the model for changes in per-pupil state revenues — a measure of the average change in the
state — are uncorrelated with the state poverty rate. Ultimately, we do not have a credible source of variation with
which to identify the average state response, so we view this evidence as suggestive.

15

The state fixed effects, γs , account for trends in fiscal outcomes common to districts in the same
state, and the coefficients on the controls, β, give changes over time in the gradients of fiscal
outcomes in a district’s initial characteristics. θ is the coefficient of interest, indicating the extent
to which the gradient of fiscal outcomes in initial district child poverty changed over time. The
district fixed effect in (1) is absorbed in taking the first difference.
We estimate model (2) for long changes around the introduction of Title I – one postprogram (1964 to 1969) and one pre-program (1961 to 1964). The post-program period is
sufficiently long to allow time for districts and states to respond to the new program, such that
the results might reflect a new equilibrium.20 In practice, the results are not sensitive to the
choice of end year. Summary statistics for the dependent variables are presented in the last two
columns of Table I.
The first column of Table III presents estimates of model (2) for the post-program
change, using the same controls included in the regressions plotted in Figure III; the coefficient
on child_povertyd is thus simply the difference in coefficients for 1964 and 1969 shown in the
figure. In the model for the change in per-pupil federal funding, in Panel A, the coefficient on the
1960 child poverty rate – $929 (with a standard error of $74) – is, as expected, quite close to the
average state factor in the Title I grant formula as of 1969 – $954, shown in Table II.21 Per-pupil
current expenditure increased by $425 more between 1964 and 1969 in a district with only poor
20

Gordon (2004) shows how local crowd-out of Title I in the 1990s phased in over a three-year period following
changes in grant amounts. An additional consideration is that 1969 was after the Nixon Administration stopped
enforcement of the federal-funds-withholding provisions of CRA (Orfield, 2000), breaking the explicit link between
desegregation and Title I receipt. We do not consider any later years because the federal government began
providing aid to desegregating districts in a way that appears correlated with child poverty in 1970.
21
If all districts received their formula amounts under the Title I program, we would expect the change in the
poverty gradient from 1964 to any year from 1965 to 1969 to be roughly equal to the average grant received for each
eligible child (the “state factor”) in that year. The coefficients on child_povertyd in 1965 and 1966 are less than this
since some Southern districts did not receive Title I funds due to non-compliance with CRA. Data on the state factor
in the Title I formula was drawn from county-level data published in a series of Congressional reports. See
Appendix A.

16

children compared to a district with no poor children (Panel B). Rescaling by the corresponding
change in per-pupil federal revenue, these estimates imply that each additional dollar increase in
per-pupil federal revenue received over 1964 to 1969 generated a 46 cent increase in per-pupil
current expenditure.22
We formalize this rescaling of the estimates into more intuitive “dollar-for-dollar” terms
in column (2), using child_poverty as an instrument for the change in federal revenue in a twostage least squares (TSLS) regression. Focusing on these estimates, there is little evidence of
crowd-out by state governments (Panel C), but local revenue declined by about 33 cents for each
additional dollar of federal revenue (Panel D). Thus, our estimates leave a statistically
significant 26 cents of federal revenue unaccounted for (Panel E): each dollar of additional
federal revenue increased current expenditure by 46 cents, but there was only 28 cents of total
crowd out (33 cents local less five cents state). This differential could represent an increase in
spending on capital and debt service, which are included in total, but not current, expenditure.
The data we have on total expenditure are incomplete and less reliable than the data for current
expenditure,23 but when we estimate the model for the subset of states for which we have data,
the results are similar to those for current expenditure but less precise, suggesting Title I did not
increase spending on capital and debt service. Technically, this implies that districts used some

22

Feldstein (1978) provides cross-sectional flypaper estimates of Title I from 1970, and finds spending increases by
80 cents per dollar of grant. Gordon (2004) exploits formula-based changes in funding in the early 1990s and
estimates essentially full local crowd out and no impact on current spending, but with large confidence intervals
(Gordon, 2004). Our findings here thus fall between the extremely wide range of limited estimates in the literature.
23
For two states (NC and GA), we were not able to obtain data on total expenditure. Reporting of total expenditure
is not as consistent across states as current expenditure and revenue by source, and because total expenditure
includes capital expenditure, it exhibits much more year-to-year variation. In addition, while in theory, total revenue
should be similar to total expenditure, at least on average and over longer time periods, in practice, this is not always
the case. Capital outlays (part of total expenditure) can generate substantial departures of total expenditure from total
revenue in a given year. Finally, at least some states do not count proceeds from bond issues as “revenue,” while the
capital improvements financed by bond issues are included in total expenditure; thus, revenue can be persistently
lower than expenditure.

17

of the new federal revenue to reduce debt or build up reserves, which would imply lower taxes in
the future and could therefore be considered another form of local crowd-out.
Estimates of (2) for pre-program changes, given in column (3), largely confirm the visual
impression in Figure III that changes in the poverty gradient in the years leading up to Title I
implementation were small relative to the effects observed after. Per-pupil current expenditure
declined slightly more over the early 1960s in poorer districts, but the coefficient is not
statistically significant. There is some evidence of a small disproportionate shift from local to
state funding for poorer districts, as the coefficient in the state revenue regression is positive and
the coefficient in the local revenue regression is negative, significant at the 5 and 10 percent
level, respectively. As can be seen in Figure III, these changes were small relative to changes in
fiscal outcomes after 1964, and when we include separate controls for pre-program changes in
per-pupil state and local revenue, the results are unchanged (results reported below in column (8)
of Table IV). Still, the estimates in column (2) of Table III assume that there would have been no
trend in the poverty gradient between 1964 and 1969 in the absence of the program. If, similar to
the approach taken in Finkelstein (2007), we instead take the trend from 1961 to 1964 as the
counterfactual, our substantive conclusions that Title I increased school expenditure and reduced
local effort are unchanged, though the estimates from this exercise imply slightly larger
expenditure responses and slightly less local offset (results available on request).
While our estimates do not account for every cent of Title I revenue, they have
confidence intervals that allow us to make economically meaningful conclusions about the
program’s fiscal impacts. We can rule out substantial reallocation of state funds, and the
confidence interval for local revenue suggests local districts engaged in economically
meaningful offset. The estimate for current expenditure (the targeted good) is significantly

18

different from both one and zero, and also significantly larger than existing estimates of the
income elasticity of education demand would imply – 12 to 19 cents per dollar in the average
district, according to our back-of-the-envelope estimate.24 This suggests that at least some
districts were either constrained to increase spending on education more than they would have
liked given income and prices, or that grants disproportionately “stuck” for other reasons. We
explore this in more detail in the next section.
IV.D.

Robustness
As described above, the primary threat to identification in our empirical strategy comes

from desegregation-related changes to school finance. Our main control for the effects of
desegregation is black enrollment share. Before exploring how our estimates change with more
extensive controls, it is useful to confirm that the relationship between black enrollment share
and changes in fiscal outcomes align with expectations. To this end, we present coefficients on
black share from estimates of model (2) in Table III. Black enrollment share is positively related
to changes in per-pupil current expenditure over 1964 to 1969, consistent with the prediction that
demand for funding increased more in blacker districts due to desegregation and with the results
for Louisiana reported in Reber (2011).
Table IV shows that the coefficients of interest are remarkably insensitive to the inclusion
of more controls or more flexible functional forms. Column (1) repeats the TSLS estimates in
column (2) of Table III. In column (2), the indicator for being in one of the poorest 300 counties
and the Thurmond vote share controls are removed; the estimates are little changed. Columns
(3) and (4) show the estimates under alternative specifications of 1960 enrollment and black

24

Put differently, the income elasticity would have to be about 1.5 to explain our estimates of the Title I-induced
increase in education spending. Fisher and Papke (2001) review the literature and cite income elasticity of demand
for public education spending estimates that do not approach this, ranging from 0.40 to 0.65. See Appendix B for
details on this calculation.

19

share in a model that otherwise includes only state fixed effects: in column (3) black share and
enrollment are both interacted with state fixed effects, and column (4) is the same as (1) but
includes indicators for deciles of black enrollment share in lieu of the linear term. The results are
not sensitive to the functional form of black share and enrollment, so we use the baseline linear
specification.
The next columns in Table IV add several sets of controls to further account for the
effects of desegregation and other coincident policy changes. In column (5), we include several
direct measures of desegregation by 1970 –the dissimilarity index and an indicator for whether
the district was desegregating under court supervision at that time25 –as well as the share of the
white population enrolled in private schools in spring 1970.26 Column (6) adds a control for the
1960 black voter registration rate to examine the hypothesis that increases in black political
participation after VRA changed the demand for school spending.27 Estimates from a
specification that controls for changes in federal spending on other programs at the county level
— including spending on Head Start, public assistance, retirement programs, and health
programs — are reported in column (7). Finally, we include controls for pre-program changes in
per-pupil local and state revenue (separately) in column (8). The estimates are quite similar to the
baseline estimates regardless of which additional controls are included.
V.

Heterogeneous Fiscal Responses to Title I Grants
For the average Southern school district, each dollar of federal revenue distributed

through Title I in the 1960s increased current expenditure by about 46 cents – more than what
25

Controlling for variables measured after the introduction of Title I raises the possibility of reverse causation, as
changes in financing could theoretically influence desegregation, so we do not include these variables in the main
specification. In this historical context we do not perceive this is a likely or influential mechanism, however. Prior to
the passage of ESEA, there was essentially no variation in these desegregation variables.
26
Ideally, we would use the change in private enrollment, but these data are not available for 1960. Private
enrollment rates were historically quite low in the South but increased somewhat during the period of desegregation.
27
Voting-related changes in blacks’ political power are likely also related to the black share of the population, which
is highly correlated with the black share of enrollment already included in the regression.

20

reasonable estimates of the income elasticity of demand for education would imply. What forces
underlie this finding? One possibility, highlighted in Section III, is that current expenditure
increased more – and local revenue declined less – in districts where the median voter wanted to
consume on the restricted portion of the budget constraint but was forced to the corner.28 We do
not have the data to identify the corner precisely, but we can test whether districts that were more
likely to have been constrained, given their prior local effort and Title I grant, increased current
expenditure more and reduced local funding less. In addition to furthering our understanding of
how fiscal constraints might shape responses to intergovernmental grants, this analysis of
heterogeneity provides a valuable internal validity check on our earlier estimates and the
foundations of our strategy for estimating the effects of Title I on student outcomes.
To understand our measure of “scope for local offset,” it is useful to return to Figure II. A
larger Title I grant would have shifted out BC3 by more, increasing the probability that a district
preferred to consume on its inaccessible portion, and districts with low initial local revenue
would have had less scope to offset the Title I grant by lowering local revenue, all else equal.
Thus, the districts most likely to have been constrained were those that received large Title I
grants relative to the local revenue they would have raised in the absence of the program in the
same year. We cannot observe this counterfactual local revenue, but it is likely highly correlated
with local revenue prior to Title I. We therefore use the ratio of the district’s 1969 Title I grant to
1964 (pre-program) local revenue as a proxy for the scope for local offset. This proxy orders
districts by their scope for offset but has no natural scale. We split the sample at the 75th
percentile and consider the top quartile to encompass “low scope for offset” districts; our
findings are qualitatively similar but the differences less dramatic if we split the sample into two

28

Differences in income elasticities would also generate differences in fiscal responses. We are not aware of
credible estimates of how the income elasticity of demand for education varies across districts.

21

equal-sized groups (available on request). Because low scope for offset districts received larger
Title I grants, these districts were poorer on average, but there is significant variation in the
poverty rate within each category.29
Table V, Panel A shows how fiscal responses to Title I varied by scope for offset.
Instead of estimating separate TSLS models for each subsample, we estimate a pooled regression
so as to test whether fiscal responses to Title I were significantly different across the two groups.
We instrument for the change in per-pupil federal revenue and its interaction with the low scope
for offset indicator with the child poverty rate and its interaction with low scope for offset and
include interactions between low scope for offset and most controls in the baseline specification
(black share in enrollment, district enrollment, and state dummies). The estimates from a fullyinteracted model are very similar but slightly less precise, and the findings are similar when we
include the different sets of controls in Table IV (results available on request).
The results suggest that current expenditure increased significantly more between 1964
and 1969 in districts with low scope for offset – 91 cents for each dollar of federal revenue,
compared to 23 cents for districts without low scope for offset (column (1)). There are no
significant differences across these two groups of districts in state revenue responses (column
(2)), though the standard errors do not allow us to rule out economically interesting effects. The
results for local revenue (column (3)) suggest that the quarter of districts with low scope for
offset did not reduce local revenue in response to federal funding, while the remaining districts
reduced local revenue by 58 cents for each dollar of federal revenue. The coefficients actually
suggest (marginally significant) crowding in among low scope for offset districts. As shown in
Appendix Figure I, the poverty gradients of per-pupil current expenditure and per-pupil local

29

The standard deviation of the child poverty rate is 0.17 in the full sample (Table II). Significant variance remains
within each of the two scope for offset subsamples, with a standard deviation of 0.14 for each.

22

revenue for the two “scope for offset” groups diverged quickly after ESEA was passed, but
trended similarly – and changed little – in the early 1960s.
In light of race relations in the South, we also examine heterogeneity by racial
composition. Variation in fiscal effects of Title I by black enrollment share may map to other
sources of a “flypaper effect,” such as the median (white) voter being more willing to spend on
blacks out of federal revenue than out of local taxes. Panel B shows estimates analogous to those
in Panel A, but stratifying districts by black share. The results suggest that current expenditure
increased by about twice as much per dollar of federal revenue in high black enrollment share
districts, due to less local offset.30 While this is consistent with whites being more willing to
spend on blacks out of federal revenue, racial composition is also correlated with scope for
offset, since high black share districts received larger Title I grants and had lower initial local
revenue. Panel C presents estimates of the specification with both interactions included to
determine whether racial composition or scope for offset is responsible for the differential
response. For current expenditure and local revenue, the coefficient on the interaction between
low scope for offset and the change in federal funding is similar to that in Panel A and maintains
significance at the one percent level, while the coefficient on the interaction between high black
share and the change in federal funding becomes statistically insignificant and is close to zero.
The fact that the scope for offset interaction coefficients are relatively stable across
specifications, combined with the theoretical prediction that scope for offset should matter for
fiscal responses, suggests that institutional factors were an important mediator of fiscal responses
to Title I. However, we cannot rule out that districts we characterize as “low scope for offset”
were not legally constrained to the corner solution, but rather were disproportionately subject to
30

Again, we divided the sample into quartiles and define districts in the top quartile (corresponding to at least
approximately 50 percent black enrollment) as “high black enrollment share.” Results are similar but less stark if we
define high black enrollment share as above the median.

23

bureaucratic capture or mental accounting. The point estimates can be squared with the
assumption of no other such sources of flypaper effects only if a non-trivial share of districts
faced significant institutional constraints on reducing local revenue.31 Unfortunately, we lack the
data (e.g., on the proxies for bureaucratic capture used in the literature32) to explore other reasons
why the effects of Title I on education spending are larger than the income elasticity of education
demand alone would generate.33
VI.

Title I and Educational Attainment
The results thus far suggest that Title I raised school spending in the South, and more so

in districts where the grants were large relative to expected local revenue, where the ability to
offset Title I funds was likely constrained. Did these increases in school spending improve
student outcomes? Recall that there was limited enforcement of targeting during this era, so
Title I-induced increases in school expenditure could easily have benefitted children who were
not “educationally disadvantaged.” We therefore examine how Title I affected all students and
view our analysis as being more closely related to the literature on the effects of school spending

31

Our measure of scope for offset does not have a natural scale, but the point estimates indicate one-for-one
increases in spending with federal revenue and no offset for low scope for offset districts, implying that a quarter of
districts would have consumed at the corner both with and without the Title I grant in the context of the neoclassical
model. Among the remaining districts, the increase in spending (21 cents per dollar) is consistent with an income
elasticity of demand for education spending of about 0.7. In some states, we have more detailed breakdowns of local
revenue, and based on the limited data we have, there do not appear to have been districts that were raising only the
required minimum contribution for participation in the state MFP, but we cannot be sure that this is the actual
required minimum contribution overall because we do not know the precise school finance rules in each state. On
the other hand, local offset did violate the rules of the program, so districts may have achieved local offset over time
by reducing the rate of growth of local revenue; it is easier to do this quickly when the grant is small relative to
initial local spending.
32
Strumpf (1998) uses public spending on administrative overhead as a proxy for bureaucratic power, showing
municipalities with stronger bureaucracies exhibit larger flypaper effects; Lutz (2010) finds nearly complete crowd
out of education grants in New Hampshire, where voters — rather than bureaucrats — directly determine budgets in
town meetings; and Brooks, Phillips and Sinitsyn (2011) show that stickiness increases in city council size.
33
Bureaucrats in the parent governments of dependent school districts (which do not raise their own revenue) may
have more scope and incentive to offset federal grants targeted to education by increasing spending in other policy
areas. Because our sample is predominately comprised of independent districts (all districts except in North Carolina
and Virginia), we do not examine this source of heterogeneity, nor do we distinguish among alternative (noneducation) uses of funds.

24

on student outcomes (see Hanushek (1986, 1997)) than on the achievement effects of Title I.34
We do, however, present separate estimates for blacks and whites to explore the possible
importance of race in the within-district allocation of funds. States discontinued publication of
spending by race by the mid-1960s, so we cannot examine this directly. But up to that time,
school boards did allocate state funding disproportionately to white schools (Margo, 1990;
Reber, 2011), so it would not be surprising if they did the same with federal funding before
schools desegregated.
The outcome of interest in our analysis is the high school dropout rate of 18 and 19 year
olds. Obtaining data on student outcomes at a local level is difficult for this period. High school
dropout can be consistently observed at a local level both before and after Title I in the
Decennial Census and is also particularly relevant for the South at this time, as 30 percent of
whites and 43 percent of blacks aged 18 and 19 were high school dropouts in 1960. Public-use
Census microdata and published Census tabulations are insufficient to construct local dropout
rates, so we purchased the necessary tabulations, at the county level, from the Census Bureau.35
Throughout, we weight by race-specific county population of 18-19 year olds in 1960, so the
estimates represent the effect of Title I-induced expenditure increases for the average student.
We exploit the heterogeneity of fiscal response documented above as a source of
identification. To set ideas, the first column in Figure IV shows the regression-adjusted
relationship between initial child poverty rates and the change in per-pupil current expenditure
between 1964 and 1969, separately in counties where all districts had low scope for fiscal offset
34

Several major studies – the Sustaining Effects Study (Carter, 1984) and the Prospects study (Puma et al., 1997) –
attempt to estimate the effects of participating in Title I programs on student outcomes. Identifying these effects is
difficult, given the negative selection of participants by design. See also Borman and D'Agostino (1996), and van
der Klaauw (2008).
35
There are 856 districts represented in the 655 counties in the sample. We restrict attention to counties where
districts in our estimation sample represent at least 90 percent of total county enrollment in 1960. Though all
discussion of impact on dropout refers to counties, recall that the relevant fiscal decisions are made at and
aggregated from the district level.

25

(Panel A) and in the remaining counties (Panel B). The underlying regressions were estimated
using county aggregates of the district-level finance data and are otherwise similar to the
reduced-form specifications that underlie the district-level estimates in Table V.36 The dot sizes
represent the (relative) size of the county’s white population aged 18 to 19 in 1960 to reflect
weighting of the regression fit. Consistent with our earlier findings, school spending became
much more progressive over the second half of the 1960s in the subsample of counties where the
scope for fiscal offset by districts was low.37 The finding is similar in the subsample of counties
with black populations and weighting by initial county black population, as shown in the first
column of Figure V.
If “money mattered,” there should have been greater convergence of poorer counties to
richer counties in educational attainment over the 1960s in the subsample of counties where the
scope for local offset was low, or where Title I translated into higher spending at a greater rate.
We explore this in the second column of each figure using the same specification as in the first
column but replacing the dependent variable with the 1960 to 1970 change in high school
dropout rates of 18 and 19 year olds. For whites (Figure IV), the reduction in high school
dropout over the 1960s was much larger in poorer counties than richer counties in the subsample
with low scope for offset (Panel A), but not elsewhere (Panel B), suggesting that Title I-induced
spending increases improved white educational outcomes. This was not the case for blacks,
however (Figure V).
In Table VI, we present TSLS estimates of the effects of changes in current expenditure
on changes in dropout, instrumenting for the change in per-pupil current expenditure with the
36

The specification also includes the 1960 race-specific dropout rate of 18-19 year olds (also interacted with the low
scope for offset indicator) to account for the possibility that the trend in dropout rate depended on the starting point.
We unfortunately cannot examine trends in dropout at the county level during the 1950s. County aggregates were
generated from all district-level data weighting by 1960 district enrollment.
37
The difference across the two groups in the change in the poverty gradient in spending is statistically significant
(Appendix Table I).

26

interaction of 1960 child poverty with the low scope for offset indicator.38 By using the
interaction of the 1960 child poverty rate and the low scope for offset indicator as the excluded
instrument, we can allow the 1960 child poverty rate to have an effect on dropout through
channels other than educational expenditure. We identify a causal effect of current expenditure
on dropout if, in the absence of the program, the relationship between the 1960 child poverty rate
and changes in dropout would have been similar in counties with and without low scope for
offset. Note that because spending was low and dropout rates high at this time — particularly in
the low scope for offset districts where the marginal students affected by the program resided —
the effects on educational attainment that we identify may be larger than would be expected from
modern-day spending increases.
The first column of Table VI presents TSLS estimates for the baseline specification.39
The estimates imply that each additional $100 increase in current expenditure between 1964 and
1969 was associated with a statistically significant 2.9 percentage point reduction in the
likelihood of white dropout and an insignificant 1.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
black dropout over the 1960s. The change in spending was permanent, so these estimates should
not be compared to programs involving one-time expenditures. The cohorts in our analysis were
exposed to about 5 years of Title I-induced spending increases before we observe their dropout
outcomes in 1969. Title I grants were slightly smaller in the early years (and some districts did
not receive their grants due to non-compliance with the Civil Rights Act), so these effects

38

This is equivalent to scaling the difference in the poverty coefficients, for high and low scope for offset counties,
from the regressions with the change in dropout rates as the dependent variable by the corresponding difference in
their poverty coefficients from the regressions with the change in per pupil current expenditure as the dependent
variable. Results are qualitatively similar, but somewhat smaller in magnitude, when we define low scope for offset
as having an above median ratio of the 1969 Title I grant to 1964 local revenue.
39
As in Table V, we interact the low scope for offset indicator with most but not all of the controls in the baseline
specification. First-stage and reduced-form estimates that correspond to the specification shown in the first column
are in Appendix Table I.

27

correspond to exposure to somewhat less than $500 of additional cumulative spending between
1965 and 1969.
It is difficult to compare these estimates to others in the literature, as most existing
studies that measure outcomes with educational attainment — studies which, like this one, focus
on individuals schooled before 1970 — measure school inputs directly (i.e., with pupil-teacher
ratios) rather than with educational expenditure.40 We can however think about the magnitudes
of the estimates in several ways. First, a back-of-the-envelope cost-benefit analysis focusing
solely on labor market returns to an additional year of schooling for whites implies that the value
of the social benefits were nearly twice as large as the spending increase (see Appendix B for
details). Second, the point estimate for whites implies that Title I explains 30 percent of the 10
percentage point reduction in their high school dropout rate over the decade.41 By contrast, the
point estimate suggests Title I had an adverse effect on blacks, but using the 95 percent
confidence interval, we estimate that at most, Title I can account for 22 percent of the 14
percentage point reduction in black high school dropout over the 1960s.
The estimates are robust to several specification tests. For example, adding more controls
to the model reduces precision but does not qualitatively affect the estimates. In column (2), we
include changes in transfer payments to the county over the 1960s through other federal
programs, including Head Start and Medicaid. In column (3), we also add county aggregates of

40

See, for example, Card and Krueger (1992a, 1992b, 1996) and Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon (2006). Such
studies find positive effects of measured inputs on educational attainment and wages, but it is difficult to compare
the magnitudes to our estimates. Reber (2010) estimates the effects of desegregation-induced changes in spending
on educational attainment for blacks and finds somewhat smaller effects. On the other hand, existing work
estimating the effects of educational spending tends to use test scores as the educational outcome of interest
(Hanushek, 1997).
41
These calculations scale up the coefficient on the change in per-pupil funding (or its upper bound) in column (1)
of Table VI by the predicted change in per-pupil spending from Title I for the average child, then divide by the
(weighted) mean of the dependent variable. The predicted change in per-pupil spending from Title I is calculated
separately by race, weighting by the 1960 race-specific population of 18 and 19 year olds and controlling for their
dropout rate.

28

the two measures of desegregation as of 1970 introduced above and of the 1970 white private
school enrollment rate. Perhaps more compelling, we see no effect of spending on high school
dropout rates of an older group, whose secondary education would have been completed prior to
1965. We show this in column (5), using as a dependent variable the change in the percent of a
county’s whites (Panel A) and blacks (Panel B) aged 25 and older without a high school degree.
Presumably, unobserved shocks to educational attainment in the county population – through
migration, for example – would have affected this older age group as well.
Thus, the estimates suggest that whites benefited from Title I-induced changes in
educational expenditure, but blacks did not. The estimates are sufficiently imprecise that we
cannot reject moderate beneficial effects for blacks, but we reject that the effects are the same for
the two groups. A larger effect for whites is plausible, given that even nominal targeting of Title
I funding to the most disadvantaged students within districts was weak at the time (Martin and
McClure, 1969), and that substantial desegregation occurred only after 1968, so districts may
have been able to continue targeting resources disproportionately to white students, as they had
done at least through the 1950s (Margo, 1990). If Title I-induced increases in spending were
directed to whites, it should be the case that whites in districts with more blacks benefited more
from Title I, as there would have been more Title I funding to divert to a smaller group of whites.
When we test whether the effect of changes in spending on dropout depended on the black
enrollment share, in column (4), the estimates are in the expected direction but quite imprecise.
The estimates in Table VI nevertheless point to some benefit for blacks of desegregationrelated changes in school resources over the 1960s, consistent with the work of Reber (2010,
2011). Districts with higher black enrollment shares in 1960 saw larger increases in per-pupil
current expenditure over the second half of the 1960s (Table III), likely because this additional

29

funding in blacker districts was needed to “level up” quality in desegregated schools to that
previously available only in the white schools. Table VI, Panel B shows that there was a
corresponding disproportionate reduction in dropout rates among blacks in blacker counties.
Under the relatively strong assumption that the effects of initial black enrollment share on black
dropout worked only through such desegregation-related increases in spending, these estimates
imply a 3.75 percentage point greater reduction in black dropout for each additional $100
increase in per-pupil current expenditure growth.42 Increases in school spending through this
alternative channel would account for about 43 percent (6.1 percentage points) of the overall
decline in dropout among blacks during the 1960s. In this historical context, policies specifically
targeted to blacks, like school desegregation, appear to have been more effective in helping
blacks than policies targeted to poor children.43
VII.

Discussion
This paper examines the impacts of the introduction of Title I of the Elementary and

Secondary Education Act in the South. Combining variation in the program’s intensity across
school districts with the timing of its introduction in 1965, we find evidence of an important role
for Title I in increasing the level and progressivity of funding for Southern schools during the
1960s. School districts responded to the influx of Title I funding by significantly reducing their
own fiscal effort, but only where institutions permitted this response. “Money mattered,” but

42

The 3.75 figure comes from scaling down the coefficient on 1960 black enrollment share in Table VI, Panel B
column (1) by the coefficient on 1960 black enrollment share in a regression for the 1964 to 1969 change in per
pupil expenditure that weights by the 1960 population of black 18-19 year olds and includes their 1960 dropout rate
as a control ($387). We arrive at the 6.1 percentage point figure as 3.75×3.87×0.42, where 0.42 is the initial black
share for the average black 18 or 19 year old in 1960.
43
A growing literature examining the effects of policy efforts to narrow black-white school quality gaps and
desegregate schools consistently concludes that such programs were beneficial for blacks on a variety of outcomes,
including educational attainment. See, for example, Reber (2010), Johnson (2011), Card and Krueger (1992a), Lutz
(2011), Ashenfelter, Collins, and Yoon (2006), Guryan (2004), and Weiner, Lutz, and Ludwig (2009).

30

only in places where the introduction of Title I increased spending on education and only for
whites.44 Despite this, the program appears to have been cost-effective overall.
Our analysis makes important contributions to both our understanding of how
intergovernmental grants operate and the effects of Title I, but necessarily falls short of a full
assessment of the legacy of Title I. The program likely had other benefits – on other educational
or social outcomes, on other cohorts, or in the increased consumption of other goods that crowd
out represents – that are not easily quantified. Title I likely also had effects through other
channels, particularly for blacks. Combined with provisions of the Civil Rights Act prohibiting
the receipt of federal funds by discriminating school districts, Title I promoted voluntary
desegregation and reduced the burden on the federal courts in dismantling segregation (Cascio, et
al. 2010; Rosenberg, 1991). The spending response to desegregation, which also benefited
blacks, might have been smaller in the absence of the influx of Title I funds (Reber, 2011).
Our findings illuminate the usefulness of examining the impacts of intergovernmental
grants on a jurisdiction’s finances alongside any evaluation of its impacts on the ultimate
outcome of interest and the importance of institutions in mediating these effects. In particular,
failure to find effects of grants on outcomes of interest should not necessarily be taken as
evidence that resources do not matter if the institutional context is one where grants do not
translate to higher spending. Grants should only affect outcomes where circumstances constrain
localities to use the funds on the targeted good. Indeed, the introduction of Title I only improved
education where it increased education spending.

44

Our findings are in contrast to the existing literature on Title I, which has concluded the program is largely
ineffective. However, we ask a different question by estimating returns to increases in education spending induced
by Title I for all students in a district, rather than comparing outcomes of participants in whatever was called a Title
I program at a particular point in time to those for non-participants (as in Carter, 1984; Puma et al., 1997).

31

References
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay, and Michael Greenstone. 2006. “Civil Rights, the War on
Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and
Mississippi.” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper no. 07-04.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. “Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of the Food Stamp Program on Birth Outcomes.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, XCIII (2):387-403.
Alt, James E. 1995. “Persistence and Change in Southern Voter Registration Patterns, 19721990.” In Classifying by Race, ed. Paul E. Peterson, 313-332. Princeton N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Ashenfelter, Orley, William Collins, and Albert Yoon. 2006. “Evaluating the Role of Brown v.
Board of Education in School Equalization, Desegregation, and the Income of African
Americans.” American Law and Economics Review, 8(2):213-248.
Bailey, Stephen K. and Edith K. Mosher. 1968. ESEA: The Office of Education Administers a
Law. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Baicker, Katherine and Douglas Staiger. 2005. “Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal Health
Care Funds, and Patient Mortality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1):345-386.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Byron F. Lutz. Forthcoming.“School Desegregation, School Choice
and Changes in Residential Location Patterns by Race.” American Economic Review.
Borman, Geoffrey D. and Jerome V. D'Agostino. 1996. “Title I and Student Achievement: A
Meta-Analysis of Federal Evaluation Results.” Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis, 18(4): 309-26.

32

Bradford, David F. and Wallace E. Oates. 1971. “The Analysis of Revenue Sharing in a New
Approach to Collective Fiscal Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 85(3):416439.
Brooks, Leah and Justin Phillips. 2010. “An Institutional Explanation for the Stickiness of
Federal Grants.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 26(2):243-264.
Brooks, Leah, Justin Phillips, and Maxim Sinitsyn. 2011. “The Cabals of a Few or the
Confusion of a Multitude: The Institutional Trade-off between Representation and
Governance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1):1-24.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1996. “School Resources and Student Outcomes: An
Overview of the Literature and New Evidence from North and South Carolina.” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10(4): 31-50.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992a. “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
A Direct Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107:151-200.
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 1992b. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” The Journal of Political
Economy, 100(1):1-40.
Card, David and A. Abigail Payne. 2002. “School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School
Spending, and the Distribution of Student Test Scores.” Journal of Public Economics 83:
49-82.
Carter, Launor F. 1984. “The Sustaining Effects Study of Compensatory and Elementary
Education.” Educational Researcher, 13(7):4-13.
Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, Sarah Reber. 2008. “From Brown to Busing.”
Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2):296-325.

33

Cascio, Elizabeth, Nora Gordon, Ethan Lewis, and Sarah Reber. 2010. “Paying for Progress:
Conditional Grants and the Desegregation of Southern Public Schools.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 125(1):445-482.
Clark, Melissa A. 2003. “Education reform, redistribution, and student achievement: Evidence
from the Kentucky Education Reform Act.” PhD diss. chapter, Princeton University.
Clotfelter, Charles T. 1976. “School Desegregation, 'Tipping' and Private School Enrollment.”
Journal of Human Resources, 22:29-50.
Cohen, David K. and Susan L. Moffitt. 2009. The Ordeal of Equality: Did Federal Regulation
Fix the Schools? Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1978. “The Effect of a Differential Add-on Grant: Title I and Local
Education Spending.” Journal of Human Resources, 13(4):443-58.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3):1-37.
Fisher, Ronald and Leslie Papke. 2000. “Local Government Responses to Education Grants.”
National Tax Journal, 53(1):153-168.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gordon, Nora. 2004. “Do Federal Grants Boost School Spending? Evidence from Title I.”
Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10):1771-1792.
Guryan, Jonathan. 2004. “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates.” American Economic
Review, 94(4): 919–943.

34

Guryan, Jonathan. 2001. “Does Money Matter? Regression Discontinuity Estimates from
Education Finance Reform in Massachusetts.” NBER Working Paper 8269.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1997. “Assessing the Effects of School Resources on Student Performance:
An Update.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19(2):141-164
Hanushek, Eric A. 1986. “The Economics of Schooling. Production and Efficiency in Public
Schools.” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3):1141-1177.
Hines, James R. and Richard H. Thaler. 1995. “Anomalies: The Flypaper Effect.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 9(4):217-226.
Hoxby, Caroline. 2001. “All School Finance Equalizations are not Created Equal.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116(4):1189-1231.
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Schanzenbach. 2009. “Consumption Responses to In-Kind Transfers:
Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4):109-139.
Johnson, Rucker C. 2011. “Long-run Impacts of School Desegregation and School Quality on
Adult Attainments.” NBER working paper 16664.
Knight, Brian. 2002. “Endogenous Federal Grants and Crowd-out of State Government
Spending: Theory and Evidence from the Federal Highway Aid Program.” American
Economic Review, 92(1):71-92.
Ludwig, Jens and Miller, Douglas L. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(1):159-208.
Lutz, Byron. 2011. “The End of Court-Ordered Desegregation.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 3(2):130–68.

35

Lutz, Byron. 2010. “Taxation with Representation: Intergovernmental Grants in a Plebiscite
Democracy.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2):316-332.
Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Martin, Ruby and Phyllis McClure. 1969. Title I of ESEA: Is it Helping Poor Children?
Washington, DC.: National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, New
York, NY and Washington Research Project.
Musgrave, Robert A. 1959. The Theory of Public Finance: a Study in Political Economy. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Oates, Wallace E. 1999. “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism.” Journal of Economic Literature,
37(3), 1120-1149.
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal Federalism. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
Orfield, Gary. 2000. “The 1964 Civil Rights Act and American Education.” In Legacies of the
1964 Civil Rights Act, ed. Bernard Groffman. Charlottesville and London: University of
Virginia Press.
Papke, Leslie. 2008. “The Effects of Changes in Michigan’s School Finance System.” Public
Finance Review, 36(4):456–74.
Papke, Leslie. 2005. “The Effects of Spending on Test Pass Rates: Evidence from Michigan.”
Journal of Public Economics, 89:821–39.
Puma, Michael J., Nancy Karweit, Cristofer Price, Anne Ricciuti, William Thompson and
Michael Vaden-Kiernan. 1997. Prospects: Student Outcomes. Final Report.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, Planning and Evaluation Service.

36

Reber, Sarah J. 2010. “Desegregation and Educational Attainment for Blacks.” Journal of
Human Resources, 45(4): 893–914.
Reber, Sarah J. 2011. “From Separate and Unequal to Integrated and Equal? School
Desegregation and School Finance in Louisiana.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
93(2): 416-435.
Rosenberg, Gerald N. 1991. The Hollow Hope: Can Courts Bring About Social Change?
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Roy, Joydeep. 2011. “Impact of School Finance Reform on Resource Equalization and
Academic Performance: Evidence from Michigan.” Education Finance and Policy,
6(2):137-167.
Roza, Marguerite. 2010. Educational Economics: Where Do School Funds Go? Washington,
DC.; Urban Institute Press.
Strumpf, Koleman. 1998. “A Predictive Index for the Flypaper Effect.” Journal of Public
Economics, 69:389-412.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 1968. “Political Participation: A Study of the Participation of
Negroes in the Electoral and Political Processes in 10 Southern States Since Passage of
the Voting Rights Act of 1965.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Office of Education. 1969. History of Title
I ESEA. Washington, DC.
Van der Klaauw, Wilbert. 2008. “Breaking the Link between Poverty and Low Student
Achievement: An Evaluation of Title I.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2):731-756.
Weiner, David A., Byron F. Lutz, Jens Ludwig. 2009. “Desegregation and Crime.” NBER
Working Paper 15380.

37

Table I. Descriptive Statistics: Dependent Variables
1961
(1)

Level
1964
(2)

1969
(3)

Change
1961 to 1964 1964 to 1969
(4)
(5)

Per-pupil federal revenue

48.12
(63.40)

65.19
(74.43)

484.90
(262.51)

17.07
(34.99)

419.71
(270.25)

Per-pupil state revenue

1,191.38
(355.36)

1,320.77
(354.39)

1,805.77
(430.02)

129.40
(96.07)

485.00
(231.12)

Per-pupil local revenue

450.38
(349.20)

511.66
(403.78)

838.29
(601.47)

61.28
(116.32)

326.63
(288.68)

Per-pupil current expenditure

1,682.35
(456.66)

1,910.49
(468.12)

2,828.63
(522.20)

228.13
(214.99)

918.14
(421.78)

Notes: All figures are in real 2009 dollars. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Sample consists of 922 school
districts in 9 southern states: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, and Virginia. See Appendix A for description of estimation sample.

38

Table II. Descriptive Statistics: Independent Variables
Mean
(1)

Std. dev.
(2)

Obs.
(3)

Child poverty rate, 1960

0.32

0.17

922

State factor in Title I grant, 1969

954

6.11

922

Black share in enrollment, 1960

0.32

0.22

922

District enrollment, 1960

6,921

11,801

922

Poorest 300 counties, 1960 (=1)

0.24

0.43

922

Percent voting for Thurmond, 1948

34

30

922

Black voter registration rate, early 1960s (percent)

28

24

824

White private school enrollment share, 1970

0.04

0.07

901

Black/white dissimilarity index, 1970

0.28

0.22

864

District under court supervision, 1970

0.34

0.47

878

0.345977
Notes: All dollar figures are in real (2009) terms. Sample consists of school districts in 9
southern states: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. See Appendix A for description of estimation sample.

39

Table III. Reduced-Form and TSLS Estimates of the Fiscal Response to Title I
1964 to 1969
Reduced Form
(1)

TSLS

1961 to 1964
Reduced Form

(2)

(3)

A. Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Child Poverty Rate, 1960
Fraction Black, 1960

929.2***
(73.50)
73.43
(45.46)

-----

10.88
(7.708)
-7.892*
(4.606)

B. Per-pupil Current Expenditure
Child Poverty Rate, 1960

424.6***
(107.5)

-54.42
(56.15)

Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Fraction Black, 1960

0.457***
(0.0994)
338.1***
(75.01)

371.6***
(79.20)

-17.95
(47.63)

C. Per-pupil State Revenue
Child Poverty Rate, 1960

45.24
(46.20)

59.84**
(27.73)

Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Fraction Black, 1960

0.0487
(0.0491)
55.34
(37.27)

58.92*
(35.65)

2.227
(20.66)

D. Per-pupil Local Revenue
Child Poverty Rate
Rate, 1960

-306.77***
-306
(63.78)

-63.36
-63
36*
(33.48)

Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Fraction Black, 1960

-0.330***
(0.0733)
149.1***
(52.16)

124.8***
(46.22)

-35.75*
(21.30)

E. Per-Pupil Total Revenue less Per-Pupil Current Expenditure
Child Poverty Rate, 1960

243.2***
(82.83)

61.78
(58.20)

Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Fraction Black, 1960
First-stage Partial F -stat on instrument
Number of districts

-114.4*
(65.04)

0.262***
(0.0863)
-133.7**
(65.71)

-23.46
(48.56)

922

159.9
922

922

Notes: All dollar figures are in real (2009) terms. All specifications include as controls state dummies, 1960
black enrollment share, ln(1960 district enrollment), an indicator that the district is in one of the 300 poorest
counties in 1960 and indicators for quintiles of the Thurmond vote share. The TSLS regressions in column
(2) use the 1960 child poverty rate as an instrument for the change in per-pupil federal revenue. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered on county. ***, **, * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.

40

Table IV. Sensitivity of the TSLS Estimates of the Long-Run Fiscal Response to Title I
Baseline
(1)

Change Functional Form of Black Share
(2)
(3)
(4)

Concurrent Policy Changes
(5)
(6)
(7)

Lags
(8)

A. Δ Per-pupil Current Expenditure
Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Root MSE

0.457***
(0.0994)
293.6

0.504***
(0.0794)
292.6

0.460***
(0.0820)
291.2

0.522***
(0.0942)
293.2

0.491***
(0.101)
292.7

0.480***
(0.110)
297.7

0.456***
(0.103)
292.7

0.425***
(0.0973)
272.2

0.0577
(0.0565)
148.5

0.0455
(0.0515)
144.2

0.0613
(0.0493)
143.6

B. Δ Per-pupil State Revenue
Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Root MSE

0.0487
(0.0491)
144.6

0.0779*
(0.0408)
144.5

0.0470
(0.0384)
134.6

0.0190
(0.0479)
144.2

0.0705
(0.0491)
142.4

C. Δ Per-pupil Local Revenue
Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
Root MSE
First-stage Partial F -stat on Instrument
Number of districts
Controls:
Black share in enrollment,, 1960
ln(district enrollment, 1960)
Poorest 300 counties indicator
Thurmond vote, 1948 (quintile dummies)
State dummies
x black share in enr, 1960
x ln(district enr, 1960)
Deciles of black share in enrollment, 1960
School segregation measures, 1970
White private school enrollment share, 1970
Voter Registration, 1960
Change spending on other public programs
Pre-program change in dependent variable

-0.330***
(0.0733)
218.8

-0.323***
(0.0585)
218.1

-0.332***
(0.0601)
215.6

-0.284***
(0.0669)
216.4

-0.306***
(0.0741)
219.9

-0.299***
(0.0780)
218.9

-0.322***
(0.0749)
217.5

-0.345***
(0.0742)
218.8

159.9
922

232.9
922

243.0
922

182.1
922

154.3
856

121.3
824

155.6
922

164.7
922

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X

Notes: Each column and panel represents a different TSLS regression. The instrument for the change in per-pupil federal revenue is the 1960 child poverty rate. Changes in fiscal
variables correspond to 1964 to 1969 and are in real (2009) dollars. See Appendix A for detailed description of control variables and data sources. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered on county. ***, **, * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

41

Table V. Heterogeneous Fiscal Responses to Title I
Dependent Variable is Change from
1964 to 1969 in Per-Pupil:
Current
Expenditure
(1)

State Revenue
(2)

Local Revenue
(3)

A. Scope for Offset
(1969 Title I Grant/1964 Local Revenue)
Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
X Low Scope for Offset (top quartile)

0.228
(0.144)
0.678***
(0.226)

0.0471
(0.0742)
-0.113
(0.111)

-0.582***
(0.119)
0.753***
(0.141)

B. Black Enrollment Share
Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
X High Black Share (top quartile)

0.330***
(0.120)
0.513**
(0.212)

0.0274
(0.0558)
0.0582
(0.112)

-0.404***
(0.0851)
0.333**
(0.142)

C. Scope for Offset and Black Share
Δ Per-pupil Federal Revenue
X Low Scope for Offset top quartile)
X High Black Share (top quartile)

Number of districts
Controls:
Interacted Treatment Variable
Interacted with Treatment Interaction Variable:
Black share in enrollment, 1960
ln(district enrollment, 1960)
State dummies
Poorest 300 counties indicator
Thurmond vote, 1948 (quintile dummies)

0.208
(0.148)
0.751***
(0.284)
0.0926
(0.308)

0.0391
(0.0751)
-0.0431
(0.138)
-0.0307
(0.158)

-0.580***
(0.119)
0.801***
(0.194)
-0.0146
(0.234)

922

922

922

X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Notes: All dollar figures are in real (2009) terms. Each column and panel presents coefficient estimates from a
TSLS regression. Excluded instruments are 1960 poverty rate and 1960 poverty rate interacted with the
relevant interacted treatment variable(s) (Panel A: low scope for offset (top quartile of 1969 Title I grant/1964
local revenue), Panel B: high black enrollment share (top quartile), Panel C: low scope for offset and black
enrollment share). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on county. ***, **, * represent statistical
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

42

Table VI. Estimates of the Effect of Changes in Current Expenditure on Dropout Trends
1960-1970 Change in Dropout Rate (x 100) of:
Ages 18-19
Ages 25+
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Dependent Variable:
(1)

A. White
Mean of Dependent Variable
Δ Per-pupil Current Expenditure ($100s)

-9.9

-9.9

-9.9

-9.9

-7.8

-2.88**
(1.46)

-3.09*
(1.66)

-3.12*
(1.80)

0.78
(0.65)

11.46
(9.50)
11.35
(8.70)

7.04
(9.06)
7.70
(7.74)

8.65
(10.17)
2.65
(8.01)

-1.80
(1.76)
-2.17
(2.56)
11.29
(8.17)
29.35
(23.48)

0.85
(4.33)
-2.00
(3.72)

10.43
7.300
655

10.71
6.350
655

10.80
5.236
603

9.091
2.582, 22.28
655

3.978
3.448
655

X Fraction Black, 1960
Child Poverty Rate, 1960
Fraction Black, 1960

RMSE
First-stage partial F -stat on Excl. Inst.
Number of Counties

B. Black
Mean of Dependent Variable

-14.0

-14.0

-13.9

-14.0

-7.9

Δ Per-pupil Current Expenditure ($100s)

1.65
(1.54)

1.86
(1.74)

2.35
(2.31)

-0.44
(0.38)

-3.86
(10.66)
-14.52*
(7.81)

-4.97
(10.61)
-12.55*
(7.31)

-5.75
(13.74)
-15.73*
(8.23)

0.91
(1.92)
1.14
(2.56)
-3.20
(10.16)
-23.38
(22.96)

9.16**
(3.82)
6.27***
(2.25)

9.307
5.009
612

9.596
4.495
612

10.40
2.949
578

10.64
2.373, 1.857
612

2.622
6.428
548

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X Fraction Black, 1960
Child Poverty Rate, 1960
Fraction Black, 1960

RMSE
First-stage partial F -stat on Excl. Inst.
Number of Counties
Controls:
Low Scope for Offset
Interacted with Low Scope for Offset:
Black share in enrollment, 1960
ln(district enrollment, 1960)
State dummies
1960 Race-Specific Dropout Rate Ages 18-19
Poorest 300 counties indicator
Thurmond vote, 1948 (quintile dummies)
Change spending on other public programs
Nonblack private school enrollment share, 1970
School segregation measures, 1970

Notes: Each column and panel represents a different TSLS regression, where county is the unit of analysis. In columns (1)(3) and (5), we instrument for the 1964 to 1969 change in per-pupil current expenditure (2009 dollars) with the interaction
between the 1960 child poverty rate and the low scope for offset indicator. In column (2), we also instrument for the
interaction between the 1964 to 1969 change in per-pupil current expenditure (2009 dollars) and 1960 black enrollment share
with the triple interaction between the 1960 child poverty rate, the low scope for offset indicator, and 1960 black enrollment
share. Throughout, attention is restricted to counties where districts in our estimation sample represent at least 90 percent of
total county enrollment in 1960. County aggregates were generated from the district data weighting by 1960 district
enrollment. In cases where not all districts within a county have low scope for offset, we coded the county as not having low
scope for offset. Standard errors (in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity robust. ***, **, * represent statistical significance at
the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

43

Appendix Table 1. Reduced Form Heterogenous Effect Estimates for
Current Expenditure and Dropout Rates at the County Level
Dependent variable:
1960 to 1970 Diff. in
1964 to 1969
Dropout Rate of 18Change in Per-Pupil
19 y.o.'s
Current Expenditure
(x 100)
(1)
(2)
A. Whites
Child Poverty Rate, 1960
X Low Scope for Offset

R-squared
Number of Observations
Weight

269.9
(207.3)
1,166***
(431.5)

3.68
(3.78)
-33.60***
(11.22)

0.567
655

0.467
655

white 18-19 y.o.'s, 1960
B. Blacks

Child Poverty Rate, 1960
X Low Scope for Offset

R-squared
Number of Observations
Weight

475.4**
(184.1)
829.7**
(370.7)

3.98
(4.82)
13.68
(10.30)

0.547
612

0.494
612

black 18-19 y.o.'s, 1960

Controls:
Low Scope for Offset
Interacted with Low Scope for Offset:
Black share in enrollment, 1960
ln(district enrollment, 1960)
State dummies
1960 Race-Specific Dropout Rate Ages 18-19
Poorest 300 counties indicator
Thurmond vote, 1948 (quintile dummies)

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

Notes: Each column and panel represent a different regression, where the unit of analysis is a
county. We restrict attention to counties where districts in our estimation sample represent at
least 90 percent of total county enrollment in 1960. County aggregates of district variables
were generated from the district data weighting by 1960 district enrollment. In cases where
not all districts within a county have low scope for offset, we coded the county as not having
low scope for offset. Standard errors (in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity robust. ***, **, *
represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

44

2000

3000

Figure
g
I. Trends in Per-Pupil
p Expenditure
p
and Revenue byy Source:
Southern States, the 1960s

Current Expenditure

10000

State Revenue

Local Revenue

0

Federal Revenue

1960

1965
year

Note: All figures are in 2009 dollars
dollars. Unweighted means were calculated from our district
district-level
level sample
from 9 Southern states: AL, FL, GA, LA, MS, NC, SC, TN, and VA.

45

1970

Figure II. Local Government Responses to Title I Grant
C
(All other
goods)
I + State grant +
Title I grant

I + State grant
I

Y
X

I – min local
contribution

Z
BC1

BC3

BC2

State
grant

E
(Education)

E
Minimum local
contribution

Title I grant
46

Figure III. Year-by-Year Gradients of District Finance Variables
i the
in
h 1960 Child Poverty
P
Rate
R
B. Per-pupil Current Expenditure
-600 -200 2000 600

-100 300 7000 1100

A. Per-pupil Federal Revenue

1960

1965
year

1970

1960

1965
year

1970

1965
year

1960

1965
year

Note: Plotted are the year-specific coefficients and 95% confidence intervals on the 1960 child poverty rate from regressions on district fixed effects,
state by
b year fixed
fi d effects,
ff
andd the
h ffollowing
ll i controls
l interacted
i
d with
i h year dummies:
d
i 1960 black
bl k share
h in
i enrollment,
ll
ln(1960
l (1960 enrollment),
ll
) dummies
d
i
for county quintile in 1948 Thurmond vote share, and dummy for among poorest 300 counties in 1960. The omitted year is 1961, and the coefficients
are rescaled so that the 1961 coefficient is equal to the cross-sectional poverty gradient in 1961 (with the same controls).

47

1970

D. Per-pupil Local Revenue

-15000-1100 -700 -3000

-1000 300 700 11000

C. Per-pupil State Revenue

1960

1970

Figure IV. The 1960 Child Poverty Rate and Differences in
Current Expenditure and White Dropout Rates over the 1960s,
byy Scope
p for Fiscal Offset
A. Counties with Low Scope for Offset
40

Dropout Ages 18-19
1960 to 1970

0
-40

-1500

0

1500

Per-pupil Current Expenditure
1964 to 1969

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

.3

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

.3

B. Other Counties

0

40

Dropout Ages 18-19
1960 to 1970

-40

-1500

0

1500

Per-pupil Current Expenditure
1964 to 1969

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

.3

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

Note: Plotted are residuals from regressions on state dummies, 1960 black share in enrollment, ln(1960 enrollment), dummies
for quintile of 1948 Thurmond vote share, dummy for among poorest counties in 1960, the white 1960 dropout rate of 18-19
year olds. The unit of observation is the county, and regressions are weighted by the white 1960 population of 18-19 year olds.

48

.3

Figure V. The 1960 Child Poverty Rate and Differences in
Current Expenditure and Black Dropout Rates over the 1960s,
by
y Scope
p for Fiscal Offset
A. Counties with Low Scope for Offset
Dropout Ages 18-19
1960 to 1970

-40

-1500

0

0

40

1500

Per-pupil Current Expenditure
1964 to 1969

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

.3

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

.3

B. Other Counties
Dropout Ages 18-19
1960 to 1970

0
-40

-1
1500

0

40

1500

Per-pupil Current Expenditure
1964 to 1969

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3
Residual Child Poverty Rate, 1960

Note: Plotted are residuals from regressions on state dummies, 1960 black share in enrollment, ln(1960 enrollment), dummies
for quintile of 1948 Thurmond vote share, dummy for among poorest counties in 1960, the black 1960 dropout rate of 18-19
year olds. The unit of observation is the county, and regressions are weighted by the black 1960 population of 18-19 year olds.

49

Appendix Figure I. Year-by-Year Gradients of District Finance Variables
i the
in
h 1960 Child P
Poverty R
Rate, bby S
Scope ffor Off
Offset

1960

1965
year

B. Per-pupil Current Expenditure

Coefficiennt
-500 0 500100001500

Coefficiennt
-500 0 500100001500

A. Per-pupil Federal Revenue

1970

1960

1970

D. Per-pupil Local Revenue
Coefficient
-11500
-1000-500 0 5500

Coefficient
-500 0 500100015500

C. Per-pupil State Revenue

1965
year

1960

1965
year

1970

1960

1965
year

Note: Plotted are the year-specific coefficients on the 1960 child poverty rate from regressions on district fixed effects, state by year fixed effects,
and the following controls interacted with year dummies: 1960 black share in enrollment, ln(1960 enrollment), dummies for county quintile in 1948
Th
Thurmond
d vote
t share,
h
and
d ddummy ffor among poorestt 300 counties
ti in
i 1960,
1960 estimated
ti t d separately
t l by
b scope for
f local
l l offset.
ff t The
Th omitted
itt d year is
i 1961,
1961
and the coefficients are rescaled so that the 1961 coefficient is equal to the cross-sectional poverty gradient for the categoy in 1961 (with the same
controls). Solid dots represent districts in top quartile of 1969 Title I/1964 local revenue, and hollow dots represent other districts.

50

1970

Appendix A: Data
I.

Sources and Variables

I.A

School Finance and Enrollment Data

Our analysis of the fiscal impacts of Title I relies on district-level data on current expenditure
and revenue by source (local, state, and federal). These data were hand-entered from annual
reports of state departments or superintendents of education and are available on an annual basis
between 1961 and 1969 with several exceptions: Georgia data are missing in 1964 (use 1963),
1968 (use 1967), and 1969 (use 1970), and Louisiana data are missing in 1967 (use 1966).1 Real
per-pupil values of the finance variables were created by dividing by total enrollment from the
same year, drawn from the same source, then converting to real 2009 dollars using the CPI-U.
I.B

High School Dropout Data

Our analysis of the effects of Title I on educational attainment uses the 1960 to 1970 change in
the high school dropout rate of 18 and 19 year olds as the dependent variable. We constructed
this outcome using county-level tabulations of population characteristics by single year of age
(ages 15 to 19) and race (white, black/African American, other), produced for us by the Census
Bureau using the sample detail files from the 1960 and 1970 Censuses. The numerator of the
dropout rate in a given Census year is the number of 18 and 19 year residents of a county of a
given race who report not being currently enrolled in school and less than twelve years of
completed education. The denominator is the total number of 18 and 19 year residents of that
county of that race with education reported.
We perform a falsification check using the 1960 to 1970 change in the high school dropout rate
of county residents aged 25 and over, which we constructed in a similar fashion using published
Census tabulations of the total population (both years) and the non-white population in 1960 and
black population in 1970.2 Here, the numerator of the dropout rate in a given Census year is the
number of residents age 25 and over with less than twelve years of completed education, and the
denominator is the total number of residents age 25 and over with education reported. Data for
1960 was hand-entered from Table 83 and Table 87 of U.S. Census (1963). Data for 1970 was
downloaded from the National Historical Geographic Information System (Minnesota Population
Center, 2004).
I.C

Title I Eligibility Data

Our identification strategy relies on an estimate of initial district eligibility for Title I funds. Title
I funding allocations were made at the county level. States then allocated grants to districts
1

Alabama Department of Education (various years), Florida State Superintendent of Public Instruction (various
years), Georgia State Department of Education (various years), Mississippi State Department of Education (various
years), North Carolina Education Association (various years), South Carolina State Department of Education
(various years), State Department of Education of Louisiana (various years), Tennessee Department of Education
(various years), Virginia State Board of Education (various years).
2
Tabulations for the white population are the difference between total and non-white (in 1960) or black (in 1970),
when non-white or black is reported, and total, when non-white or black is not reported (due to small population).

51

within each county. We do not know data sources used for this purpose, but we do observe
district-level Title I allocations in the first fall of the program in 1965, t1allocd,1965 (U.S. Senate,
1967). We also observe county-level counts of 5-17 year olds eligible for Title I in fall 1965,
t1eligc,1965 (U.S. Senate, 1965). Using these data, we estimate district counts of Title I eligible
child for 1965, t1eligd,1965 as
t1eligd,1965 ≈t1eligc,1965 × ∑

t1allocd,1965
d∈c t1allocd,1965

,

or with the 1965 county-level eligibles times the share of the 1965 county Title I allocation
received by the district.3 We then define the “initial” child poverty rate as t1eligd,1965/enrd,1960,
where enrd,1960 represents 1960 district enrollment. If the effective poverty rate for distribution of
Title I funds (based on current enrollment and current eligibility) were roughly equal to the
initial child poverty rate, the change between 1964 and any year from 1965 to 1969 in the
coefficient on child_poverty in regressions for per-pupil federal revenue should be equal to the
amount received for districts for each eligible child – the “state factor” – in the Title I formula.
We collected state factors for 1965-1967 and 1969 from congressional publications (U.S. Senate,
1965, 1967, 1970).4
I.D

Other District- and County-Level Covariates
1. 1960 black enrollment share (district): For most states, this variable is constructed from
1960 data on enrollment by race in the school finance publications cited in Section I.A of
this Appendix.5 We estimated this variable for North Carolina using district-level data
from Southern Education Reporting Service (1964, 1966).
2. Thurmond vote share in the 1948 Presidential Election (county): The county-level
percent of votes cast for Strom Thurmond in the 1948 Presidential election was drawn
from ICPSR Study No. 8611 (Clubb, Flanigan, and Zingale 2006).
3. Poorest Counties in 1960 (county): Data on whether a county was one of the 300
poorest counties in 1960, which was expected to have received special grant-writing
assistance for Head Start (Ludwig and Miller, 2007), was generously provided to us by
Jens Ludwig and Douglas Miller. The poverty rate used in this determination was also
provided to us, and is distinct from (but positively correlated with) that used for
dissemination of funds under Title I (see section I.C of the Data Appendix).

3

Note that, in reality, there were two categories of Title I eligibles in 1965: (1) children aged 5 to 17 in families with
incomes less than $2000 in the 1960 Census; (2) children in families receiving AFDC in excess of $2000. We refer
to all Title I eligibles as being from group (1) for ease of explanation, as the vast majority of eligibles are in indeed
in this group in our sample.
4
Funding amounts per eligible child were ratably reduced by state-specific multiplicative constants after 1965, when
Title I was no longer fully funded.
5
We use the enrollment measure most consistently reported within the state over time. All states except Georgia
and North Carolina report fall enrollment or registration or average daily membership. To make these states’
enrollment figures more comparable to those for other states, we multiply the enrollment concept reported (average
daily attendance, or ADA) by the statewide average ratio of fall enrollment to ADA reported in U.S. DHEW (1967).

52

4. 1970 Dissimilarity Index (district): The formula for the dissimilarity index is given by:



id

enri %bl i  %bl d

2  enrd  %bl d  1  %bl d 

where enri is total enrollment in school i, enrd is the enrollment in district d (summing
across all schools), %bli is the percent of total enrollment in school i that is black, and
%bld is the black enrollment percent in district d. It can be interpreted as the share of
students who would have had to change schools to replicate the racial composition of the
district in each school. We construct a dissimilarity index for all available districts as of
1970 using computer-coded microdata on enrollment by race at the school level from a
1970 survey conducted by the Office for Civil Rights (OCR), housed at UCLA and
converted from binary to ascii format by Ben Denckla and Sarah Reber (Denckla and
Reber, 2006). Not all districts are represented in this survey, so we lose some districts
when including the dissimilarity index as a control.6
5. 1970 Court Supervision (district): We classify a district as having a court-supervised
desegregation plan in 1970 if for the 1970-71 academic year, the district submitted a
court order to comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act and that court order was
approved by HEW (its “assurance code” is equal to 3). This information was collected
by OCR simultaneously with the computer-coded microdata on enrollment by race in
each of a district’s schools in fall 1970, used to construct the 1970 dissimilarity index.
6. White Private School Enrollment Rate (district): The 1970 white private school
enrollment rate was constructed using district-level tabulations of the total population and
the black population in the 1970 Census, reported in the 1970 Fourth-Count (Population)
School District Data Tapes (U.S. Department of Education, 1970). The numerator is the
sum of counts of (non-black) district residents (ages 3 to 34) enrolled in private school
(kindergarten, elementary, or secondary). The denominator is the sum of (non-black)
district residents in various age groups spanning 5 to 19. The Fourth Count school
district data covers all districts with at least 300 students as of the 1969-70 school year.
We lose very few districts due to this restriction given the typically large enrollments of
Southern districts.
7. Pre-VRA Black Voter Registration Rate (county): Available data on black voter
registration rates in the early 1960s for all states represented in our sample except
Virginia were generously provided by James Alt (Alt, 1995). Pre-VRA voter registration
rates in Virginia were hand-entered from Table 12 in U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
(1968).

6

Most of these districts are smaller districts in Tennessee. The survey included all districts “eliminating racially
dual school systems under terms of voluntary plan agreements with [HEW] or under Federal court order regardless
of school district enrollment size” (with the exception of such districts in Tennessee and Texas). It also included all
districts with at least 3000 enrollment and smaller districts with the following probabilities: 75% for districts with
1200 to 2999 students, 50% for districts with 600 to 1199 students, 25% for districts with 300-599 students, and 0%
for districts with less than 300 students.

53

8. Outlays on Federal Programs (county): Changes (1962 to 1969) in per-capita federal
outlays to counties for public assistance (less food stamps), Medicare, Medicaid, and
retirement and disability programs were constructed using data from the Regional
Economic Information system, generously provided to us by Douglas Almond, Hilary
Hoynes, and Diane Schanzenbach (Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach, 2011). Federal
outlays to counties for Head Start in 1972 were drawn from National Archives data and
generously provided to us by Jens Ludwig and Douglas Miller (Ludwig and Miller,
2007).
II.

Estimation Sample

School districts both consolidate and, less commonly, split apart during our sample period. We
use the state school finance data referenced above to establish a history of these reorganizations
and limit our working sample to districts that do not experience reorganization between 1961 and
1969 (1032 districts across nine Southern states). Our estimation sample includes all districts in
this sample with data available the fiscal outcomes and the controls in the main specification –
the 1960 child poverty rate, 1960 black enrollment share, 1960 enrollment, 1948 Thurmond vote
share, and whether the district was in one of the 300 poorest counties in 1960 (985 districts). We
also trim districts from the sample for which changes in any of the four key outcomes over 1961
to 1964 or 1964 to 1969 lies more than 3.5 standard deviations away from the state-specific
mean. Our final sample includes 922 districts.
III.

References

Alabama Department of Education.Various Years. “Annual Report for the Scholastic Year
Ending June 30, 1966 and for the Fiscal Year Ending September 30, 1966: Statistical and
Financial Data.” Montgomery, AL.
Clubb, Jerome M., William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale, Electoral Data for Counties in
the United States: Presidential and Congressional Races, 1984-1972 [Computer file], Compiled
by Jerome M. Clubb, William H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale, ICPSR08611-v1, (Ann Arbor,
MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, 2006-11-13).
Denckla, Ben and Sarah Reber. 2006. “Documentation for Decoded OCR Files.” Unpublished.
Florida State Superintendent of Public Instruction. Various years. “Ranking of the Counties.”
Research Report, Division of Research. Tallahassee, FL.
Georgia State Department of Education. Various years. “Annual Reports of the Department of
Education to the General Assembly of the State of Georgia.” Atlanta, GA.
Minnesota Population Center. 2004. “National Historical Geographic Information System: Prerelease Version 0.1.” Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota. http://www.nhgis.org.

54

Mississippi State Department of Education. Various years. “Biennial report and
recommendations of the State Superintendent of Public Education to the legislature for the
scholastic year.” Jackson, MS: State Superintendent of Public Education.
North Carolina Education Association. Various years. “Per Pupil Expenditures for Current
Expense: Information Provided by Division of Statistical Services State Department of Public
Instruction.” Raleigh, NC.
South Carolina State Department of Education. Various years. “Annual Report of the State
Superintendent of Education of the State of South Carolina.” Columbia, SC.
Southern Education Reporting Service. 1964. “A Statistical Summary, State By State, of School
Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border Area from 1954 to the Present.”
Fourteenth revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting Service.
Southern Education Reporting Service. 1967. “A Statistical Summary, State By State, of School
Segregation-Desegregation in the Southern and Border Area from 1954 to the Present.”
Sixteenth revision. Nashville, TN: Southern Education Reporting Service.
State Department of Education of Louisiana. Various years. “Financial and Statistical Report.”
Baton Rouge, LA.
Tennessee Department of Education. Various years. “Annual Statistical Report of the
Department of Education.” Nashville, TN.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 1968. “Political Participation: A Study of the Participation of
Negroes in the Electoral and Political Processes in 10 Southern States Since Passage of the
Voting Rights Act of 1965.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1963. “Census of Population: 1960.
Volume I: Characteristics of the Population. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education. 1967. “Statistics of
State School Systems 1963-64.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Dept. of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 1970. “User’s Manual for
1970 Census Fourth Count (Population): School District Data Tape”. ICPSR version.
Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Ann Arbor,
MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, 2004.
doi:10.3886/ICPSR03525
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 1970. “1970 Census
Fourth Count (Population) School District Data Tapes.” Washington, DC.

55

U.S. Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Subcommittee on Education. 1965.
“Maximum Basic Grants—Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (Public Law 81874, Title II, and Public Law 89-10, Title I).” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
U.S. Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Subcommittee on Education. 1967.
“Notes and Working Papers Concerning the Administration of Programs Authorized Under Title
I of Public Law 89-10, The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 As Amended by
Public Law 89-750.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
United States Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. 1967. Subcommittee on
Education. “County Allotments Under Title I, Elementary and Secondary Education Act, for
Fiscal Year 1968 Based Upon $1.2 Billion Appropriation Distributed Under Family Income
Factors of $2,000 and $3,000 With County Savings Clause Added.” Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
United States Senate. Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Subcommittee on Education.
1970. “Allocation of Funds Under Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965, As Amended, Fiscal Year 1970.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Virginia State Board of Education. Various years. “Annual Report of the Superintendent of
Public Instruction of the Commonwealth of Virginia.” Richmond, VA.

56

Appendix B: Supplementary Analyses
I.

Cost benefit analysis

This section describes how we approximate the labor market returns to the additional educational
attainment induced by Title I spending. We view this calculation as providing a rough
approximation of the lower bound of potential benefits, as it ignores likely additional
unmeasured private and social returns to this schooling—for example, improvements in health,
reductions in criminal behavior, and increased civic participation.
Because we do not find a significant impact on educational attainment for blacks, the benefits in
this calculation come solely from whites; the costs include all expenditures including those
nominally allocated to black students. We estimate the benefits by applying the rate of return to
additional schooling to annual wage income over one’s career, and multiplying this present
discounted value by our estimated change in probability that one graduates from high school.
We assume a ten percent rate of return to an additional year of schooling, in the middle of the
range of estimates in the relevant literature, and a five percent discount rate. We calculate the
mean annual wage income from the 1970 Census, using white men and women ages 20-50 in our
sampled states who finished tenth grade but did not graduate from high school. This mean
($33,132 in 2009 dollars—all figures going forward are in 2009 dollars as well) is estimated
unconditional on labor market participation; the mean conditional on positive earnings is
$38,033. Our preferred specification for outcomes results (see Table VI, Column 3) estimates
that $100 in Title I-induced spending per pupil yields a 3.1 percentage point increase in the
likelihood of graduating from high school. For one year’s wages, the estimated expected
additional return from $100 of Title I revenue is $81 of annual wage income per person.
We estimate the costs of the program based on two different definitions of cost: (1) federal
dollars spent on intergovernmental grants to school districts (this includes transfers to local
consumption whose benefits we disregard but is what the federal government would use in
calculating returns on its grants); and (2) current educational spending by school districts
(relevant for the more general question of how money matters in educational production). The
estimates in Table VI, Column 3 correspond to the latter concept.
From the district (current expenditure) perspective:
In our sample, the typical white student lived in a district with 75 percent white enrollment.
Assuming that funds were distributed equally across students regardless of race, it would cost
approximately $132 per pupil to spend $100 per white pupil. We estimate this using data for
1969, so the cohort generating this result on average received Title I funding (low variance
across years) for five years to produce this attainment gain. We therefore compare our estimated
benefits (associated labor market return expected from additional $100 Title I revenue per pupil
per year) with a cost of $132*5=$660. After 12 years of work, the expected benefit ($692)
exceeds this amount; after 39 years of work, the expected benefit is double the cost.
From the federal (Title I revenue including crowded out funds) perspective:
We find that one dollar of Title I revenue per pupil increases current expenditure per pupil by
$0.46 (Table III, Column 2). $132 of spending per pupil (the cost of spending $100 per white
57

pupil) therefore costs $287 per pupil in federal revenue (287=132/.46) per year or $1435 over
five years. Considering these higher costs, the five-year intervention would be cost-effective
only after 52 years of labor market returns to the additional education; again, this disregards all
other benefits of the increased education spending and increased consumption due to crowd out.
II.

Income elasticity calculation

We find that one dollar of Title I revenue per pupil increases current expenditure per pupil by
$0.46 (Table III, Column 2). We want to know how much spending would have been expected to
increase in response to Title I based on the income elasticity of demand for education spending.
The increase in spending on education due to the grant is
AddlSpendi ng  Counterfac tualSpendi ng    % IncomeDuet oGrant

where η is the (assumed) income elasticity of demand for education spending.
To estimate CounterfactualSpending for 1969 (what education spending would have been
without Title I), we assume that in the absence of Title I, spending per pupil would have
increased in line with income growth: We apply the assumed income elasticity of demand and
the observed growth in median family income in the county7 to pre-program (1964) per-pupil
current expenditure:
CounterfactualSpendingPerPupil69  SpendingPerPupil 64    %MedianFamilyIncome6469
We then multiply by enrollment to get total counterfactual spending:
CounterfactualSpending 69  CounterfactualSpendingPerPupil69  Enrollment 69
To estimate %ΔIncomeDuetoGrant, we divide the Title I grant by the number of families (to get
the additional income per family implied by the grant, as if the grant were distributed as cash)
and then divide by median family income in 1969:

TotalTitleIGrant 69
%IncomeDuetoGrant 

NumberFamilies69
MedianFamilyIncome69

We can then calculate the additional spending the Title I grant would be expected to generate for
each county. To compare that to our coefficients, which indicate how much additional spending
was generated for each additional dollar of Title I revenue, we divide the implied additional
spending by the total Title I grant. Using this method, we calculate the expected additional
spending for a range of income elasticities reported in the literature, 0.40 to 0.65 (Fisher and
7

We assume that half the change in median family income at the county level (obtained from the County and City
Data Book) from 1960 to 1970 occurred from 1964 to 1969.

58

Papke, 2001). These estimates are consistent with spending increases of $0.12 to $0.19 per dollar
of Title I revenue.

59

