                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INCOME INEQUALITY AND EARLY NON-MARITAL CHILDBEARING:
            AN ECONOMIC EXPLORATION OF THE "CULTURE OF DESPAIR"

                                       Melissa Schettini Kearney
                                           Phillip B. Levine

                                         Working Paper 17157
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17157


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




This paper was originally circulated as "Early Non-marital Childbearing and the 'Culture of Despair'."
The authors thank Liz Ananat, Judy Hellerstein, and Serkan Ozbeklik for comments on an earlier version.
We also acknowledge helpful comments from seminar participants at the Harris School at the University
of Chicago, the Harvard Labor Workshop, Middlebury College, the Maryland Population Research
Center, University of British Columbia, Wharton, University of Wisconsin IRP, Northwestern IPR,
and participants at the conferences, “Public Policy and the Economics of Fertility” at Mount Holyoke
and “Labor Markets, Children, and Families” at the University of Stavanger. We thank Erin Moody
and Lisa Dettling for very capable research assistance. We are grateful to Christopher Rogers at the
National Center for Health Statistics for facilitating our access to confidential data. Any views expressed
are those of the authors alone, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Melissa Schettini Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Inequality and Early Non-Marital Childbearing: An Economic Exploration of the
"Culture of Despair"
Melissa Schettini Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 17157
June 2011, Revised January 2012
JEL No. I3,J1

                                              ABSTRACT

Using individual-level data from the United States and a number of other developed countries, we
empirically investigate the role of income inequality in determining rates of early, non-marital childbearing
among low socioeconomic status (SES) women. We present robust evidence that low SES women
are more likely to give birth at a young age and outside of marriage when they live in more unequal
places, all else held constant. Our results suggest that inequality itself, as opposed to other correlated
geographic factors, drives this relationship. We calculate that differences in the level of inequality
are able to explain a sizeable share of the geographic variation in teen fertility rates both across U.S.
states and across developed countries. We propose a model of economic “despair” that facilitates the
interpretation of our results. It reinterprets the sociological and ethnographic literature that emphasizes
the role of economic marginalization and hopelessness into a parsimonious framework that captures
the concept of “despair” with an individual’s perception of economic success. Our empirical results
are consistent with the idea that income inequality heightens a sense of economic despair among those
at the bottom of the distribution.


Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu
                                                                                           Kearney and Levine, p. 1


I. INTRODUCTION

         Rates of early, non-marital childbearing vary tremendously across countries and across

states. The United States is consistently at the high end of this distribution, with a rate of teen

childbearing that greatly exceeds that of other developed countries. Within the United States the

experience is far from uniform. Some states have teen childbearing rates that are roughly

comparable to those found in Europe, whereas others have rates that are over three times that

level.

         These patterns are documented in Figures 1 and 2, which display teen childbearing rates

by country and by states within the U.S., respectively. The teen birth rate of 41.5 per 1,000 in

the United States is a multiple of the level that exists in other developed countries. For example,

the rate is 25.9 in the United Kingdom, 14.1 in Canada, and 4.3 in Switzerland. Figure 2 shows

that tremendous variation exists across states as well: some states have rates that are comparable

to those in other developed countries, but others have extremely high rates. For example, the

rates in Texas, New Mexico, and Mississippi (over 60 per 1,000) are more than three times the

rates in New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and Vermont.1 As we document subsequently, these

geographic differences are long-standing and persistent. We consider this geographic variation to

pose both a challenge and potentially a clue in thinking about factors that may be important to

understanding rates of early non-marital childbearing.

         Despite over four decades of research on the topic of early, non-marital childbearing, the

best available research to date has very little to say about why these differences exist and why

they are so persistent. Why is it that teenagers in the United States are so much more likely than

1
  This cross-state variation in teen birth rates does not simply reflect cross-state variation in overall birth rates. The
highest fertility rates to women age 15-44 are found in Alaska, Idaho, and Utah, which rank 35, 28, and 19,
respectively, in terms of teen birth rates (Martin et al., 2010). In addition, this cross-section variation is substantially
larger than recent time-series variation, which has garnered so much attention. Between 1991 and 2008, the national
teen birth rate fell from a peak of 62 to 42.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 2


their counterparts in other countries to give birth when young and unmarried? Why are teens in

some parts of the United States so much more likely to have a teen birth than their counterparts

in other parts of the country? In this paper we argue that the standard explanations studied by

economists come up short of being able to explain any substantial share of the variation. We

propose a new direction of research and present robust empirical evidence that income inequality

can explain a substantial share of this geographic variation.

       A striking correlation exists between income inequality and aggregate rates of teen

childbearing, both across countries and across states. But places with more inequality also differ

in many other dimensions that could affect rates of teen childbearing. To determine whether

aggregate inequality measures have a causal relationship with rates of early non-marital

childbearing, we conduct an empirical analysis of individual level data that examines whether

income inequality operates on individuals likely to be affected in a negative way – namely, those

at the bottom of the income distribution. We use individual level data from the National Survey

of Family Growth (NSFG) to look across states in the U.S. and individual level data from the

Fertility and Family Survey (FFS), conducted by the United Nations, to look across several

developed countries. We find that women who grew up in low socioeconomic circumstances

have more teen, non-marital births when they live in higher inequality locations, all else equal.

The proximate mechanism driving this finding is less frequent use of abortion.

       Of course, other geographic characteristics are likely to be correlated with inequality and

may limit our ability to draw causal conclusions from this relationship. Our analysis controls for

demographic characteristics of the population and a broad array of public policies that could

otherwise pose problems for our interpretation. We also show that our results are unchanged

when we hold constant other economic factors, like the absolute income levels of the poor, as
                                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 3


well as other potentially important environmental factors such as social capital or political

climate. While we could never completely rule out the existence of an omitted factor, the

robustness of the relationship is striking.

         We propose a model of economic “despair” to rationalize these results. Our model is

heavily influenced by the existing ethnographic and sociological literature on the topic, including

the work of Clark (1965), Lewis (1969), Wilson (1987), and Edin and Kefalas (2005), among

others. Despite specific differences, all these authors broadly view despair and hopelessness as

playing a key role in driving rates of non-marital childbearing among the poor. Our contribution

to this literature is to capture this qualitative idea in a parsimonious model within the economics

paradigm of a utility-maximizing framework. We explicitly treat an early non-marital birth as

being the result of individual decision-making.

         We focus on the idea that it is the perceived inability of poor women to improve their

situation through work or marriage that leads them to choose motherhood when young and

single, rather than delaying until a later period. When a poor young woman perceives that

socioeconomic success is unachievable to her, she is more likely to embrace motherhood in her

current position, as there is little option value to be gained by delaying the immediate

gratification of having a baby. When there is relatively more hope of economic advancement – a

perception that is more likely in a more equal or mobile society – it is relatively more desirable

to delay motherhood and invest in human or social capital. 2 The operational link to the empirical

work is that the combination of being poor and living in a more unequal (and less mobile)




2
  We show subsequently that inequality and mobility are highly correlated across societies. We also discuss that
inequality theoretically could have an opposing “aspirational” effect (more to strive for in unequal societies), so that
the ultimate impact of inequality on teen childbearing outcomes is an empirical question. The evidence is consistent
with our interpretation here.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 4


society contributes to the decision to have a baby when young and unmarried. Our empirical

results are consistent with these ideas.

       Our scholarly contribution is twofold. First, we present empirical evidence supporting the

role of income inequality in driving rates of early, non-marital childbearing among those at the

bottom of the income distribution. Our estimates suggest that inequality can explain a sizable

share of the geographic variation observed in teen childbearing rates, on the order of 10 to 50

percent. To date, no other explanation can come close to explaining as much of the geographic

variation.

       Second, we believe our economic model of despair constitutes an important contribution

to the literature in economics that considers so-called risky behaviors. In our conceptualization,

these behaviors might be more appropriately considered “drop out” behaviors, in so far as

adolescents are choosing to drop out of the mainstream climb to socio-economic success.

Though this paper is focused entirely on early non-marital childbearing, we believe our model is

applicable to a number of other contexts that involve current benefits and future economic costs.

II. REVIEW OF PREVIOUS RESEARCH

       The standard economics model of childbearing considers an individual who maximizes

utility over children and other consumption subject to a budget constraint (cf. Becker and Lewis,

1973). Preferences are generally assumed to be given and stable, and explanations have focused

on differences in constraints, often generated by particular policies and institutions. Economists

have tended to explore the relevance of factors such as the incentives of the welfare system, the

role that abortion policy plays, the impact of labor market conditions, and the like. Other

research has examined the impact of an individual’s own economic disadvantage and her

likelihood of having an early non-marital birth.
                                                                          Kearney and Levine, p. 5


       The political scientist Charles Murray (1986) wrote in his now-famous book, Losing

Ground, that the welfare system provided incentives for couples to have a child outside of

marriage by reducing both the financial rewards of marriage and the financial costs of out-of-

wedlock childbearing. This hypothesis became politically popular among conservatives and

helped usher in an era of welfare reform. It also spawned a vast empirical literature in economics

investigating the issue. Moffitt (1998 and 2003) provides an overview of the large literature on the

topic, concluding that more generous welfare benefits likely have only a modest positive effect on

rates of non-marital childbearing. With regard to the variation across countries, the lower rate of

teen childbearing in Europe with its much more generous welfare system provides a prima facie

case against the hypothesis that social support is largely to blame for high rates of teen

childbearing in the United States.

       Economists have also examined a host of other policy and institutional factors relevant to

the costs of avoiding or not avoiding a non-marital or teen birth. A highly incomplete list of such

studies includes previous work that we have conducted elsewhere on the effect of various

policies and environmental conditions, such as restrictive abortion policies (Levine, Trainor, and

Zimmerman, 1996; Levine, 2003); welfare reform (Kearney, 2004); labor market conditions

(Levine, 2001) and access to affordable contraception (Kearney and Levine, 2009a). These

empirical studies have generally found that changes in such “prices” do have impacts on teen and

non-marital childbearing, but individually these factors can account for only very small shares of

the total variation in non-marital childbearing.

       Moving away from traditional economic models of fertility, Akerlof, Yellen, and Katz

(1996) propose a “technology shock” hypothesis for the rise in non-marital childbearing in the

U.S. in the later 20th century. They relate the erosion of the custom of “shotgun marriage” – the
                                                                         Kearney and Levine, p. 6


practice of getting married between conception and birth -- to the legalization of abortion and the

increased availability of contraception to unmarried women in the United States. The story is one

of decreased bargaining power on the part of women who do not adopt either birth control or

abortion. This theory is an intriguing explanation for the decrease in shotgun marriages in the

U.S. over the relevant decades, but it is unlikely to have much explanatory power for the

geographic variation in outcomes since those technology shocks happened everywhere.

       Behavioral economists O’Donohue and Rabin (1999) suggest that teens are “hyperbolic

discounters,” who place disproportionate weight on present happiness as compared to future

well-being. Other scholars suggest that teen childbearing is attributable to teens’ stage of

cognitive development, arguing that they are not quite ready to make the types of decisions that

would prevent a pregnancy (for example, Brooks-Gunn and Furstenberg, 1989; Hardy and Zabin,

1991; Brooks-Gunn and Paikoff, 1997).While limited decision-making capacity surely is an

issue for some set of teens, we note that these claims have an element of universality to them that

cannot begin to explain the striking differences in rates of early non-marital childbearing across

socioeconomic groups, over time, or across states or countries. In other words, we doubt that the

particularly high rate of teen childbearing among U.S. teens as compared to their counterparts in

Europe can be attributed to the more limited decision making capacity -- or more present-biased

preferences -- of the teenage brain in America.

       Another line of research considers the relationship between background disadvantage and

rates of early childbearing (cf. Duncan and Hoffman, 1990; An, Haveman, and Wolfe, 1993;

Lundberg and Plotnick, 1995; and Duncan, et al., 1998). It is well-known that growing up in

disadvantaged circumstances, such as in poverty or to a single mother, is associated with much

higher rates of early childbearing. In a previous examination of cohort rates of early
                                                                                     Kearney and Levine, p. 7


childbearing, we find that the proportion of a female cohort born economically disadvantaged –

as captured by being born to a teen mother, a single mother, or to a mother with a low level of

education – is tightly linked to the subsequent rate of early childbearing in that cohort (Kearney

and Levine, 2009b). But, strikingly, we find that state and year of birth fixed effects capture

much of the variation. We interpret that finding as suggestive of the importance of some

“cultural” dimension, otherwise un-modeled in that framework; we return to such an alternative

perspective subsequently.

        Although economists have been contributing to discussions of early, non-marital

childbearing for several decades, the first contributors to the discussion were other social

scientists. Their work pursued a parallel, rarely (if ever) intersecting track. Daniel Patrick

Moynihan’s 1965 report first drew attention to the issue of non-marital childbearing among black

families in the U.S., when the rate was one in three. 3 At about the same time, the social theories

of the psychologist Clark (1965) and the anthropologist Lewis (1969) - who developed the theory

of the “Culture of Poverty” - were met with controversy. Lewis (1969) wrote the following:

        The culture of poverty is both an adaptation and a reaction of the poor to their
        marginal position in a class-stratified, highly individuated, capitalistic society. It
        represents an effort to cope with the feelings of hopelessness and despair that
        develop from the realization of the improbability of achieving success in terms of
        the values and goals of the larger society … [M]any will tell you that marriage by
        law, by the church, or by both is the idea form of marriage; but few marry …
        Women often turn down offers of marriage because they feel that it ties them
        down to men who are immature, punishing, and generally unreliable (p. 189-190)


This lack of opportunity was observed explicitly by Clark (1965), who wrote the following:



3
  Moynihan (1965) argued that the deterioration of the nuclear family, and the rise of the female-headed households,
was hindering the economic progress of blacks in the U.S. As a policy matter, he argued that it was crucial to
improve the job prospects of black men in order to keep them engaged in the family and community as father
figures, and thereby curb the steady increase in rates of out-of-wedlock childbearing and divorce that was
contributing to increased rates of poverty among black communities.
                                                                          Kearney and Levine, p. 8


       In the ghetto, the meaning of the illegitimate child is not ultimate disgrace. There
       is not the demand for abortion or for surrender of the child that one finds in more
       privileged communities. In the middle class, the disgrace of illegitimacy is tied to
       personal and family aspirations. In lower-class families, on the other hand, the
       girl loses only some of her already limited options by having an illegitimate child;
       she is not going to make a “better marriage” or improve her economic and social
       status either way. On the contrary, a child is a symbol of the fact that she is a
       woman, and she may gain from having something of her own. Nor is the boy who
       fathers an illegitimate child going to lose, for where is he going? The path to any
       higher status seems closed to him in any case (p. 72).


       The sociologist Wilson (1987) revived serious scholarship on the topic with his book The

Truly Disadvantaged. The distinction between Wilson and Clark is largely the focus on the lack

of jobs itself in Wilson, not the social attitude that results from the lack of jobs. Either way, the

lack of opportunity is what is driving the childbearing outcomes in both viewpoints, as described

in the following excerpt:

       Thus, in a neighborhood with a paucity of regularly employed families and with
       the overwhelming majority of families having spells of long-term joblessness,
       people experience a social isolation that excludes them from the job network
       system that permeates other neighborhoods and that is so important in learning
       about or being recommended for jobs that become available in various parts of
       the city … Moreover, unlike the situation in earlier years, girls who become
       pregnant out of wedlock invariably give birth out of wedlock because of a
       shrinking pool of marriageable, that is, employed black men (p. 57).

The relevant environmental factor for women in this argument is the weak marriage market that

is attributable to the lack of jobs for men in the inner city. Wilson is clear to point out that his

focus is on "social isolation" and not the "culture of poverty."

       More recently, Edin and Kefalas (2005) contributed an influential ethnographic account

of non-marital childbearing among poor women. They make the following observation:

       … the extreme loneliness, the struggles with parents and peers, the wild behavior,
       the depression and despair, the school failure, the drugs, and the general sense
       that life has spun completely out of control. Into this void comes a pregnancy and
       then a baby, bringing the purpose, the validation, the companionship, and the
       order that young women feel have been so sorely lacking. In some profound
                                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 9


         sense, these young women believe, a baby has the power to solve everything (p.
         10).

From this perspective, having a baby at a young age outside the scope of marriage is not the

result of a constraint, but something that the woman values.

         Our reading of these seminal and influential works is that they find common ground in

the notion that growing up in an environment where there is little chance of social and economic

advancement leads young women to bear children outside of marriage. These women perceive

that they have so little chance for success in life not solely because of their own disadvantage,

but also because of the environment in which they live. They see no reason to postpone having a

child and may even benefit from having one, regardless of marital status.4

         This literature provides potentially useful insights regarding why some places have so

much higher rates of early non-marital childbearing than others. Disadvantaged individuals who

live in locations with little opportunity for economic advancement will be more likely to have an

early, non-marital birth. We will return to these ideas subsequently in interpreting the results of

our econometric analysis.

III. ECONOMETRIC APPROACH

         A potential clue in understanding the determinants of early, non-marital childbearing is

the persistence in its geographic patterns. Year-to-year and even decade-to-decade variability

within a location is very limited. The correlation in teen birth rates within states, for instance,

between 1980 and 2008 is 0.92. This suggests that longstanding differences across states are

critical. In terms of thinking about a typical analysis of state-year level regressions, statistically


4
  Many of these arguments, and particularly the earlier ones, focus directly on the issues of race. The Moynihan
Report (1965) which first broadly publicized the issue of rising non-marital fertility, also focused on race. At the
time, one in three births to black women was outside of marriage whereas the rate for whites was much lower. Now
that rates of early, non-marital childbearing are high for all women (albeit still higher for black women), our view is
that this is less an issue of race today than it used to be.
                                                                                      Kearney and Levine, p. 10


the state fixed effect is paramount in explaining variation in teen childbearing research. In this

research we are trying to see whether we can get inside the black box of that fixed effect.

         One potential culprit among many is income inequality, which tends to be fairly

persistent within a place and shows a strong correlation with rates of early, non-marital

childbearing.5 Wilkinson and Pickett (2009) call attention to the correlation between inequality

and a broad range of “social ills,” including increased crime, drug use, mortality, and teen

childbearing, among others. Figures 3 and 4 present scatter plots displaying these relationships

across developed countries and across states in a similar manner to their analysis. The correlation

is positive, and is especially large in the case of cross-country comparisons. This correlation is

noteworthy, but it does not necessarily imply a causal positive relationship between income

inequality and early, non-marital childbearing. 6

         An important step in establishing a causal relationship is to determine that inequality

operates on those who are most likely to be negatively impacted by it. With this purpose in mind,

our primary empirical test is based on determining whether low SES women in high inequality

locations are more likely to have an early, non-marital birth compared to higher SES women in

those locations.       We estimate regression models for a series of fertility outcomes (birth,

conception, etc.) controlling for year-of-birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. We also

control for individual level demographics, public policy variables and time-varying labor market

conditions in these models.




5
  Using data from the 1980 and 2000 Censuses, which we describe subsequently, we find that the correlation in the
50/10 ratio across states between those years is 0.74.
6
  Wilkinson and Pickett (2009) focuses on correlational relationships, which are merely the starting point of our
empirical investigation. Furthermore, the robustness of their correlational relationships has been called into question
in other contexts, for example, see Deaton and Lubotsky (2003) on the relationship between inequality and
mortality.
                                                                                             Kearney and Levine, p. 11


        The key variable in our models is the interaction between long-term measures of

inequality and a woman's socioeconomic status. We are interested in explaining persistent

differences in rates of early, non-marital childbearing across places. We therefore focus our

analysis on “fixed” characteristics of environments. In terms of inequality, this means we

empirically consider variation in long-term averages in state and national measures of income

inequality. Note that these long-term inequality measures are perfectly correlated with the state

fixed effects, and we thus do not separately estimate the conditional main effect.

        More formally, we estimate regression models for multiple outcomes by age 20 of the

form:

                  Outcomeisc  0  1  I s  LSisc   2 LSisc  3 X isc  4 Esc   s   c   isc          [1]


where I is our measure of inequality, LS is an indicator of low socioeconomic status, and the

interaction term is the regressor of primary interest. The subscript i indexes individuals, s indexes

states (or countries), and c indexes birth cohorts. The terms γs and γc represent state (or country)

and birth cohort fixed effects, respectively.                 The vector X consists of additional personal

demographic characteristics – age, age squared, race/ethnicity, and an indicator for living with a

single parent at age 14.

        The vector E captures environmental factors including relevant public policies and labor

market conditions in the state-year: the unemployment rate, an indicator for a welfare family cap,

the maximum welfare benefit for a family of three, an indicator for SCHIP implementation, an

indicator for whether the state Medicaid program covers abortion, an indicator for whether state

abortion regulations include parental notification or mandatory delay periods, and whether the

state Medicaid program includes expansion policies for family planning services (see Kearney

and Levine, 2009a for a discussion of these policies. The data sources used to create these
                                                                                            Kearney and Levine, p. 12


variables are described in the data appendix. By including all of these individual and state level

controls in the model, our estimated effect of inequality for low-SES women is net of effects

driven by policies that might be correlated with inequality.

      Our primary question of interest is whether β1 is positive: are low-SES women in high

inequality states relatively more likely to have a non-marital birth by age 20? We consider the

multiple channels through which a difference in birth rates could be realized. First, an individual

can take actions with regard to sexual behavior and contraceptive practices; low SES women in

more unequal places may be more likely to get pregnant. Second, a non-marital childbirth could

be avoided through the choice to end a pregnancy; low SES women in more unequal places may

be relatively less likely to choose an abortion to end her pregnancy. And finally, non-marital

births depend upon the parents choosing to remain unmarried after a pregnancy occurs; low SES

women in more unequal places may be relatively less likely to get married before the birth

through a so-called “shot-gun” marriage.

       One limitation of this modeling approach is that any other characteristic of the

socioeconomic environment that might be correlated with inequality and also directly related to

non-marital early childbearing propensities among low-SES women will be captured by our

long-run inequality/SES interaction term. Although it is impossible to completely rule out this

form of omitted variable bias, we examine whether introducing additional interactions of SES

with other potentially troublesome characteristics change our results.                               More formally, we

estimate “horse race” models that take the form:

         Outcomeisc  0  1  I s  LSisc   2 LSisc  4  As  LSisc   4 X isc  5 Esc   s   c   isc   [2]
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 13


This specification is largely the same as that in equation [1] except that we now include

alternative factors (A) that are time invariant within states (not countries, as we describe

subsequently) and we interact them with an indicator for low SES.

       We consider two categories of alternatives. The first includes other features of the

income and wage distribution. The second includes other social measures that are more directly

focused on identifying alternative explanations – political composition of the state, a measure of

religiosity of the state, the percentage of the population that is minority, the incarceration rate,

poverty rate, and Putnam’s Social Capital Index. We describe all of the alternatives we consider

in more detail when we report the results of our analysis.

IV. DATA DESCRIPTION

       Our empirical analysis takes advantage of cross-state variation in outcomes using five

waves of data from the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) and cross-national variation

in outcomes using data from the Fertility and Family Surveys (FFS).

A. NSFG Data

       The NSFG has evolved considerably since its inception in 1973. Initially, it focused

exclusively on married women between the ages of 15 and 44. Beginning with the 1982 survey,

all women in this age range were included regardless of marital status; we restrict our attention to

the surveys since then. The 2002 survey was also the first to include men in this age range, but

with just two waves of men available and a relatively small sample size for state level analyses,

these data are insufficient to study their childbearing outcomes for this project. Also, beginning

in 2006, the survey changed its design from one that was conducted every six or seven years to

one that is conducted annually, but with smaller samples in each year. In the end, we use data
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 14


from the 1982, 1988, 1995, 2002, and 2006-2008 surveys. These surveys provide observations

for over 42,000 women between the ages of 15 and 44.

       In all of our subsequent analysis, we restrict our attention to women who have turned age

20 (or 25 where appropriate) in 1976 or afterwards. The age restriction follows naturally from

our outcome measures that are measured at age 20 or 25.         We impose the year restriction to

avoid much of the social and behavioral changes that were associated with the introduction and

diffusion of the birth control pill in the 1960s and abortion legalization in the early 1970s. After

imposing these sample restrictions, we still have nearly 27,000 observations in these data.

       Each survey contains complete pregnancy histories, which we can use to generate

measures of pregnancies and pregnancy resolution (including childbearing) by age 20 (that is,

through age 19). One potential problem with these data is the reporting of abortions. A woman

who has had an abortion may report it accurately, report it as a miscarriage, or not report the

pregnancy at all. For our purposes, we focus on the incidence of “pregnancy failure,” which

includes either a miscarriage or an abortion. This measure should capture behavioral changes in

abortion regardless of how they are reported as long as the pregnancy itself is reported.

Although miscarriages may not be purely biologically determined (Ashcraft and Lang, 2010), we

believe it is reasonable to assume that the vast majority of movements in pregnancy failures are

generated from changes in abortion decisions (particularly since fetal deaths are so rare).

       Data on age at first marriage is also available so that we can ascertain whether the

observed pregnancies occurred before marriage.          We can also approximate whether the

pregnancy led to a marriage that occurred before the birth of the child. We define these so-called

“shotgun marriages” as a birth that follows a marriage by six months or less.
                                                                                     Kearney and Levine, p. 15


         The importance of using microdata for this exercise is that we are able to link fertility

histories to personal characteristics. In particular, the hypothesis we test is about the impact of

inequality on the fertility decisions of those with low socioeconomic status. It is critical to be

able to provide an operational definition of low socioeconomic status and identify women who

satisfy it. Although ideally we would have access to family income when women were growing

up, the retrospective nature of the data prohibits that. Instead, we categorize women according to

their mother’s level of education, focusing on the children of high school dropouts as the ones

who should be affected the most when they grow up in locations with greater inequality.

Another important feature of these data is the availability of state identifiers, which enable us to

make the link to the level of income inequality where the women grew up.7

         We attach to these outcome measures a set of environmental factors that existed in the

respondent’s state of residence and the year in which she turned age 19; when we analyze birth

outcomes by age 25, we attach state-level factors for the year in which a woman turned age 24.

These factors include the policy variables listed above -- the level of welfare generosity and the

status of welfare reform, SCHIP implementation, Medicaid family planning expansions, and the

types of abortion restrictions. In addition, we attach the state-level unemployment rate in that

year. We additionally attach alternative characteristics measures that we use in our horse race

specifications – percentage of votes to Democrats, Index of religiosity, percentage of population

that is minority, incarceration rate, poverty rate, and Putnam’s Social Capital Index.




7
  State identifiers are available in the NSFG for researchers with special permission from the National Center for
Health Research. We accessed these data on-site at the NCHS Research Data Center in Hyattsville, MD. These state
identifiers focus on the respondent’s state of residence at the time of the survey, which may be different from their
state of residence during their teenage years. We have to assume that any interstate migration related to the
interaction of inequality and socioeconomic status during the intervening years is small.
                                                                                      Kearney and Levine, p. 16


         Of primary interest, we attach measures of income inequality in the respondent’s state of

residence.8 We created these measures using microdata from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses

along with the 2006-2008 American Community Surveys on household income. These data are

available from IPUMS-USA (Ruggles, 2010). Using these data, we estimated income cut-offs at

the 10th and 50th percentiles for each state and survey year and then generate ratios of these

measures (i.e. 50/10 ratio) as our indicator of inequality. We use these data to estimate long-run

averages in measured inequality within states.

         Table 1 tabulates inequality by state, which varies widely. Interestingly, the fifth highest

inequality state by this measure is Massachusetts with a 50/10 ratio of 4.6 and the fifth lowest

inequality state is its neighbor, Vermont, with a 50/10 ratio of 3.6. This suggests that as a rough

gauge, moving from a low inequality state to a high inequality state increases the 50/10 ratio by

around 1. We will use this number in interpreting our results.

         Figures 5 and 6 present some descriptive statistics from the NSFG data that provide some

useful background for interpreting our subsequent analysis. In Figure 5, we present trends in

rates of childbearing by age 20 for all women and by marital status at the time of first birth. This

figure shows that the rate of early childbearing has fluctuated around a level of about 20 percent

since the mid-1970s. The most recent trend is downward; of those who turned age 20 in 2006

around 17 percent had already given birth. This relative stability masks dramatic differences in
8
  We have considered whether the state is the right level of aggregation for this analysis. On the one hand, teens
may have a better perspective on the economic well-being of those more immediately around her. On the other, the
broader environment may better capture for her what her available opportunities are. Data issues also hinder our
ability to conduct an analysis at local levels. First, our geographic identifier in the NSFG is the location of current
residence and mobility is a much greater concern at the local level than at a broader level. Second, the only sub-
state identifier available even in restricted NSFG data is the county of residence. This limits the sample size
available for our analysis because public use census data only identifies county of residence for 40 percent of the
population. Nevertheless, we have conducted a county-level analysis identical in form to that reported here using
the subset of NSFG respondents who live in counties for which Census income data are available. The results are
qualitatively similar than those reported here, but smaller in size. Rather than a coefficient of 0.053 (0.015) in
Column 1 of Table 3, the comparable coefficient with county data is 0.031 (0.012). This is consistent with the
attenuation bias that would result from cross-county migration.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 17


marital versus non-marital early childbearing. The percentage of women who had a marital birth

by age 20 fell from 14 percent to 3 percent over this period. The comparable statistic for non-

marital births rose from 8 percent to 14 percent. Understanding these patterns (including a

discussion of whether a decline in shotgun marriages is responsible) is clearly important in

understanding the trends in early childbearing.

       In Figure 6, we focus on the outcomes for unmarried women who were pregnant before

the age of 20. The most notable feature of this figure is the dramatic increase in the percentage

of women who go on to carry their pregnancy to term. Although this outcome occurred only

about 40 percent of the time in the mid-1970s, it now occurs nearly two-thirds of the time. This

increase can be attributed partly to a reduction in the fraction of non-marital conceptions that

result in a marital birth (i.e. shotgun marriage). Since around 1980, however, a reduction in the

percentage of pregnancy failures, likely the result of less frequent use of abortion, is another

contributing factor. In the most recent statistics, a woman who gets pregnant outside of marriage

has a 62 percent probability of having a non-marital birth, a 10 percent probability of getting

married before the birth, and a 28 percent probability of aborting or having a miscarriage.

B. FFS Data

       The Family and Fertility Survey is a dataset that combines survey data from 23 countries

mainly in Western and Eastern Europe (along with a few other developed countries) conducted

largely during the early and mid-1990s. A standard questionnaire was prepared that asked

respondents to report characteristics of their household, parents, partnerships, and children,

among other things. Importantly each survey also contains complete fertility histories for each

respondent. The survey was given to national representative samples of women (and men in
                                                                                     Kearney and Levine, p. 18


many countries) of childbearing age. Although a standard questionnaire existed, modifications

were imposed in many countries so that the data available is not necessarily uniform.

         For our purposes, we restricted our attention to those countries outside of Eastern Europe.

Women’s fertility histories are the focus of our analysis and childbearing outcomes for women in

these FFS countries mostly took place prior to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Because of the

vastly different economic environment that existed in those countries during that period, we did

not include them in our analysis. The remaining countries include Austria, Belgium, Canada,

Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, and the United

States.9 The United States data actually is the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth. In much

of our reported results, we exclude the United States because it is such an outlier among this

group of countries in terms of both its level of inequality and the level of early childbearing. As

in the NSFG, and for similar reasons, we restrict our attention to those women who were older

than 20 or 25 (depending on the age at which outcomes are measured) on the survey date and

who turned those ages no earlier than 1976. That date pushes most childbearing outcomes

beyond the introduction and diffusion of the birth control pill and, in many (but not all) countries

past the legalization of abortion. 10

         Unlike our analysis of NSFG data, we do not distinguish fertility outcomes between those

that take place within and outside the scope of marriage.                    The reason for this is that the

relationship between marriage and fertility in many European countries is considerably weaker

than it is in the United States; it is not uncommon for committed partners to have children before

marriage and then marry sometime later (cf. Kiernan, 2004). As such, the link between



9
  Obtaining data from the Netherlands requires a separate application procedure, which we have yet to complete.
10
   In our regression models using these data we also include measures of the legal status of abortion in each country
in each year. The data necessary to code this variable are available in Levine (2004).
                                                                                 Kearney and Levine, p. 19


subsequent well-being and whether marriage preceded a birth is weaker, so we do not use

marriage to distinguish between outcomes.

        To measure a woman’s socioeconomic status, we use an indicator of whether a woman

grew up in a household (“most of the time”) with both of her parents as opposed to a single

parent or no parent household. This variable is not available in each country and further restricts

the data available to us. In the end, we are left with Austria, Belgium, Finland, Germany,

Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain as the countries available for our analysis of fertility. When

we focus on conception and pregnancy failure, we are further restricted because the surveys in

Austria and Germany do not ask about these outcomes, so we are left with data for six countries.

        The main additional variable that we attach to these data is the Gini coefficient as our

inequality measure that we also calculate as the long-term average within each country. We use

the Gini coefficient here rather than the 50/10 ratio because its use in international inequality

statistics is more prevalent. We take advantage of the data collection efforts conducted by the

United Nations World Institute for Development Economics Research (UN-WIDER), which has

cataloged an expansive collection of Gini coefficient estimates for a large number of countries in

its World Income Inequality Database. 11 We restrict our attention to all available estimates

between 1976 and 2000, focusing on those that are: (a) obtained from nationally representative

data sources; (b) deemed to be of high quality; (c) cover the entire population of the country; (d)

use individuals as the unit of analysis, and; (e) focus on disposable income. Imposing these

restrictions still leaves at least six estimates of the Gini coefficient within each country. 12 We

take the simple average of these within-country estimates to obtain our desired long-term


11
   We obtained these data from http://www.wider.unu.edu/research/Database/en_GB/database/ (accessed June 7,
2011)
12
   For Finland, we have 40 estimates of the Gini coefficient over the 25 years because multiple data sources are
available for the same year.
                                                                         Kearney and Levine, p. 20


measure of inequality. Along with the Gini coefficient, we also attach national unemployment

rates for each country and year along with indicators for the legal status of abortion.

       Figure 7 displays trends in conceptions, births, and pregnancy failures in the countries

with complete data on all of these outcomes over time. It shows that the percentage of women

giving birth by age 20 fell in these countries from about 14 percent to 10 or 11 percent for birth

cohorts hitting age 20 in 1976 through 1989 (using this cut-off to maintain the same countries in

the panel throughout the period). These rates are at least 50 percent lower than that observed in

the United States, as reported in Figure 5. Rates of conception have fallen as well, particularly

throughout the 1980s, which is consistent with the drop off in the rate of pregnancy failure

during this period. Since changes over time in pregnancy failures are largely attributable to

changes in the rate of abortion, the declining occurrence of abortion during this period in Europe

matches that occurring in the United States at that time.

       Table 2 characterizes the degree of income inequality in all of the FFS countries used in

this analysis (including those with missing pregnancy resolution data). It shows a great deal of

dispersion in inequality, as captured by the Gini coefficient. As a rough characterization, low

inequality countries have a Gini coefficient around .25, middle inequality is characterized by a

Gini of around .3 and high inequality is captured by a Gini of around .35. Although not listed

here, the estimate of .38 in the United States is higher than any of these other countries. The

spread of around .1 is a useful reference point for subsequent interpretation of the magnitude of

our regression results later in the paper.

V. RESULTS

A. Analysis of NSFG Data
                                                                          Kearney and Levine, p. 21


       Before presenting our formal econometric results, we begin by presenting a descriptive

analysis of the NSFG data that is comparable in spirit to our regression models that can illustrate

the findings to come. To do so, we distinguish states by their long-term level of income

inequality (50/10 ratio). As listed in Table 1, we categorize states by quartile, focusing on the top

and bottom quartiles along with the interquartile range for each of these income measures,

respectively, giving us three categories: high, medium, and low inequality. Then, we distinguish

women by their mother’s level of education and estimate a set of outcomes for women separately

by socioeconomic status (as proxied for by her mother’s education group) and state inequality

category (high/medium/low). A comparison of outcomes across states and SES groups represents

a stylized version of the interaction of SES and state inequality measures, previewing the

regressions to follow.

       Figures 8A through 8D present the results of this exercise. Figure 8A focuses on non-

marital childbearing by age 20. It shows that high SES women (with college-educated mothers)

exhibit little variation in early non-marital childbearing across states that differ in their level of

income inequality. Low SES women (with mothers who have dropped out of high school) are

more likely to give birth to a child at a young age outside of marriage if they live in a high

inequality state. Moving from a low inequality state to a high inequality state (which represents

roughly a one point increase in the 50/10 ratio) appears to increase the rate of non-marital

childbearing by age 20 by around 5 percentage points.

       Figures 8B through 8D are designed to determine the antecedent behavior that leads to

this increase in non-marital childbearing among low SES women. In Figure 8B we see little

evidence that high inequality changes rates of non-marital conceptions differentially for women

who differ by SES. Figure 8C displays rates of pregnancy failure that does show a pattern of
                                                                         Kearney and Levine, p. 22


behavior across states and groups of women that is consistent with the pattern in non-marital

childbearing. Middle and high SES women have no clear pattern in their rates of pregnancy

failure, but the pattern for low SES women is clear. Rates of pregnancy failure are a little over 4

percentage points lower for these women when they reside in high inequality states compared to

low inequality states. This means that the differences in early non-marital childbearing can

almost entirely be attributed to differences in the rate of pregnancy failure, which is likely due to

differences in the use of abortion. Figure 8D focuses on rates of shotgun marriage; no apparent

pattern is observed across groups here.

       These charts represent a stylized version of the regressions reported in Table 3, which

reports estimates from our econometric model described earlier. The first column in the upper

panel of this table explores non-marital births by age 20 as the outcome. The interaction

between the 50/10 ratio and having a high school dropout mother represents β 1 in our

econometric model. It indicates that low SES mothers in a high inequality state are more likely

to have a non-marital birth by age 20. As we saw earlier, a one point change in the 50/10 ratio

roughly captures the movement from a low inequality state to a high inequality state. In this

case, that movement is predicted to increase early, non-marital childbearing by 5.3 percentage

points for those women whose mothers were high school dropouts. This point estimate is very

similar to what we observed in Figure 8A, suggesting that the other covariates in the model have

very little correlation with inequality and/or early non-marital childbearing.

       The remainder of the top panel of the table focuses on other non-marital outcomes and all

marital outcomes by age 20. In Column 3, we see that much of the reason why non-marital

childbearing among low SES women rises with inequality is that abortion rates, as captured by

pregnancy failures, fall. The magnitude of this estimate indicates that moving from a low
                                                                                       Kearney and Levine, p. 23


inequality state to a high inequality state reduces the likelihood of a pregnancy failure by 4.2

percentage points. We cannot statistically distinguish this estimate from the 5.3 percentage point

increase in early non-marital childbearing. This suggests that the rise in early non-marital births

associated with greater inequality is mainly attributable to fewer abortions. Column 2 provides

no evidence that the likelihood of contraception is affected. We find little support for an impact

of inequality on marital fertility. In Column 7, we focus on shotgun marriage as an outcome and

find no statistically significant impact of inequality there for low SES women.

         Interestingly, when we focus on moderate SES women as captured by daughters of high

school graduates, we find that the point estimate for the increase in non-marital births is

attenuated, and now there is a statistically significant reduction in marital births, of nearly the

same (opposite-signed) magnitude. Presumably these women are at some, albeit reduced, risk of

poor economic outcomes that may be exaggerated in high inequality states. For them, greater

inequality is associated with fewer marital births. This suggests that a reduced prevalence of

shotgun marriage is the pathway, as confirmed in Column 7. These results are similar to the

results for women in their young 20s, described below.

         The lower panel of Table 3 replicates this analysis, focusing on childbearing/marital

outcomes by age 25 rather than age 20. Including somewhat older young adults increases the

relevance of shotgun marriages in these findings.                    We continue to find that non-marital

childbearing increases for low SES women when they live in high inequality states, but we find a

similar drop in marital childbearing (although the latter is not quite significant). Changes in the

likelihood of a shotgun marriage explain the divergent pattern. 13


13
   We have estimated these models separately for blacks and Hispanics, but sample sizes drop substantially and
statistical power falls as a result. For the outcomes by age 20, among the sample of Hispanic women (n=4,086), the
estimated coefficient (standard error) on the interaction term of interest is 0.060 (.047) for non-marital births, 0.020
(0.050) for non-marital pregnancy failure, and -0.065 (.024) for shot-gun married. These results suggest that low-
                                                                                       Kearney and Levine, p. 24


B. Analysis of FFS Data

         Our conceptual approach in analyzing the FFS data is very similar to that using the NSFG

with a few minor distinctions.              First, our measure of socioeconomic status is household

composition during childhood rather than maternal education.                       Low SES is determined by

whether a woman grew up in a household headed by a single or no parent. Second, we also rely

on a country’s long-term average Gini coefficient rather than the 50/10 ratio. Third, we no

longer make distinctions between marital and non-marital outcomes because this difference has

less significance in the European context.

         As in our discussion of the NSFG results, we begin by presenting in Figure 9 a graphical

depiction of the difference in the likelihood of giving birth by age 20 by socioeconomic status in

countries that differ by their level of inequality. Countries are distinguished into inequality

categories consistent with the statistics reported in Table 2. Among women who grew up in

higher SES households (i.e. with both parents), we see perhaps a trivially small increase in rates

of early childbearing among women growing up in higher inequality countries. For women from

low SES households, however, a clear pattern is evident that women from high inequality

countries are considerably more likely to give birth by age 20. Moving from a low inequality

country to a high inequality country increases the odds of having an early birth by around 5

percentage points. Notably, the magnitude of this effect is very similar to that obtained in the

U.S. in moving between a low inequality and high inequality state.




SES Hispanic teens living in more unequal places are less likely to get married conditional on getting pregnant. For
the outcomes by age 20, among the sample of black women (n=6,117), the estimated coefficient (standard error) on
the interaction term of interest is 0.025 (.033) for non-marital births,-0.085 (.025) for non-marital pregnancy failure,
and 0.018 (.014) for shot-gun married. These results suggest that low-SES black teens living in more unequal places
are less likely to terminate a pregnancy, conditional on getting pregnant. The pattern of results is qualitatively
similar for these racial/ethnic groups for outcomes by age 25.
                                                                                     Kearney and Levine, p. 25


         These stylized results are replicated in a more formal econometric analysis, which is

reported in Table 4. It reports the results of our econometric model, specified earlier, where β 1 is

captured by the interaction between the Gini coefficient and whether a woman was not raised in

a two parent household. The top panel considers fertility outcomes by age 20 and the bottom

panel by age 25. In interpreting our findings, we focus on the impact of a 0.1 point increase in

the Gini coefficient, which roughly reflects a movement from a low inequality country to a high

inequality country, as described earlier.

         Consistent with Figure 9, the results in the top panel indicate a strong relationship

between inequality and early childbearing among low SES women. In Column 1, we present

regression results in models that include the United States. In that model, we see that a 0.1 point

increase in the Gini coefficient increases the rate of childbearing among low SES women by age

20 by 5.9 percentage points.14 In Column 2 we drop the United States from the analysis and this

estimated impact falls to 3 percentage points. Again, this is consistent with the U.S. being a

positive outlier in both inequality and early childbearing along with low rates of two parent

families. This estimate falls again, to 2 percentage points, when we restrict our sample in

Column 3 to the remaining countries that also report data on other pregnancy outcomes. When

we focus on conceptions and pregnancy failures in Columns 4 and 5, respectively, we see that

higher inequality generates both more conceptions and fewer pregnancy failures among low SES

women by age 20. The importance of conceptions is somewhat different than in the United

States, where abortion was the primary determinant.


14
   Standard errors reported in Table 4 are clustered at the country level. As reported in Cameron, Miller, and
Gelbach (2008), even these adjusted standard errors may be understated with so few countries used in the analysis
(9, 8, and 6, respectively, in columns 1, 2, and 3 through 5). A simple solution to help address the problem that they
describe, which has been implemented in Cohen and Dupas (2010), is to adjust the critical values using a t-
distribution with G-2 degrees of freedom, where G is the number of countries. Implementing this approach would
change the standard critical value of 1.96 at the 5 percent level of significance from a normal distribution to 2.262,
2.306, and 2.447, respectively, from t-distributions.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 26


       The bottom panel of the table focuses on outcomes by age 25. The impact on births is

similar to that by age 20, albeit somewhat less precisely estimated. On the other hand, the point

estimates in models of conception and pregnancy failure suggest that abortion is a less common

mechanism than it is for younger women. The precision of these results, however, is weak

enough to prevent us from drawing strong conclusions here.

C. An Investigation of Alternative Mechanisms

       Our approach to statistical identification focuses on the interaction between

socioeconomic status and a measure of income inequality. That inequality measure is estimated

as a long-term average and fixed within states/countries over time. As such, any state/country

fixed factor that is highly correlated with the measure of inequality that we use will generate

results that are similar in spirit to those reported here. Low SES women in states or countries

with that characteristic will be found to have a higher propensity to give birth at an early age. In

other words, our interpretation of the role played by inequality may not be warranted if there is

some other important state/country fixed factor that is omitted, but strongly correlated with

inequality and directly related to childbearing outcomes for low SES women.

       Although we do not have a perfect solution to rule out this possibility, we are able to

examine the impact of including other plausible alternatives into our model.           If including

interactions between SES and these other factors reduces the magnitude of the inequality

interaction, then this would indicate the presence of omitted variable bias. If not, it would

bolster our argument that the relationship between inequality and early childbearing is causal.

       In our analysis, we focus on data from the NSFG and the relationship between early (by

age 20) non-marital childbearing and other state characteristics interacted with low

socioeconomic status. Our emphasis on the NSFG data, as opposed to the FFS, and alternative
                                                                               Kearney and Levine, p. 27


state characteristics is more a function of data availability and our ability to generate plausible

alternatives than any other substantive consideration.

        We consider two sets of alternative factors. The first consists of other features of state

income and wage distributions that may matter, but are different than our measure of inequality

at the bottom of the income distribution. We consider five alternatives. First, we include the

90/50 ratio from the income distribution, calculated in the same way we described earlier

regarding the 50/10 ratio. Since that measure identifies inequality at the top of the distribution

rather than the bottom, we would not expect it to have a very strong impact on early childbearing

among low SES women. Second (and third), we consider the absolute level of income at the

bottom and middle of the income distribution, as opposed to the relative distance between these

measures. Perhaps it is not inequality that matters for a young woman’s decision, but rather how

low the 10th percentile of the income distribution is, or where the 50 th percentile is. Fourth (and

fifth), we consider the average wage ratio for high school graduates relative to high school

dropouts and for college graduates relative to high school graduates. These outcomes provide a

measure of the returns to education in the state and provide a way to examine whether a higher

return to moving up the ladder can actually reduce the likelihood of early, non-marital

childbearing among low SES women. 15

        In Table 5, we report the results of estimating equation [2] including these five alternative

measures. Column (1) reports the main coefficients of interest from equation [1] – namely, a

point estimate of 0.053 (.015) on the interaction of the 50/10 ratio and our maternal education

measure of low-SES status. As we show in the remainder of the table, the coefficients on each of



15
   We calculated these wage ratios using data the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses along with the 2006-2008 ACS,
estimating hourly wages for full-time workers (greater than 1,500 hours in the year) by level of educational
attainment.
                                                                                     Kearney and Levine, p. 28


these alternative measures is not statistically significant (at the 5 percent level) and including

these additional variables, does not attenuate the coefficient on our main variable of interest.

         We next consider a set of six alternative state characteristics that are unrelated to

economic outcomes, but capture other dimensions of the political and social climate within a

state. We first consider the political culture of a state, which we capture by including the

average percentage of voters favoring Democratic candidates averaged within state between the

1972 and 2008 Presidential elections. 16 Religious beliefs in a state may also be a contributing

factor; we experiment with including an index of religiosity as well. 17 We also explore the role

played by differences in states’ percentage of the population that is minority (defined as

individuals who are not white, non-Hispanic). Next, we include the incarceration rate and the

poverty rate in the state.18 The final alternative state characteristic is “social capital.” Putnam

(2000) argues that the loss of social capital has contributed to the high teen birth rate, so we

include his measure of social capital as a potential alternative.

         The results of this analysis are reported in Table 6. Again, the first column replicates the

first column of Table 3 for the purposes of comparison. The results provide no evidence that any

of these additional measures has an effect on early non-marital childbearing rates among low-

SES women. Nor does the inclusion of these variables alter our conclusion about the role of




16
   The source of these data is David Leip’s Atlas of Presidential Elections, available at http://uselectionatlas.org/.
17
   The source of these data is Gallup Poll, State of the States: Importance of Religion. January 28th, 2009. Available
at: http://www.gallup.com/poll/114022/state-states-importance-religion.aspx.
18
   The incarceration data are compiled by the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice programs,
downloaded from www.ojp.usdoj.gov (accessed April, 2011). Poverty rate data comes from the United States
Census Bureau and were obtained from http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/historical/people.html
(accessed June 7, 2011). In our analysis, we follow the Census Bureau recommendation to use data beginning in
1980 to maintain the consistency of the data over the time period.
                                                                              Kearney and Levine, p. 29


inequality. 19 The bulk of the evidence in Tables 5 and 6 is strongly suggestive that inequality has

a causal impact on early non-marital childbearing in the United States.

D. Evaluating the Magnitude of the Effects

        An important motivation for this current project is the inability of past research to explain

much of the geographic variation that exists in teen childbearing. Our analysis suggests income

inequality may be an important determinant. The proposed mechanism for the relationship is that

greater levels of income inequality lead to a heightened sense of economic despair. We formalize

this idea in a model below. Although we can by no means explain all of the variability or even

the majority of it, our results are able to explain a sizeable share of the problem. In the United

States, according to our estimates 13.6 percent of women experienced a teen, non-marital

childbirth in high inequality states compared to 10.1 percent of women in low inequality states

over the post-1976 sample window we consider. In those high inequality states, roughly 34

percent of teens were daughters of high school dropout mothers (per our tabulations of the NSFG

data). Based on our estimates in Table 3, low SES women in high inequality states were 5.3

percentage points more likely to have a non-marital teen birth compared to low SES women in

low inequality states. If the level of inequality in the high inequality states decreased to the level

of the low inequality states, we would expect teen, non-marital childbearing to decline by

.053*.34*1 = .018 or 1.8 percentage points. This represents 1.8/(13.7-10.2) = .51 or 51 percent

of the gap in the likelihood of non-marital childbearing by teens between high and low inequality

states. In other words, equalizing rates of income inequality across states would eliminate

around half of the difference in rates of early, non-marital childbearing between high and low

inequality states.

19
  One possible exception to this general finding is that including our political measure has a somewhat more
substantial downward impact on the key interaction between the 50/10 ratio and our measure of low-SES in the
model for non-marital childbearing by age 25.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 30


       We also conduct a similar calculation using the results of our analysis of FFS data, with

the goal of applying international estimates to explain the gap in teen fertility between the United

States and Europe. Focusing exclusively on the data in the FFS, we estimate that 20.1 percent of

women give birth before the age of 20 in the United States and 9.2 percent of women in non-

Eastern Bloc countries had a teen birth, generating a 10.9 percentage point difference between

the U.S. and the other countries.     In the United States, 15 percent of women grew up in

households headed by a single or no parent. Our estimates in Table 4 that include the U.S.

(Column 1) indicate that a one point increase in the Gini coefficient would reduce the likelihood

of a birth by age 20 among low SES women by 0.589 percentage points. This means that if

those 15 percent of women grew up in two parent families and with the level of inequality

observed in a low inequality country with a Gini coefficient of 0.25 instead of the 0.38 value that

exists in the U.S., teen fertility in the U.S. would decline by 0.15*(0.25 - 0.38)*0.589 = -0.011.

This represents -0.011/0.109 = -0.101, or a 10.1 percent reduction in the gap in teen fertility

between the United States and the other countries.

        Our estimates suggest that inequality can explain roughly 10 percent of the variation in

teen childbearing across countries and 50 percent across U.S. states; however, we suspect that

our estimated figure for the cross-state variation is an overestimate and the figure for cross-

country variation is an underestimate of the role played by inequality. First, our measure of low-

SES status in the cross-country FFS data captures only 15 percent of the population, as compared

to our measure of low-SES in the U.S. context, which captures 35 percent of the population. In

the FFS, we are probably applying our estimated effect to too small a percent, thereby leading to

an artificially low estimate of 10 percent of the gap being explainable by inequality. In addition,

the difference in teen birth rates between high and low inequality states is 3 percentage points, as
                                                                           Kearney and Levine, p. 31


compared to a 10 percentage point difference between high and low inequality countries. In other

words, as a mechanical matter, the denominator of the difference is substantially lower in the

cross-state context. Recall from Figures 3 and 4 that the cross-sectional link between inequality

and early childbearing is much stronger internationally than across states. Thus, the set of high

inequality states are a much more diverse set of states than are the set of high inequality

countries. This likely suggests that our 50 percent estimate overstates the amount of cross-state

variation that can be explained by inequality. We thus conclude that inequality can explain

between 10 and 50 percent of the geographic variation in teen fertility.

VI. AN ECONOMIC MODEL OF THE “CULTURE OF DESPAIR”

      To this point, we have empirically addressed the role of inequality in explaining

geographic variation in early, non-marital childbearing, but we have not addressed why

inequality might matter. Although we do not presume to have a concrete answer to this question,

we propose an economic model incorporating insights from the sociological and ethnographic

literatures that we described earlier. One of the main contributions of this paper is to show how

these ideas are easily captured in a fairly standard economics model of individual decision-

making. The model we propose is based on the idea that young girls make decisions about their

behaviors – sexual activity, contraceptive use, abortion – based in part on their own perceptions

of their likelihood of future success. The primary role of inequality in this model is to affect

one’s perception of economic success.

      In this model, a young, unmarried woman's decision to have a baby is based on a

comparison of her expected lifetime utility if she has a baby in the current period compared to

expected lifetime utility if she delays childbearing. An individual chooses to have a baby in the

current period if the following condition is met:
                                                                          Kearney and Levine, p. 32


                                     u b  E (V b )  u d  E (V d )
                                       o               o                                        [3]

       b
where uo is current period utility if she has a baby and u0 is current period utility if she delays
                                                          d




childbearing. V is the present discounted sum of future period utility.

      For young, unmarried women, childbearing has a direct effect on current period utility and

an indirect effect on future period utility. We propose that for young, unmarried women of low

socioeconomic status (SES) having a baby is utility-enhancing in the current period, such that ub

> ud. This proposition reflects the description from Edin and Kefalas (2005) above, whereby a

baby is seen as bringing “purpose, the validation, the companionship, and the order” otherwise

missing from many of these women’s lives. If ub < ud, it is never optimal to have a baby in the

current period and the model trivially predicts “delay” to the optimizing choice. It seems

reasonable to expect that for the majority of high-SES young women, ub < ud, and the results of

the empirical analysis are consistent with that supposition.

      For unmarried young women, having a baby in the current period negatively affects

expected future utility by leading to lower levels of consumption in the future. For simplicity, we

characterize utility in future periods as taking high and low values, Uhigh and Ulow, respectively.

We assume that childbearing at an early age reduces the likelihood of achieving Uhigh. There are

two likely mechanisms, the first through the labor market and the second through the marriage

market. With regard to the first, we posit that having a baby makes it more difficult for women to

acquire human capital, decreasing the future stream of own earnings, and thereby lowering

subsequent income and consumption. Having a baby while young and unmarried is also likely to

be a hindrance in the marriage market, and would thereby reduce the likelihood of improving

one’s economic condition through a successful marriage. We define Ulow to be the level achieved

by a young woman who does not delay childbearing. The present discounted value of the young
                                                                                             Kearney and Levine, p. 33


mother’s future utility stream is thus deterministic and captured by V low. If the young woman

delays childbearing, there is some positive probability p that she will achieve the “high” utility

position in future periods. As we have defined things, a young woman who has a baby in the

current period is necessarily assigned to a low position in the income distribution. Our model

assumes that if she delays childbearing, she has some probability of achieving the high

income/consumption level. 20

       We can therefore write the condition to have a baby in the current period as follows:

                                                          high
                                    ub  V low  u d  pV       (1  p)V low.                                     [4]
                                     o            o

This condition makes it clear that the change in lifetime utility from delayed childbearing comes

from two opposite-signed sources: (1) the loss of current period enjoyment of a baby and (2) a

positive probability of achieving the high- utility state in the future. We have implicitly assumed

that the delay in childbearing causes no first-order change in the future lifetime enjoyment of the

child itself (say, by making childlessness a more likely outcome). In other words, the decision

we are modeling is to have a baby in the current period versus having a baby in the subsequent

period. So the direct utility loss from not having a child in the current period is limited to the loss

in current period utility.

       Rearranging terms, we see that a young woman will choose to delay childbearing in the

current period if and only if:

                                   pV
                                        high
                                                (1  p )V
                                                             low
                                                                   V
                                                                        low
                                                                                b
                                                                               u u
                                                                                 o
                                                                                     d
                                                                                     o                            [5]


Of course, the young woman does not perfectly observe p. Instead, she bases her decision on her

20
  Alternatively, we could define “low” and “high” utility as relative constructs that need not correspond to low and
high levels in the unconditional income distribution. Defining the positions in the simplest case as corresponding to
“low” and “high” positions in the overall income distribution leads the model to have an ambiguous prediction on
the relationship between inequality and early non-marital childbearing, as we show below. It is thus a conservative
modeling approach, given our main hypothesis.
                                                                                          Kearney and Levine, p. 34


perception of p. Let us call this subjective probability q, and rewrite the condition for delaying

childbearing:

                                   qV
                                        high
                                                                         o   
                                                (1  q)V low  V low  ub  u d
                                                                              o                                    [6]


If a young woman perceives that she has a sizable chance at achieving economic success -- and

thereby capturing Vhigh -- by delaying childbearing, the comparison is more likely to favor the

choice “delay.” On the other hand, if the young woman perceives that even if she delays

childbearing her chances of economic success are sufficiently unlikely -- in other words, if q is

very low -- then the comparison is more likely to favor having a baby in the current period.21

       Rearranging expression [6], we can define a reservation subjective probability qr such that

a young woman will choose to delay childbearing if and only if:

                                                                 b     d
                                                      r
                                                             uo  uo
                                               qq (          high        low
                                                                                 ).                                 [7]
                                                           V          V

We propose that one's perception of the likelihood of economic success, q, depends on (a) her

                                                                                 dq         22
position in the income distribution, as proxied for by SES status, such that d ( SES )  0 .

         We additionally propose that one’s perceived probability of success is a function of the

                                                          dq
interaction of being low SES and inequality, such that d (ineq) | ( SES  low)  0 . The further


21
   We are not the first to hypothesize that a notion of opportunity costs is an important determinant of the decision to
have a teen birth (for example, this general idea is contained in Lundberg and Plotnick (1995). However, we are not
aware of previous work focused on the perception of future economic success and how inequality potentially shapes
that perception.
22
   This supposition finds empirical support in tabulations of data from the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY79). That survey includes questions about expectations of future success and perceived control over
one’s life, as captured by the Rotter Scale Index. We tabulate these variables by maternal education, which we use
as our proxy for SES status (as described below). Among young women whose mothers attended college, 32
percent report a high likelihood of achieving her occupational aspirations; this compares to only 18 percent of young
women whose mothers are high school dropouts were optimistic. Similarly, on the Rotter Scale of control over
one's life (which ranges from 0 for total control to 16 for no control), the average values for daughters of mothers
who attended college was 8.01 compared to 9.24 for daughters of high school dropouts.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 35


down in the income distribution one finds herself and the more inequality that exists, the lower is

the perception of economic success q. Note that if income inequality and mobility were

positively related, inequality would likely not have such an impact on individual’s perceptions.

We do not have sufficient data on mobility differences across states or countries to include

mobility in our models directly, but we offer some evidence in Figure 10 indicating that mobility

and inequality are actually negatively related empirically. This figure plots the intergenerational

earnings elasticity – which is inversely related to intergenerational mobility – against the Gini

coefficient for a set of nine countries. 23 The two variables are strongly positively related, which

indicates a strong negative correlation between mobility and inequality. To the extent that

individuals at the bottom of the income distribution perceive a sizeable degree of income

inequality and a low degree of mobility, they are likely to have a lower subjective q¸ and a higher

likelihood of early childbearing.

         We have described the decision facing a young woman as primarily being about giving

birth. But as considered in the empirical section, there are multiple decision nodes that lead to a

non-marital birth: getting pregnant, carrying the pregnancy to term, and not marrying one’s

partner in a so-called “shot gun marriage.” This last pathway explicitly raises the possibility that

a woman’s decision is influenced not only by her perceived likelihood of her own economic

advancement, but also the likelihood that marrying her partner will bring economic success

through his economic achievements. Assuming assortative mating, it is easy to see that

conditions that lead a young woman to adjust downward her subjective probability of her own

economic success will also lead her to have a relatively low subjective probability associated

with the likelihood that her male partner will achieve economic success. So, the greater the

inequality (and lower the mobility), the lower would be the perceived likelihood that a male
23
     A similar figure appears in Wilkinson and Pickett (2009).
                                                                                    Kearney and Levine, p. 36


partner will bring economic advantages. The results presented in Tables 3 and 4 with regard to

shot-gun marriage are consistent with this prediction.

        The prediction with regard to inequality is not unambiguously signed within the model.

Expression [7] shows that qr varies inversely with the distance between Vhigh and Vlow, which in

the most simple case, may be thought of as inequality. In fact, one could interpret this difference

as a greater return to effort.24 If so, then greater inequality would lower reservation q, and might

thereby lead to less early childbearing. 25 As a result, the theoretical prediction of the model

regarding inequality is ambiguous. However, our empirical results suggest that the relationship

between inequality and childbearing for low SES women is, in fact, positive. The empirical

results are consistent with the idea that on net, inequality generates desperation, not aspiration,

among those at the bottom of the distribution.

      One important element in this model is that future utility is appropriately discounted. The

model does not require any present-biased decision making, also known as quasi-hyberbolic

discounting, to explain the choice that favors current period utility. If we add present-biased

decision making to the model, it would simply amplify the effect of a lower q and make the

decision lean even more heavily in favor of having a baby in the current period.

      This last pathway explicitly raises the possibility that a woman’s decision is influenced not

only by her perceived likelihood of her own economic advancement, but also the likelihood that

marrying her partner will bring economic success through his economic achievements. Assuming

assortative mating, it is easy to see that conditions that lead a young woman to adjust downward

her subjective probability of her own economic success will also lead her to have a relatively low

24
  We loosely tested this proposition earlier by exploring the impact of changes in the college/high school wage
premium.
25
    This need not be the case if we define Vhigh to be the “high” level of income/consumption available to the young
woman making the choice to delay childbearing, and allow for that upper bound to be distinct from a high position
in the unconditional income distribution.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 37


subjective probability associated with the likelihood that her male partner will achieve economic

success. So, the greater the inequality (and lower the mobility), the lower would be the perceived

likelihood that a male partner will bring economic advantages. The results presented in Tables 3

and 4 with regard to shot-gun marriage are consistent with this prediction.

     The value of this model is a framework within which to interpret the behavioral factors that

drive the empirical results. Inequality appears to be positively related to early non-marital

childbearing among low-SES women. There are a number of proximate ways this could be

realized, but the data show that this difference is driven by a greater tendency to “keep the baby”

among low-SES girls in more unequal places. Note that this is consistent with the observation of

Clark (1965) – cited above – that “In the ghetto…There is not the demand for abortion or for

surrender of the child that one finds in more privileged communities.”         To the extent that

inequality heightens feelings of economic despair or marginalization, our model provides a

rationalization for the empirical finding. It also links our econometric analysis and findings to a

vast array of social science research that has largely gone unexplored by economists.

VII. FINAL DISCUSSION

       This paper has presented a new set of findings regarding the large, persistent cross-

sectional variation in teen childbearing. We conducted econometric analyses on two large,

individual-level datasets to determine the extent to which income inequality – and other

economic and social conditions -- relates to rates of early non-marital childbearing. We find that

women who grew up in low socioeconomic status households are substantially more likely to

have an early birth (outside of marriage in the United States) when income is more unequally

distributed in their location. As the level of inequality increases, low socioeconomic status

women are less likely to abort their pregnancies. We econometrically consider other aggregate-
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 38


level variables that might affect an individual’s perception of economic success, such as the

absolute level of income at the bottom of the distribution and the college-high school wage

premium. We also considered aggregate-level variables that might be spuriously correlated with

inequality and teen birth rates and thereby confound the interpretation of our primary results,

such as the political leanings or religiosity of a place. The data do not support any of these

alternative explanations.

      The analysis and interpretations are guided by a model of economic despair that is built

within the paradigm of a utility maximizing rational actor and based on the insights of

anthropological and ethnographic evidence. When a poor young woman perceives that

socioeconomic success is unachievable to her, she is more likely to embrace motherhood in her

current position, as there is little option value to be gained by delaying the immediate

gratification of having a baby. When there is relatively more hope of economic advancement, it

is relatively more desirable to delay motherhood and invest in human or social capital. We

propose that income inequality heightens any perceived sense of economic despair, and so this

decision becomes even more common among poor women in more unequal places. Combining

our empirical analyses with our economic model, we suggest that an important factor in

generating high rates of early, non-marital childbearing in the United States and, particularly, in

some states with the United States is young women’s perceived lack of economic opportunity.

      We offer the following caveats to the interpretation of our empirical results. First, though

our model provides a means to interpret the relationship between inequality and early, non-

marital childbearing, it need not be the case that it explains the decision-making process of all

individuals. For instance, suppose some critical mass of low-SES individuals responds to

inequality in the way posited by our model. Others in that same place might then behave
                                                                           Kearney and Levine, p. 39


similarly in response to this established social norm. In such a scenario, our model would be

relevant to explaining the geographic patterns we observe in early non-marital childbearing, even

though it would not account for the full magnitude of the effect.

        Second, we have not investigated the precise channels through which inequality might

lead to a greater sense of economic despair among adolescents. Various theories exist for how

income inequality, as distinct from absolute income, might affect individual-level behavior.

Social scientists, particularly political scientists and sociologists, have emphasized the role of

relative, as distinct from absolute deprivation – in leading to acts of social unrest. In the recent

economics literature, Luttmer (2005) has documented that people are less happy when they live

around people who are richer than themselves. Watson and McLanahan (2011) present evidence

that relative income matters for the marriage decision of low-income men. They interpret their

model within the idea of an identity construct. We speculate here that there is an alternative

channel at play. To the extent that greater levels of income inequality are associated with

increased levels of residential and institutional segregation, individuals at the bottom of the

income distribution will be more likely to feel a heightened sense of social marginalization, and

hence economic despair.26 This would link directly to the “social isolation” thesis of Wilson

(1987). We think this is a promising area of future research that could lead to important insights

into how income inequality affects the lives of the poor.

        In conclusion, we have presented robust empirical evidence that income inequality is

associated with higher rates of early, non-marital childbearing among economically

disadvantaged women. Our results suggest that inequality itself, as opposed to other correlated

geographic factors, is a primary driver of this relationship. We have proposed a model of


26
   Watson (2009) presents evidence that as income inequality has increased over time, cities have become
increasingly segregated along income lines.
                                                                        Kearney and Levine, p. 40


economic despair that could explain these findings: to the extent that income inequality leads to a

heightened sense of economic despair among the poor, it will lead to higher rates of early, non-

marital childbearing among those at the bottom of the distribution. This could also be part of the

explanation for why high-inequality states and countries see higher rates of a host of “drop out”

behaviors, including lower educational attainment and higher rates of crime. We consider this a

topic worthy of future research.



References

Akerlof, George, Janet Yellen, and Michael Katz (1996). "An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock
Childbearing in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111(2): 277-317.

An, Chong-Bum, Robert Haveman, and Barbara Wolfe. 1993. “Teen Out-of-Wedlock Births and
Welfare Receipt: The Role of Childhood Events and Economic Circumstances,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 75 (2) (May): 195-208.

Ashcraft, Adam and Kevin Lang (2010) The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: Consistent
Estimates When Abortion Makes Miscarriage Nonrandom.” Unpublished manscript.

Becker, Gary and H. Gregg Lewis (1973). "On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality
of Children". The Journal of Political Economy. 81(2): S279–S288.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Frank F. Furstenberg, Jr. “Adolescent Sexual Behavior.” American
Psychologist. Vol. 44, No. 2 (February 1989). pp. 249-257.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Roberta Paikoff. “Sexuality and Developmental Transitions During
Adolescence,” pp. 190-245 in John Schulenberg, Jennifer L. Maggs, and Klaus Hurrelmann
(eds.), Health Risks and Developmental Transitions during Adolescence. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press. 1997.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller (2008). “Bootstrap-Based
Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors”, Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3):
414-427.

Chau, Michelle, Kalyani Thampi, and Vanessa R. Wight (2010). Basic Facts About Low-income
Children, 2009 (Children Under Age 18). New York: National Center for Children in Poverty.

Clark, Kenneth B. (1965). Dark Ghetto: Dilemmas of Social Power. New York: Harper &
Row.
                                                                      Kearney and Levine, p. 41


Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas (2010). “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from
a Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1): 1-45.

Corak, Miles (2006). “Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults? Lessons from a Cross-Country
Comparison of Generational Earnings Mobility.” IZA Discussion Paper 1993.

Deaon, Angus and Darren Lubotsky (2003). “Mortality, Inequality, and Race in American cities
and states.” Social Science & Medicine 56 (2003) 1139–1153.

Duncan, Greg and Saul Hoffman. “Welfare Benefits, Economic Opportunities, and Out-of-
Wedlock Births among Black Teenage Girls.” Demography 27 (November 1990): 519-36.

Duncan, Greg, W. Jean Yeung, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Judith R. Smith. 1998. “How Much
Does Childhood Poverty Affect the Life Chances of Children?” American Sociological Review
63(3), (June): 406-423.

Edin, Kathryn, and Maria Kefalas (2005). Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women Put
Motherhood before Marriage. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Ellwood, David T., and Christopher Jencks. 2004. “The Spread of Single-Parent Families in the
United States since 1960.” pp. 25-65 in Daniel P. Moynihan, Timothy M. Smeeding, and Lee
Rainwater (eds.), The Future of the Family. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hardy, Janet B. and Laurie Schwab Zabin. 1991.            Adolescent Pregnancy in an Urban
Environment. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.

Kearney, Melissa S. (2004). “Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Benefits on Fertility
Behavior? A Look at the Family Cap” Journal of Human Resources. 39(2): 295-325.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine (2009a). “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and
Sexual Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 91(1): 137-151.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine (2009b). “Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Early
Childbearing,” in Jonathan Gruber (ed.), An Economic Perspective on the Problems of
Disadvantaged Youth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kiernan, Kathleen (2004). “Unmarried Cohabitation and Parenthood: Here to Stay? European
Perspectives,” pp. 66-95 in Daniel P. Moynihan, Timothy M. Smeeding, and Lee Rainwater
(eds.), The Future of the Family. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Levine, Phillip B. (2001). “The Sexual Activity and Birth Control Use of American Teenagers,”
in Jonathan Gruber (ed.), An Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior among Youths. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Levine, Phillip B. (2003). “Parental Involvement Laws and Fertility Behavior.” Journal of Health
Economics. Vol. 22, No. 5 (September). pp. 861-878.
                                                                       Kearney and Levine, p. 42



Levine, Phillip B. (2004). Sex and Consequences: Abortion, Public Policy, and the Economics
of Fertility. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Levine, Phillip B, Amy Trainor, and David J. Zimmerman (1996). "The Effect of State Medicaid
Funding Restrictions on Pregnancy, Abortion, and Births," Journal of Health Economics, Vol.
15, No. 5 (October). pp. 555-578.

Lewis, Oscar (1969). “The Culture of Poverty,” pp. 187-200 in Daniel P. Moynihan (ed.), On
Understanding Poverty: Perspectives from the Social Sciences.” New York: Basic Books.

Luker, Kristin (1997). Dubious Conceptions: The Politics of Teenage Pregnancy. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert D. Plotnick. 1995. “Adolescent Premarital Childbearing: Do
Economic Incentives Matter?” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol. 13, No. 2 (April). pp. 177-200.

Luttmer, E. F. P., 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 963-1002.

Martin, Joyce, Brady E. Hamilton, Paul D. Sutton, Stephanie J. Ventura, T.J. Mathews, and
Michelle Osterman (2010). “Births: Final Data for 2008.” National Vital Statistics Reports.
59(1).

Martin, Joyce, Brady E. Hamilton, Paul D. Sutton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Fay Menacker, Sharon
Kirmeyer, and T.J. Mathews (2009). “Births: Final Data for 2006.” National Vital Statistics
Reports. 57(7).

Moffitt, Robert (1998). “The effect of welfare on marriage and fertility.” In Welfare, the family,
and reproductive behavior, ed. R. Moffitt, Washington DC: National Academy Press: 50-97.

Moffitt, Robert (2003). “The Negative Income Tax and the Evolution of U.S. Welfare Policy.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives. American Economic Association, vol. 17(3), pages 119-140,
Summer.

Moynihan, Daniel Patrick (1965). The Negro Family: The Case for National Action. Washington
D.C.: United States Department of Labor, Office of Policy Planning and Research.

Murray, Charles (1986). Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950-1980. NewYork: Basic
Books.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin (1999). “Doing it Now or Later.” American Economic
Review. Vol. 89, No. 1 (March). pp. 103-124.

Putnam, Robert (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
                                                                  Kearney and Levine, p. 43



Ruggles, Steven J., Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
and Matthew Sobek (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-
readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

United Nations (2009). Human Development Report. New York: United Nations.

United Nations (2008). Demographic Yearbook. New York: United Nations.

United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (2011). Statistical Database. Available at:
http://w3.unece.org/pxweb/ (accessed June 8, 2011).
Waldfogel, Jane, Terry-Anne Craigie, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2010). “Fragile Families and
Child Well-Being.” Future of Children. 20(2): 87-112.

Watson, Tara (2009). “Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation by Income.”
Review of Income and Wealth 55: 820-844.

Watson, Tara, and Sara McLanahan (2011). “Marriage Meets the Joneses: Relative Income,
Identity, and Marital Status.” Journal of Human Resources 46: 568-586.

Webster, Bruce H., Jr., Alemayehu Bishaw (2007). U.S. Census Bureau, American Community
Survey Reports, ACS-08, Income, Earnings, and Poverty Data From the 2006 American
Community Survey. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Whitehead, Barbara Dafoe and Marline Pearson (2006). Making a Love Connection: Teen
Relationships, Pregnancy, and Marriage. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen
Pregnancy.

Wilkinson, Richard and Kate Pickett (2009). The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes
Societies Stronger. London: Bloomsbury Press.

Wilson, William J. (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass and
Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                Table 1: Household Inequality Measures across States, 1980-2008
 Highest Inequality             Middle Inequality             Lowest Inequality
 State    Ratio 50/10           State    Ratio 50/10          State      Ratio 50/10
  DC          5.88                NJ         4.24                AZ           3.81
  LA          4.92               NM          4.19                ME           3.79
  NY          4.74                MI         4.18                AK           3.78
  AL          4.65               WV          4.18                MT           3.78
  MA          4.61                NC         4.16                IA           3.74
  MS          4.52                CT         4.14                NE           3.72
  GA          4.51                AR         4.13                WI           3.72
  KY          4.49                OH         4.10               WY            3.71
   SC         4.39                CA         4.09                VT           3.61
   RI         4.39                OK         4.08                ID           3.60
  TN          4.32                VA         4.05                NH           3.58
   IL         4.32                PA         4.03                NV           3.57
  TX          4.30               MO          4.00                UT           3.41
                                 MD          3.95
                                  CO         3.89
                                 WA          3.89
                                  DE         3.87
                                 MN          3.86
                                  HI         3.86
                                  FL         3.85
                                  KS         3.84
                                  ND         3.84
                                  SD         3.84
                                  OR         3.83
                                  IN         3.81
Notes: The highest and lowest inequality groups are the top and bottom quartiles of states, respectively.
The middle inequality group is the middle two quartiles of states. These values are calculated from 1970-
2008, using U.S. census and ACS data.
Table 2: Household Inequality Measures across FFS Countries, 1976-2000
        Low Inequality                  Middle Inequality                    High Inequality
 Countries      Gini Coeff.        Countries       Gini Coeff.         Countries      Gini Coeff.
                                             *
  Finland         0.230            Germany           0.296               Spain           0.325
  Austria*        0.246                                                  Italy           0.328
  Belgium         0.275                                                 Greece           0.346
                                                                        Portugal         0.367
Notes: Countries are divided by apparent breaks in the levels of the Gini coefficients (0.28 and 0.32). The sample is
restricted to non-Eastern bloc FFS countries with data on household composition in childhood and it also excludes
the United States (whose Gini coefficient in these data is 0.380). Gini coefficients for each country represent the
average values of all reported Gini coefficients available from UNU-WIDER for each country, restricting the years
considered to those between 1976 and 2000 that are considered to be of high quality, and that cover the full
population of households. Countries marked with an asterisk only have data on births, not other pregnancy
outcomes.
                        Table 3: Impact of Long-Term Inequality on
    Marital and Non-Marital Fertility Outcomes by Ages 20 and 25, by Socioeconomic Status
                                (standard errors in parentheses)

                                  Non-Marital Outcomes                    Marital Outcomes                “Shotgun
                                                   Pregnancy                            Pregnancy         Marriage”
                             Birth    Conception    Failure         Birth  Conception     Failure
                              (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)              (7)

                                                                  by Age 20

50/10 Ratio*                 0.053        -0.006        -0.042      -0.026       -0.006       0.003        -0.018
   Mom HS Dropout           (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.015)     (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.004)       (0.009)

50/10 Ratio*                 0.021        -0.013        -0.013      -0.027       -0.004       0.002        -0.013
   Mom HS Graduate          (0.012)      (0.018)       (0.015)     (0.010)      (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.007)

                                                                  by Age 25

50/10 Ratio*                 0.040        -0.039        -0.022      -0.041       0.008        -0.010       -0.050
   Mom HS Dropout           (0.013)      (0.026)       (0.025)     (0.025)      (0.029)      (0.006)       (0.014)

50/10 Ratio*                 0.003        -0.049        -0.020      -0.026       0.002        -0.003       -0.021
   Mom HS Graduate          (0.014)      (0.018)       (0.017)     (0.012)      (0.016)      (0.004)       (0.010)
Notes: reported standard errors are clustered at the state level. Additional explanatory variables in each regression
include maternal educational attainment, current age and age squared, race/ethnicity, an indicator variable for living
with a single parent at age 14, the state unemployment rate at age 19, state welfare policies (family cap and
maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a family of 3), state abortion policies (Medicaid funding, parental
notification/consent, and mandatory delay laws), and an indicator variable for SCHIP implementation, along with
state and cohort fixed effects. The sample sizes are 24,720 and 23,037 in the models by age 20 and age 25,
respectively.
       Table 4: Impact of Long-Term Inequality on Fertility Outcomes by Ages 20 and 25,
                                   by Socioeconomic Status
                               (standard errors in parentheses)

                                          Birth            Birth           Birth
                                      (Full Sample     (Full Sample     (restricted                     Pregnancy
                                     including US)    excluding US)      sample)       Conception        Failure
                                           (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)

                                                                       by Age 20

Gini coefficient*                        0.589            0.301            0.192          0.180           -0.111
   Not Raised in Two Parent HH          (0.157)          (0.116)          (0.048)        (0.059)          (0.015)

Sample Size                              29,671          23,042           15,546          15,546          15,546



                                                                       by Age 25

Gini coefficient*                        0.545            0.161            0.249          0.292           -0.010
   Not Raised in Two Parent HH          (0.181)          (0.172)          (0.138)        (0.163)          (0.112)

Sample Size                              29,846           22,686           15,509        15,509            15,509
Notes: The full sample includes those women in the FFS outside of the Eastern bloc (with or without the United
States, as indicated). The restricted sample includes data from just the subset of non-US countries that also include
information about conceptions and pregnancy failures. Standard errors are clustered at the country level (see the
text for a discussion of this).
                                          Table 5: Impact of Alternative State Economic Conditions on
                                        Non-Marital Fertility by Ages 20 and 25, by Socioeconomic Status
                                                         (standard errors in parentheses)
                                                                                                                         HS Grad to HS       College Grad to
                                                                               10th Percentile       50th Percentile     Dropout Wage        HS Grad Wage
                                         50/10 ratio         90/50 ratio         of Income             of Income           Premium              Premium
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)                (5)                  (6)
Correlation between 50/10 ratio and
characteristic:                              ---                0.709              -0.615                -0.168               0.127               0.347

                                                                           by Age 20
50/10 Ratio*                                0.053               0.069               0.062                0.056                0.052                0.054
   Mom HS Dropout                          (0.015)             (0.021)             (0.019)              (0.015)              (0.015)              (0.014)
50/10 Ratio*                                0.021               0.000               0.022                0.022                0.017                0.012
        Mom HS Graduate                    (0.012)             (0.016)             (0.017)              (0.012)              (0.011)              (0.011)
State Characteristic*                        ---                -0.065              0.028                0.028                0.049                -0.035
  Mom HS Dropout                             ---               (0.066)             (0.049)              (0.049)              (0.093)              (0.072)

State Characteristic*                        ---                0.076               0.003                0.005                0.128                0.097
        Mom HS Graduate                      ---               (0.044)             (0.037)              (0.037)              (0.058)              (0.060)

                                                                           by Age 25
50/10 Ratio*                                0.040               0.057               0.034                0.039                0.042                0.045
   Mom HS Dropout                          (0.013)             (0.018)             (0.019)              (0.014)              (0.013)              (0.013)
50/10 Ratio*                                0.003               -0.006              0.003                0.003                0.003                -0.006
        Mom HS Graduate                    (0.014)             (0.018)             (0.019)              (0.014)              (0.014)              (0.013)
State Characteristic*                        ---                -0.064              -0.020               -0.021               -0.106               -0.089
  Mom HS Dropout                             ---               (0.055)             (0.049)              (0.048)              (0.074)              (0.083)
State Characteristic*                        ---                0.030               0.001                0.001                -0.003               0.092
        Mom HS Graduate                      ---               (0.047)             (0.047)              (0.046)              (0.059)              (0.064)
Notes: reported standard errors are clustered at the state level. Additional explanatory variables in each regression include maternal educational attainment,
current age and age squared, race/ethnicity, an indicator variable for living with a single parent at age 14, the state unemployment rate at age 19 or 24, state
welfare policies (family cap, waiver/TANF implementation, and maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a family of 3), state abortion policies (Medicaid funding,
parental notification/consent, and mandatory delay laws), and an indicator variable for SCHIP implementation, along with state and cohort fixed effects. The
specifications for non-marital fertility have a sample size of 24,720 and 23,037 by ages 20 and 25, respectively.
                                            Table 6: Impact of Alternative State Characteristics on
                                        Non-Marital Fertility by Ages 20 and 25, by Socioeconomic Status
                                                         (standard errors in parentheses)
                                                       Percentage of                       Percentage of
                                                         Votes to          Index of       Population that     Incarceration       Poverty      Social Capital
                                       50/10 ratio      Democrats         Religiosity       is Minority           Rate             Rate            Index
                                           (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)             (7)
Correlation between 50/10 ratio and
characteristic:                            ---             0.358            0.249              0.368              0.414            0.499          -0.598

                                                                          by age 20
50/10 Ratio*                              0.053            0.047             0.057             0.053              0.058            0.060           0.049
   Mom HS Dropout                        (0.015)          (0.019)           (0.016)           (0.016)            (0.018)          (0.024)         (0.016)
50/10 Ratio*                              0.021            0.019             0.019             0.010              0.012            0.021           0.015
        Mom HS Graduate                  (0.012)          (0.015)           (0.010)           (0.011)            (0.012)          (0.021)         (0.016)
State Characteristic*                      ---             0.131            -0.047             0.000             -0.004            0.001           -0.003
  Mom HS Dropout                           ---            (0.121)           (0.079)           (0.001)            (0.006)          (0.002)         (0.012)

State Characteristic*                      ---             0.038             0.043             0.001              0.009            0.001           -0.007
        Mom HS Graduate                    ---            (0.095)           (0.061)           (0.001)            (0.005)          (0.002)         (0.013)

                                                                          by Age 25
50/10 Ratio*                              0.040            0.027             0.047             0.048              0.046            0.030           0.049
   Mom HS Dropout                        (0.013)          (0.015)           (0.011)           (0.013)            (0.012)          (0.021)         (0.011)
50/10 Ratio*                              0.003           -0.008             0.002            -0.004             -0.004            0.001           -0.016
        Mom HS Graduate                  (0.014)          (0.014)           (0.015)           (0.014)            (0.017)          (0.021)         (0.020)
State Characteristic*                      ---             0.230            -0.089            -0.001             -0.009            0.001           0.019
  Mom HS Dropout                           ---            (0.123)           (0.074)           (0.001)            (0.007)          (0.003)         (0.015)
State Characteristic*                      ---             0.163             0.008             0.000              0.003            0.000           -0.013
        Mom HS Graduate                    ---            (0.097)           (0.062)            (0.001)           (0.006)          (0.002)         (0.013)
Notes: reported standard errors are clustered at the state level. Additional explanatory variables in each regression include maternal educational attainment,
current age and age squared, race/ethnicity, an indicator variable for living with a single parent at age 14, the state unemployment rate at age 19 or 24, state
welfare policies (family cap, waiver/TANF implementation, and maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a family of 3), state abortion policies (Medicaid funding,
parental notification/consent, and mandatory delay laws), and an indicator variable for SCHIP implementation, along with state and cohort fixed effects The
specifications for non-marital fertility have a sample size of 24,720 and 23,037 by ages 20 and 25, respectively (and 19,797 and 18,940 for the poverty rate
models).
                                                                             Teen Birth Rate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Teen Birth Rate




                                                          0
                                                              15
                                                                           30
                                                                                            45
                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                     New Hampshire                 19.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.3
                                      Massachusetts                20.1
                                             Vermont                21.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5.1
                                         Connecticut                  22.9
                                          New Jersey                    24.5
                                            New York                     25.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5.2
                                                Maine                     26.1
                                          Minnesota                        27.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.9




source: Martin, et al. (2010)
                                        Rhode Island                        28.5
                                       North Dakota                          28.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6.0
                                           Wisconsin                            31.3
                                       Pennsylvania                             31.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6.7
                                            Maryland                              32.8
                                            Michigan                              33.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8.6
                                              Virginia                             33.5
                                                  Iowa                             33.9
                                         Washington                                 34.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.7

                                                  Utah                              35.1
                                            Nebraska                                  36.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9.3




                                              Oregon                                   37.2
                                               Illinois                                 38.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9.7




                                            California                                  38.4
                                       South Dakota                                       40
                                            Delaware                                      40.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10.5




                                            Montana                                        40.7
                                                  Ohio                                     41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.2




                                                Idaho                                      41.2
                                               Hawaii                                       42.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.5




                                            Colorado                                         42.5
                                               Florida                                       42.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12.0




                                              Indiana                                         43.7
                                             Missouri                                           45.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13.7




                                               Kansas                                           45.6
                                               Alaska                                             46.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                   source: United Nationsl Economic Commission for Europe (2011) and UN Demographic Yearbook, 2008.




                                       West Virginia                                                48.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14.1




                                            Wyoming                                                 49.2
                                      North Carolina                                                49.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15.8




                                District of Columbia                                                   50.9
                                              Georgia                                                   51.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17.1




                                             Alabama                                                     53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 1: International Comparison of Teen Birth Rates, 2008




                                      South Carolina                                                     53.1
                                                                                                                                     Figure 2: Variation in Teen Birth Rates across States, 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             17.5




                                               Nevada                                                    53.5
                                            Louisiana                                                     54.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25.9




                                             Kentucky                                                       55.6
                                          Tennessee                                                         55.6
                                               Arizona                                                       56.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30.5




                                           Oklahoma                                                                 61.6
                                             Arkansas                                                               61.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          41.5




                                                 Texas                                                               63.4
                                        New Mexico                                                                    64.1
                                          Mississippi                                                                    65.7
                                 Figure 3: Income Inequality and Teen Birth Rates across Countries
                    45

                                                                                                                                  United States
                    40



                    35



                    30
  Teen Birth Rate




                    25
                                                                                                                                               y = 140.17x - 31.554
                                                                                                                                                    R² = 0.502
                    20



                    15



                    10



                     5



                     0
                      0.225          0.250             0.275            0.300             0.325           0.350          0.375                 0.400             0.425
                                                                                     Gini Coefficient


       sources: Gini Coefficient - United Nations (2009). Teen Birth Rate - United Nations (2008)


                                    Figure 4: Income Inequality and Teen Birth Rates across States
                    80



                    70



                    60



                    50
                                                                                                                                         y = 236.99x - 64.649
Teen Birth Rate




                                                                                                                                              R² = 0.1313

                    40



                    30

                                                                                                                                                          NY
                                                                                                                                 CT
                    20



                    10



                    0
                         0.40     0.41          0.42           0.43         0.44          0.45          0.46      0.47            0.48             0.49           0.50
                                                                                    Gini Coefficient


                  Source: Gini Coefficient - Webster (2007). Teen Birth Rate - Martin (2009)
                                     Figure 5: Probability of Giving Birth by Age 20, by Marital Status
                    0.25




                    0.20




                    0.15
      Probability




                    0.10




                    0.05




                    0.00


                                                                                                  Year Age 20


                                                                                    Non-Marital          Marital        All


                    note: Statistics reflect the five year moving average centered on the reported year age 20, weighted by the number of observations.


                               Figure 6: Pregnancy Resolution for Non-Marital Conceptions by Age 20
              0.8



              0.7



              0.6



              0.5
Probability




              0.4



              0.3



              0.2



              0.1



                    0


                                                                                              Year Age 20

                                                       Non-Marital Birth           Marital Birth ("Shotgun Marriage")          Pregnancy Failure


 note: Statistics reflect the five year moving average centered on the reported year age 20, weighted by the number of observations.
                                               Figure 7: Fertility Outcomes by Age 20 in Selected FFS Countries
                                  0.2


                                 0.18


                                 0.16


                                 0.14
Probability of Event by Age 20




                                 0.12


                                  0.1


                                 0.08


                                 0.06


                                 0.04


                                 0.02


                                   0
                                        1976    1977     1978     1979      1980      1981      1982      1983        1984      1985   1986      1987      1988   1989


                                                                            Conception          Birth            Pregnancy Failure


                            Note: Eastern bloc countries are excluded. Others are included based on the availability of data on all outcomes (see text).
                                                                     Figure 8A: Rate of Nonmarital Childbearing by Age 20,
                                                               by Mother's Level of Education and State Level of Income Inequality
                                                        0.25




                                                        0.20
Percentage of Women with a Nonmarital Birth by Age 20




                                                        0.15




                                                        0.10




                                                        0.05




                                                        0.00
                                                                  Mother HS Dropout                           Mother HS Grad                     Any College

                                                                                      Least Inequality   midrange inequality   most inequality




                                                                     Figure 8B: Rate of Nonmarital Conception by Age 20,
                                                               by Mother's Level of Education and State Level of Income Inequality
                                                        0.35




                                                        0.30
Percentage of Women Conceiving by Age 20




                                                        0.25




                                                        0.20




                                                        0.15




                                                        0.10




                                                        0.05




                                                        0.00
                                                                  Mother HS Dropout                           Mother HS Grad                     Any College

                                                                                      Least Inequality   midrange inequality   most inequality
                                                                                   Figure 8C: Rate of Nonmarital Pregnancy Failure by Age 20,
                                                                               by Mother's Level of Education and State Level of Income Inequality
                                                           0.12




                                                           0.10
Percentage of Women with a Pregnancy Failure by Age 20




                                                           0.08




                                                           0.06




                                                           0.04




                                                           0.02




                                                           0.00
                                                                                   Mother HS Dropout                                Mother HS Grad                                 Any College

                                                                                                            Least Inequality   midrange inequality   most inequality




                                                                                             Figure 9: Rate of Childbearing by Age 20,
                                                                              by Parental Presence as a Child and National Level of Income Inequality
                                                                       0.25




                                                                       0.20
                          Percentage of Women Giving Birth by Age 20




                                                                       0.15




                                                                       0.10




                                                                       0.05




                                                                       0.00
                                                                                                single/no parents                                                        both parents

                                                                                                          least inequality     midrange inequality     most inequality

                                  source: authors calculations using data from the Fertility and Family Surveys, excluding data from the United States.
                                                    Figure 10: Relationship between Income Inequality and Mobility
                                        0.60




                                                                                                                                 United Kingdom
                                        0.50
                                                                                                                                                            United States
Intergenerational Earnings Elasticity




                                                                                                               France

                                        0.40

                                                                                                                                   y = 1.9628x - 0.2994
                                                                                                                                        R² = 0.6482
                                                                                 Germany

                                        0.30
                                                        Sweden




                                                                                                              Canada
                                        0.20                           Finland
                                                              Norway
                                                     Denmark




                                        0.10
                                           0.225         0.250              0.275           0.300             0.325            0.350              0.375   0.400             0.425
                                                                                                         Gini Coefficient


                                    Sources: Gini Coefficient - United Nations (2009). Intergenerational earnings elasticity - Corak (2006).
             Data Appendix: State/Year Policy and Economic Condition Variables

This table lists the sources for the policy and economic condition variables included as control
variables in our OLS regressions.
Family cap                 Information on this welfare waiver policy was obtained from three sources:
                           (1) a technical report of the Council of Economic Advisers (1999); (2) an
                           Urban Institute report written by Gallagher, et al. (1998); and (3) a report
                           by Crouse (1999), prepared for the U.S. Department of Health and Human
                           Services, which summarizes information contained in a report of the U.S.
                           Department of Health and Human Services (1997).

                           Full source citations: Council of Economic Advisors. 1999. “Technical
                           Report: Economic Expansion, Welfare Reform, and the Decline in Welfare
                           Caseloads: An Update.” Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the
                           President of the United States;
                           Crouse, Gil. 1999. “State Implementation of Major Changes to Welfare
                           Policies, 1992-1998.” Washington, D.C.: Office of Human Services
                           Policy, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department
                           of Health and Human Services;
                           Gallagher, L. Jerome, Megan Gallagher, Kevin Perese, Susan Schreiber,
                           and Keith Watson. 1998. One Year after Federal Welfare Reform: A
                           Description of State Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
                           Decisions as of October 1997. Washington D.C.: Urban Institute,
                           Occasional Paper Number 6.

SCHIP implementation       Dates for state implementation of SCHIP were obtained from the Centers
                           for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) website:
                           http://www.cms.hhs.gov/schip/enrollment/fy2000.pdf, accessed September
                           2005. (All states implemented SCHIP by 1998, so these series did not
                           require updating.)

AFDC/TANF Benefit          Data on welfare benefit levels were obtained from Council of Economic
for 3-person Family        Advisers (1997) and Rowe, et al., (2004), Rowe and Russell (2004), and
                           Rowe and Versteeg (2005). We update these series using data compiled by
                           the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research, publically
                           available on the Center’s website. They list their sources as Urban Institute
                           2006-2009.

                           Full source citations: Council of Economic Advisers. 1997. Technical
                           Report: Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996.
                           Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President of the United States;
                           Rowe, Gretchen, Kevin McManus, and Tracy Roberts. 2004. The Welfare
                           Rules Databook: State Policy as of July 2001. Washington, D.C.: The
                           Urban Institute; Rowe, Gretchen with Victoria Russell. 2004. The Welfare
                           Rules Databook: State Policy as of July 2002. Washington, D.C.: The
                           Urban Institute, October; Rowe, Gretchen with Jeffrey Versteeg. 2005.
                           The Welfare Rules Databook: State Policy as of July 2003. Washington,
                           D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Medicaid Family            See Table 1 of Kearney and Levine (2008) for details and descriptions of
Planning Waiver,          these policies through 2006. Sources for those codings: Jennifer J. Frost,
Income Based              Adam Sonfield, and Rebecca Benson Gold. 2006. “Estimating the Impact
                          of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility for Family Planning Services,”
Medicaid Family           Occasional Report, New York: Guttmacher Institute, No. 28; and
Planning Waiver,          Guttmacher Institute. 2006. “State Medicaid family planning eligibility
Duration Based            expansions,” State Policies in Brief, New York: Guttmacher Institute.

                          We update these series using information reported by recent Guttmacher
                          state policies in brief factsheets, accessed through the website:
                          http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SMFPE.pdf. We verify
                          this information using information posted on the Center for Medicaid and
                          Medicare (CMS) website about Section 1115 state waivers:
                          http://www.cms.gov/MedicaidStWaivProgDemoPGI/MWDL/list.asp.
                          (Accessed 10/14/10).

Abortion restriction -    Levine (2004) includes a detailed description of these restrictions and how
Parental consent          the variables are coded. We updated Levine’s earlier series by comparing
                          changes in legal status between 2004 and what is reported by Guttmacher
Abortion restriction –    as 2010 law. For the set of states with reported changes, we searched the
mandatory delay           state websites for information about dates of implementation:
                          http://prochoiceamerica.org/government-and-you/state-governments/.

Medicaid Abortion State   Levine (2004) includes a detailed description of these restrictions and how
funding restriction       the variables are coded. We updated Levine’s earlier series using
                          information from NARAL, “Restrictions on Low Income Women's Access
                          to Abortion”, accessed 10/15/10: http://www.prochoiceamerica.org/what-
                          is-choice/fast-facts/low-income-women.html

state unemployment rate   Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS)
                          program.
