                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES FINANCIAL CONSTRAINT AFFECT SHAREHOLDER TAXES AND THE
                        COST OF EQUITY CAPITAL?

                                          Chongyang Chen
                                           Zhonglan Dai
                                         Douglas Shackelford
                                           Harold Zhang

                                         Working Paper 17169
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17169


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We would like to acknowledge our appreciation to the workshop participants at the University of Frankfurt,
the Max Planck Institute for Tax Law and Public Finance, and the Vienna University of Economics
and Business for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Chongyang Chen, Zhonglan Dai, Douglas Shackelford, and Harold Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Financial Constraint Affect Shareholder Taxes and the Cost of Equity Capital?
Chongyang Chen, Zhonglan Dai, Douglas Shackelford, and Harold Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 17169
June 2011
JEL No. G12,G32,G35,H24

                                               ABSTRACT

We show that firms with the least elastic demand for equity capital should benefit the most from reductions
in shareholder taxes. Consistent with this prediction, we find that, following 1997 and 2003 cuts in
U.S. individual shareholder taxes, financially constrained firms, and particularly those with disproportionate
ownership by U.S. individuals, enjoyed larger reductions in their cost of equity capital than did other
firms. The results are consistent with the incidence of the tax reductions falling mostly on firms with
the most pressing needs for capital. Furthermore, the findings provide an explanation for the heretofore
puzzling finding that, following the unprecedented 2003 reduction in dividend tax rates, non-dividend-paying
firms outperformed dividend-paying firms. Not surprisingly, we find that non-dividend-paying firms
are more financial constrained than dividend-paying firms are. When a firm’s financial constraint and
dividend choice are jointly considered, we find that the extent of financial constraint affects the change
in the cost of equity capital, but whether a firm issues a dividend does not. In other words, it appears
that the extant studies suffered from the omission of a correlated variation, the extent to which a firm
is financially constrained.


Chongyang Chen                                        Douglas Shackelford
School of Management,                                 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
The University of Texas at Dallas                     Kenan-Flagler Business School
Richardson, TX 75080-3021                             Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
cchen@utdallas.edu                                    Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
                                                      and NBER
Zhonglan Dai                                          doug_shack@unc.edu
School of Management
The University of Texas at Dallas                     Harold Zhang
Richardson, TX 75080-3021                             University of Texas at Dallas
zdai@utdallas.edu                                     harold.zhang@utdallas.edu
Does Financial Constraint Affect Shareholder Taxes and the Cost of Equity Capital?



1. Introduction

        The purpose of this paper is to determine the extent to which a firm’s financial

constraint affects its cost of equity capital following changes in investors’ taxes. Prior

studies (e.g., Dhaliwal, Krull, and Li, 2007 (hereafter, DKL), and Guenther, Jung, and

Williams, 2005, among others) document that shareholder taxes decreased a firm’s cost

of equity capital after the 2003 reductions in shareholder taxes. However, they ignore the

potential impact of cross-sectional variation in the need for external capital on that causal

relation.

        We address this void in the literature by hypothesizing that reductions in

shareholder taxes should lower the cost of equity capital more for financially constrained

firms than for other companies. The reason is that firms facing binding financial

constraint have less elastic demand for external capital than other firms do and thus are

forced to pay more to access that capital. Since factors that increase the cost of equity

capital, such as shareholder taxes, are borne more heavily by those firms with the least

elastic demand, reductions in those factors should benefit those firms more than firms

with more elastic demand. Restated, since shareholder taxes increase a firm’s cost of

equity capital, reductions in shareholder taxes should lower the cost of equity capital

more for firms with less elastic demand (i.e., financially constrained firms) than for firms

with less pressing needs for capital.

        We test the extent to which financial constraint matters by evaluating the two

most recent changes in U.S. shareholder taxes: the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (TRA)
and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA).1 We analyze

the impact of the tax rate changes by regressing various implied (ex ante) measures of the

cost of equity capital on measures of financial constraint developed in Hadlock and

Pierce (2010) and assorted controls.2

        Consistent with our predictions, we find that, when shareholder tax rates are cut,

the more severe the financial constraint a firm experiences, the larger the reduction in its

cost of equity capital. Furthermore, as expected, we find that the reduction in the cost of

equity capital is larger for those financially constrained stocks that are held

disproportionately by taxable individual investors, who are subject to the shareholder

taxes that were reduced, than for financially constrained firms that tend to access capital

from sources that were unaffected by the rate changes, such as tax-exempt institutions,

tax-deferred pensions, other corporations, and foreigners.

        To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the impact of financial

constraint on the relation between shareholder taxes and the cost of equity capital. Prior

studies report that the cost of equity capital fell after shareholder tax cuts in 2003.

However, we extend those studies to show that the reduction in the cost of equity capital

was increasing in the inelasticity of the firm’s demand for outside capital. This implies

that, to the extent the rate reductions were designed to mitigate barriers to the equity

markets for financially constrained firms, the shareholder tax cuts met their desired goal.




1
  The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 lowered the maximum statutory capital gains tax rate from 28% to 20%,
but left the dividend tax rate unchanged at 38.6%. The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
2003 reduced the maximum statutory tax rate for capital gains from 20% to 15% and for dividends from
38.6% to 15%.
2
  See Dhaliwal, Krull, Li, and Moser, (2005), Dhaliwal, Heitzman, and Li (2006), Hail and Leuz (2006),
DKL, among others, for estimates of the cost of equity capital for firms.


                                                  2
Companies with binding financial constraint benefited from the tax legislation more than

other firms did.

         Our results also shed light on a 2003 puzzle that has eluded scholars. DKL,

Auerbach and Hassett (2006) and others document that JGTRRA benefited non-dividend-

paying stocks more than dividend-paying stocks. This finding is surprising because

JGTRRA reduced dividend tax rates by an unprecedented 23.6 percentage points, while

lowering the capital gains tax rate (the only individual shareholder tax applicable to non-

dividend-paying stocks) by a relatively modest five percentage points. A priori, we would

have expected that the benefits from the huge dividend tax rate cuts would have

dominated the benefits from smaller capital gains tax rates reductions. It then follows that

since the immediate benefits of the dividend tax cut would have enjoyed solely by the

dividend-paying firms, the returns from dividend-paying stocks should have exceeded

those from non-dividend-paying stocks. But, alas, this was not the case; in fact the

opposite was observed.3

         Our findings suggest that the previous studies suffer from the omission of a

variable that is correlated with the decision to issue dividends, namely the extent to which

a firm is financially constrained. Not surprisingly, dividend-paying firms face less

financial constraint than non-dividend-paying firms.4 When we include in our regressions


3
  DKL describe the puzzle in the following ways, “However, we find that non-dividend paying firms
experience a larger decrease in cost of equity capital than dividend paying firms, which is inconsistent with
existing theory and empirical evidence. This result suggests that further work is needed to more fully
explain the relation between dividend taxes and stock prices.” (p.123). “However, overall the results for the
dividend paying and non-dividend paying sub-samples are puzzling and suggest that further research is
needed to fully understand the relation between dividend taxes and stock prices.” (p.145).
4
   When we segregate our sample into those paying dividends and those not paying dividends before
JGTRRA, we find that 73% of the non-dividend-paying firms have above-median financial constraint, but
only 27% of the dividend-paying firms are similarly constrained. Conversely, among the below-median
financially constrained group, 63% are dividend-paying firms, but only 37% are non-dividend-paying
firms.


                                                     3
a categorical variable, which indicates whether a firm pays dividends, and exclude a

measure of financial constraint, the coefficient on dividend policy loads in a manner that

suggests non-dividend-paying firms enjoyed a larger reduction in the cost of equity

capital than did dividend-paying firms following JGTRRA. However, when we add a

measure of financial constraint as an explanatory variable, the dividend policy variable

becomes insignificant, while the financial constraint measure is highly significant.

       In other words, the benefits of the reductions in investor taxes appear to fall on

financially constrained firms, which happen to be predominantly non-dividend-paying

firms. Prior studies erroneously inferred that non-dividend-paying firms benefited more

from JGTRRA, when actually the benefits of JGTRRA were divvied out based on

financial constraint, not on dividend policy. Thus, we conclude that cross-sectional

difference in the elasticity of demand for equity capital at least partially accounts for the

heretofore inexplicable stock price responses.

       The omission of a correlated variable does not appear limited to JGTRRA studies.

In their studies of TRA, Blouin et al, 2009, Dai et al., 2008, and Lang and Shackelford,

2000, among others, segregate firms based on whether they pay dividends. They report

that the benefits of the TRA cut in capital gains taxes fell disproportionately on non-

dividend-paying firms. They interpret this finding as evidence that TRA affected the

equity markets because its capital gains tax rate reduction (recall TRA did not alter the

dividend tax rate) affected all returns of non-dividend-paying stocks, but only some of the

returns of dividend-paying stocks. As with JGTRRA, we find that dividend policy is

significant in those TRA regressions where we exclude a measure of financial constraint,

but insignificant in those where we include a measure of financial constraint. Finding that




                                             4
the degree of financial constraint matters for two different changes in shareholder taxes

(and that in both cases the decision to issue dividends is irrelevant) provides compelling

evidence that the elasticity of demand is an important factor in determining the incidence

of changes in shareholder taxes.

       The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we show how the cost of equity

capital is affected by the firm’s financial constraint when shareholder taxes change. We

then hypothesize about the relative change in the cost of equity capital for firms with

different degree of financial constraint. Section 3 describes the research design. Section 4

presents the findings. Concluding remarks follow.



2. Hypothesis development

       In a perfect and complete financial market without frictions, such as taxation or

asymmetric information between firms and investors, the cost of capital (which aids

managers in determining their demand for capital) and the required expected stock return

(which aids investors in allocating their supply of capital) should be identical in

equilibrium. However, in the presence of market frictions, such as taxes, the two

measures can differ.

       Assuming firms are all-equity financed, Figure 1 shows the relation between the

cost of equity capital and the required expected return when investment income, such as

capital gains and dividends, are taxed. The horizontal axis represents the equity capital

investment and the vertical axis represents the cost of equity capital for firms ( rc ) and the

required expected rate of return by investors ( rr ). We model firms’ demand for capital

investment as a decreasing function of the cost of equity capital, i.e., D rc  0 , and



                                              5
investors’ supply of capital as an increasing function of required expected return by

investors, i.e., S rr  0 . To focus on the effect of changes in tax rate, we assume there

is no asymmetric information.

         To illustrate the effect of taxes on investment income, we start with no taxation of

investment income. In this case, firms’ demand for capital (D) and investors’ supply of

capital (S) intersect at point A. The equilibrium cost of capital for firms and the required

expected rate of return by investors are identical, i.e., rcA  rrA .

         Next, we introduce shareholder taxes (dividend and/or capital gains taxes) where

the tax rate is denoted by  . We assume taxes are levied directly on investors and that

the marginal investors are tax-sensitive. Introducing taxes makes the investors’ effective

supply of capital likely to shift upward (from S to S’). Assume it shifts upward until the

firms’ demand for capital and investors’ effective supply of capital intersect at point B.

At this point, the cost of equity capital paid by firms, denoted by rcB , is no longer the

same as the required after-tax expected return to investors, denoted rrB  (1   )rcB . The

former is higher than the latter, and the difference is the taxes paid to the government,

i.e., [rcB  rrB    rcB ] .

         Now suppose taxes on investment income decline (either a reduction in capital

gains taxes or dividend taxes or both), i.e.,  goes down to  ' . The investors’ effective

supply of capital shifts down toward the no tax case (from S’ to S”), and assume firms’

demand for capital and investors’ supply of capital now intersect at point C. At the new

equilibrium, the cost of equity capital for firms still exceeds the investors’ required after-

                                                               C
tax expected rate of return on equity investment, i.e., rc  rrC . However, following the



                                                 6
reduction in investment income taxes, the new equilibrium cost of equity capital for firms

is lower and the equilibrium after-tax expected return for investors is higher.

         Furthermore, the reduction of cost of capital is larger for firms whose demand

elasticity is low (in magnitude). Figure 2 adds a second firm with lower demand elasticity

whose demand for capital is labeled as D’. Suppose that before the tax cut, both firms’

demand interacts with supply S’ at point B. After the tax cut, when the effective supply

becomes S”, the first firm moves from point B to points C (as seen in Figure 1), but the

second firm moves from point B to point C’. Note that the reduction in cost of capital is

larger for the second firm than for the first firm ( rcB to rcC ' vs. rcB to rcC ). This leads us to

infer that, since firms facing more severe financial constraint are the ones that have lower

elasticity of demand for capital, these firms will see larger reductions in the cost of equity

capital, when shareholder taxes are cut, than will firms with higher elasticity of demand

for capital, i.e., firms that face less financial constraint.5 This leads to the paper’s

hypothesis:


Hypothesis: A reduction in shareholder tax rates will decrease the cost of equity capital

of severely financially constrained firms more than firms that are less financially

constrained.




5
  Consider two extreme cases: (1) the firm is completely constrained with no access to external capital, and
(2) the firm is completely unconstrained in its access to external capital. In the first case, the firm’s demand
elasticity for external capital is zero because a change in the cost of equity capital has no effect on the
amount of capital it can raise. In the second case, the firm’s demand for external capital is very elastic
because it can access the external market any time and will only choose to raise external capital when the
cost of equity capital is low and refrain from using external capital when the cost of capital is high. Thus, a
small increase in the cost of capital may have a large impact on the amount of external capital raised by the
firm, leading to a high elasticity of demand for external capital.



                                                       7
3. Research design

3.1. Research equation

         To assess whether financial constraint affects the impact of a change in

shareholder taxes on a firm’s cost of equity capital, we expand DKL’s regression

equation by adding a measure of financial constraint and several macroeconomic

controls.6 The resulting regression model is:

                             rˆit    1 Postt   2 FCit 1   3 Postt  FCit 1   4 INSTit 1
                                                                                                           (1)
                                     5 Postt  INSTit 1   X it   Z t   it ,

where r̂it is the measure of estimated cost of equity capital, Postt is a dummy variable

which takes a value of zero before the tax cut and one after the tax cut, FCit 1 is the

measure for financial constraint of firm i at time t-1, and INSTit 1 measures the percentage

of institutional ownership of firm i at time t-1.7 X it represents the firm level control

variables, and Z t represents aggregate variables to control for the overall economic




6
  To the extent possible, we follow DKL throughout the paper. By building off the prior literature, we
enhance our ability to isolate the impact of financial constraint on the cost of equity capital when
shareholder taxes change.
7
  To capture different tax sensitivity of investor ownership to shareholder taxes, we construct proxies for
the percentage of investor ownership of a stock (individual investors and institutional investors) using data
on shares outstanding and shares owned by different types of institutional investors. The data on the
institutional investors’ ownership are obtained from their quarterly filings with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (known as Form 13F) compiled by Thomson’s Financial. This control is important
because the tax rate reductions in this study only apply to income that is reported on personal tax returns,
i.e., dividends received and capital gains from the selling of shares held directly by individuals or held
indirectly by individuals in flow-through entities, such as mutual funds, partnerships, trusts, S corporations,
or limited liability corporations that pass dividend income to investors’ personal tax returns. The rate
reductions do not apply to dividend and capital gain income for shares held by tax-deferred accounts (e.g.,
qualified retirement plans, including pensions, IRAs and 401(k)), tax-exempt organizations, corporations,
and foreigners, among other non-individual shareholders. As discussed below, we recognize that this
measure is not without controversy (see Guenther and Sansing, 2006, 2010). However, we use this measure
because DKL did so. By using it, rather than some other potentially superior measure, we retain the ability
to identify any departures in our findings from those in DKL.


                                                       8
activities.8 The variable of interest is the interaction term, Postt  FCit 1 . We will interpret

a negative coefficient on  3 as evidence that firms with more severe financial constraint

(or inelastic demand for capital) experience a larger reduction in the cost of capital than

other companies do, following a reduction in shareholder taxes.

        We use the same firm level controls that DKL do: the book value-to-market value

ratio (in logarithm), forecasted long-term growth of earnings, the coefficient of variation

of the one-year-ahead earnings per share forecast, the average cost of equity capital over

the sample period for each industry using the classification by Fama and French (1997),

firm size (in logarithm) in the most recent past quarter, and risk exposures to the market,

the size, and the value factors measured by  MKT ,  SMB , and  HML . Following DKL, we

estimate these risk factor loadings using return data for the 48 months before the

beginning of the calendar year. We also include the moving average daily turnover for

each firm over past 250 days leading up to the end of the most recent past quarter.

        In addition, since macroeconomic activities may influence firms’ demand for

capital and investors’ supply of capital, we add macroeconomic and aggregate financial

variables, such as detrended risk-free rate (Campbell and Shiller, 1988), excess market

return and its volatility, industrial production growth rate, and the consumption-wealth

ratio (CAY) following Lettau and Ludvigson (2001).9 In every regression, we also include

quarterly dummy variables to control for possible seasonal effect.



8
  In the regression analysis, we use the PROC MIXED Procedure to estimate our panel model specification.
Our estimation method utilizes the clustered estimate for the standard errors which allow for both cross-
sectional and serial correlation.
9
   For the risk-free rate, we use the three month Treasury bill rate from Ken French’s website and
stochastically detrend the variable by removing the prior twelve month average as done in Campbell and
Shiller (1988). Stock market return is measured by the excess return on the value-weighted portfolio of
stocks included in the CRSP database. The growth rate of the industrial production is calculated using


                                                   9
3.2. Cost of equity capital measure

        Following Dhaliwal el al., (2005, 2006, 2007), among others, we estimate ex ante

or implied cost of equity capital using various versions of the residual income model

(Ohlson, 1995, Feltham and Ohlson, 1995). Under the assumption of clean surplus

accounting on a firm’s earnings and book value of equity, the dividend discount model

can be written as the residual income model:

                                                  
                                                        E t [ NI t i  re Bt i 1 ]
                                      Pt  Bt                                       ,         (2)
                                                 i 1          (1  re ) i

where Pt is the stock price at the end of period t, Bt is the firm’s book value at time t,

NI t i is the firm’s net income for period t+i, and re is the firm’s implied cost of equity

capital. Et [ NI t i  re Bt i1 ] is the abnormal earnings in excess of the cost of equity on the

firm’s book value and thus represents the time t expected value of the residual income at

time t+i. Following DKL, we use their three different variations of the residual income

model to estimate the implied cost of equity capital: Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan

(2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram (2003). The appendix

reviews the computation of these three estimates.

        We find that inferences are generally the same with each of the three measures.

Therefore, since each estimate has its advantages and disadvantages depending on firm

and time period, we use the mean of the three estimates as our primary estimate of the




monthly industrial production index obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The
consumption-wealth ratio, CAY, is downloaded from Martin Lettau’s website.



                                                10
cost of equity capital. Using the mean should reduce any estimation noise embedded in

each estimate and, thus, provide a more reliable estimate of the cost of equity capital.



3.3. Financial constraint measure

         We estimate a firm’s financial constraint based on the latest measure developed

by Hadlock and Pierce (2010).10 Analyzing 1,848 firm-years from 1995 to 2004 for 356

randomly selected firms in Compustat, they use an elaborate process to classify the

financial constraint for each firm-year from 1-5, where 5 represents the most financially

constrained firms. They then regress their financial constraint value for each firm-year on

various potential determinants of financial constraint as identified in extant papers. The

result is an ordered LOGIT model with four variables deemed relevant for classification:

(a) Cash Flow: a firm’s operating income plus depreciation divided by beginning-of-year

book assets; (b) Leverage: book value of long term debt divided by current book assets;

(c) Size: log of inflation-adjusted assets; and (d) Firm Age: the current year minus the

first year that the firm has an non-missing stock price on Compustat.11

         Using the estimated coefficients for the four variables and the cut points for the

five classifications of financial constraint, we can estimate the probability that firm i falls

into each of the five groups at time t. We then take the predicted probability of firm i

falling into group 5 (i.e., the group with the most financially constrained firms) at time t

10
   Other candidates for measuring financial constraint include the Kaplan and Zingales (1997) index, which
amalgamates cash flow, Tobin’s Q, leverage, dividends and cash holding scaled by book value of assets
and the Whited and Wu (2006) index, which integrates cash flow, a dividend distribution dummy, leverage,
size, industry sales growth, and firm sales growth. As pointed out by Hadlock and Pierce (2010), some of
determinants used in Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and Whited and Wu (2006) may be endogenously
determined with the measure of financial constraint faced by a firm and sometimes have conflicting signs.
Thus, they are not suitable as determinants of a firm’s financial constraint measure.
11
   Hadlock and Pierce (2010) show that similar financial constraint classifications can be derived using only
firm size and age. In Section 4.6, we replicate the empirical tests in the study using this alternative measure,
and, not surprising, inferences are largely unaltered.


                                                      11
as the measure of firm i’s financial constraint at time t. This probability is our primary

measure of financial constraint and is termed FCit. Specifically, we estimate the

probability of financial constraint for firm i at period t as follows:

                                                             1
     FCit  Pr ( Financially Constrained )  1                               and
                                                    1  exp( ' X it  C4 )
      ' X it  0.592  Cash Flowit  1.747  Leverageit  0.357  Sizeit  0.025  Firm Ageit ,
                                                                                                   (3)
where C4 is the cut point for group four (likely financial constrained) and the associated

cut points for groups 1 to 4 are estimated at -4.191, 0.208, 1.494, and 1.554, respectively.

All four estimated coefficients have consistent signs and are statistically significant at 1%

level.12

           Hadlock and Pierce’s (2010) financial constraint classification process supersedes

its predecessors for at least two reasons. First, it uses qualitative information to categorize

a firm’s financial constraint status by carefully reading statements made by managers in

SEC filings such as the annual letter to shareholders and the management discussion and

analysis section. Second, the sampling period for Hadlock and Pierce (2010) covers both

of the two changes in shareholder taxes that we examine in this study. This facilitates the

use of their coefficient estimates in computing the probability of financial constraint for

firms in our sample.



3.4. Events

           DKL limit their analysis of the impact of shareholder taxes on the cost of equity

capital to the latest change in the U.S. shareholder tax law (Jobs and Growth Tax Relief


12
  These estimates are taken from Column (4) of Table 4 in Hadlock and Pierce (2010) and we thank Joshua
Pierce for providing us the cut point estimates.


                                                  12
Reconciliation Act of 2003 or JGTRRA), which dropped the maximum, statutory tax rate

on dividends from 38.6% to 15% and the maximum, statutory tax rate on realized capital

gains from 20% to 15% for positions held at least 12 months. We test our hypothesis on

both JGTRRA and the change in the shareholder tax law that preceded it, the Taxpayer

Relief Act of 1997 (TRA), which left the dividend tax rate unchanged but reduced the

maximum, statutory tax rate on realized capital gains from 28% to 20% for positions held

more than 18 months.

       For TRA, we use data from the first quarter of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1998.

The categorical variable Post takes a value of zero on and before 3/31/1997 and value of

one on and after 7/1/1997. For JGTRRA, we use data from the first quarter of 2001 to the

fourth quarter of 2004. The categorical variable Post takes a value of zero on and before

3/31/2003 and value of one on and after 7/1/2003. We exclude the “announcement”

months (coincidentally April to June for both legislations) from our examination to

mitigate possible transient effects arising from uncertainty about passage of the tax

legislation. Results are similar if we include the transitional periods.



4. Results

4.1. Descriptive statistics

       Table 1 presents the summary statistics for firm level variables. Panel A reports

the mean, median, and standard deviation for the full sample from 1995Q1 to 1998Q4 for

TRA and from 2001Q1 to 2004Q4 for JGTRRA. The mean (median) cost of equity

capital is 9.7% (9.1%) with a standard deviation of 4.0% for TRA and 8.9% (8.4%) with

a standard deviation of 3.4% for JGTRRA. The mean estimated probability of a firm




                                              13
facing financial constraint (FC) is 4.4% with a standard deviation of 4.1% during TRA

and 3.4% with a standard deviation of 3.2% around JGTRRA. On average, about 29% of

shares owned by institutional investors during TRA and 36% during JGTRRA. The

moving average daily turnover for the past 250 days has a mean of 0.0031 (0.0041) with

a standard deviation of 0.0030 (0.0052) for TRA (JGTRRA). The book-to-market value

is on average higher during JGTRRA than during TRA. The average long-term growth of

earnings and the dispersion of earnings forecasts are slightly lower around JGTRRA than

around TRA. Not surprisingly, firms were larger in 2003 than in 1997. The mean firm

exposure to the size factor declined (from 0.85 during TRA to 0.43 during JGTRRA), but

the exposure to the value factor increased (from 0.15 during TRA to 0.39 during

JGTRRA).

       Panel B of Table 1 reports the averages for these firm level variables before and

after the tax cut for both the TRA and the JGTRRA. All firm variables experienced

changes in their sample means that are significant at the 10% level, except for the average

exposure to the size factor under TRA. Of particular interest to this study, the estimated

average cost of equity capital (rAVE) for both TRA and JGTRRA is lower after the tax cut

than before the tax cut at the 1% level. The reduction is larger in magnitude under

JGTRRA (from 0.095 to 0.083) than under TRA (from 0.097 to 0.096). Each of the three

estimates of the cost of equity capital (rGLS, rCT, and rGM) shows similar declines. The

mean probability of firms facing financial constraint is slightly lower after TRA (from

4.47% to 4.4%), significant at 10%, but more so after JGTRRA (from 3.61% to 3.04%),

significant at 1%.




                                            14
       Table 2 reports the summary statistics for the macroeconomic variables. The

stochastically detrended monthly risk-free rate has an average of -0.013 (-0.062) for TRA

(JGTRRA). The monthly average market excess return is 0.048 (0.016) for TRA

(JGTRRA). The monthly average market return volatility is 0.035 (0.045) during TRA

(JGTRRA). The monthly average industrial production growth rate is 0.008 (0.001) for

TRA (JGTRRA). The average consumption-wealth ratio is 0.014 (-0.007) for TRA

(JGTRRA). Panel B shows that the macroeconomic variables before and after the tax

cuts. The statistics suggest that overall economic environment experienced more

significant changes during JGTRRA than TRA.



4.2. Univariate tests

       Table 3, Panel A reports the findings from our initial test of the hypothesis. We

dichotomize the sample into high (HFC) and low (LFC) financially constrained firms and

then compare their costs of capital in the quarter immediately before the tax cuts with the

costs of capital in the quarter immediately afterwards. A firm is classified as having high

(low) financial constraint if its probability of financial constraint in the quarter

immediately preceding the tax rate cut is above (below) the median probability for all

firms. For completeness, Table 3, Panel A presents the results using each of the three

measures of the cost of equity capital (rGLS, rCT, and rGM), but, for brevity, we mostly

limit our discussion to the average of these three measures (rAVE) since inferences are by

and large the same for each measure.

       Consistent with extant studies that report a reduction in the cost of equity capital

following a reduction in shareholder taxes, we find that after TRA the average cost of




                                            15
equity capital decreased from 0.110 to 0.094 for the more financially constrained firms

and from 0.087 to 0.078 for less financially constrained firm group. Following JGTRRA,

the average cost of equity capital decreased from 0.099 to 0.083 for HFC companies and

from 0.094 to 0.082 for LFC firms. All decreases are significant at the 1% level.

       More importantly for this study, the reductions in the average cost of equity

capital were larger for the firms facing a higher probability of financial constraint than for

the group facing a lower probability of financial constraint. For TRA, the reduction in the

average cost of equity capital is 0.0160 for the HFC firms and 0.0089 for the LFC group.

The difference between the two groups is 72 basis points and significant at 1% level. For

JGTRRA, the reduction is 0.0159 for the high financially constrained group and 0.0116

for the low financially constrained group, a difference of 43 basis points, which is also

significant at 1% level.

       Since firms facing binding financial constraint are less likely to pay dividends, we

next partition the sample into dividend-paying and non-dividend-paying subsamples and

repeat the difference-in-difference comparison. Table 3, Panel B presents the results.

       After TRA, we find that HFC firms enjoyed a significantly larger reduction in

their cost of equity capital than did LFC firms for both the dividend-paying subsample

and the non-dividend-paying subsample. Furthermore, the difference-in-differences for

the non-dividend-paying firms (62 basis points) exceeds the difference-in-differences for

dividend-paying firms (45 basis points) and the difference is statistically significant at the

5% level.

       After JGTRRA, we find that only HFC firms in the non-dividend-paying

subsample enjoy a significantly larger reduction in their cost of equity capital than did




                                             16
LFC firms. The difference between HFC and LFC companies for the dividend-paying

subsample is insignificant. In addition, the difference-in-differences for the non-dividend-

paying firms (48 basis points) exceeds the difference-in-differences for the dividend-

paying firms (10 basis points) and the difference is statistically significant at the 5%

level.

         To summarize, consistent with prior research, we find that the cost of equity

capital fell after shareholder tax cuts. However, to our knowledge, this is the first paper to

show that the decrease in the cost of equity capital varied with the firm’s degree of

financial constraint. Furthermore, we find that the decreases were greater for non-

dividend-paying firms than for dividend-paying firms, consistent with the former

exhibiting lower demand for external capital. These dividend policy distinctions

potentially provide at least a partial solution to the DKL puzzle about why stock prices

rose more for non-dividend-paying firms than for dividend-paying firms after JGTRRA.

What the extant studies identified as dividend policy distinctions may have been partially

due to differences in financial constraint that were not considered, i.e., an omitted

correlated variable in their analyses. We now move from univariate tests to multivariate

panel regression analyses.



4.3. Primary regression results

         Table 4 reports panel regression results from estimating equation (1). As

expected, the estimated regression coefficient on the interaction term, Post  FC , is

negative and significant at 1% level for both TRA and JGTRRA. The results are

consistent with the decline in the cost of equity capital, following a reduction in




                                             17
shareholder taxes, being greater for those firms facing the most stringent financial

constraint. The estimated coefficients suggest that for a one standard deviation increase in

the probability of financial constraint faced by a firm, the reduction of the cost of equity

capital will be larger by 36 basis points under the TRA ( 0.088  0.041 ) and by 38 basis

points under the JGTRRA ( 0.119  0.032 ).

        Furthermore, including the financial constraint measures in the model reduces the

coefficients on Post , leaving only the TRA one significant. The failure to find a

significant coefficient on Post in the JGTRRA regression is consistent with cross-

sectional variation in financial constraint explaining DKL’s finding that the cost of equity

capital declined after JGTRRA.13

        Turning to two other variables of interest, we find that the estimated regression

coefficients for the variable FC are positive and significant at 1%, consistent with

financially constrained firms facing higher costs of equity capital before the two tax cuts.

This result is not surprising, but it does provide some comfort that our measure of

financial constraint is capturing an important factor that increases the cost of equity

capital. Likewise, we find the coefficient estimates on Post  INST are positive and

significant at 1% for both TRA and JGTRRA, which is consistent with the finding in

DKL. This result suggests that firms with higher institutional ownership experience a

smaller reduction in the cost of equity capital, which is not surprising because the tax rate

cuts for both TRA and JGTRRA only applied to taxable individual investors.




13
  When we exclude our measures of financial constraint, FC and Post  FC, from the regression, the
coefficient on Post is negative and significantly less than zero at the 1% (5%) level for TRA (JGTRRA).


                                                   18
4.4. Dividend policy—JGTRRA puzzle

         As discussed above, existing JGTRRA studies (e.g., DKL and Auerbach and

Hassett, 2006) document a puzzling result: The stock prices of non-dividend-paying firms

outperformed dividend-paying firms around JGTRRA, despite the fact that (a) the

dividend-paying stocks benefited immediately from the reductions in both capital gains

taxes and dividend taxes, while the non-dividend-paying firms only benefited from the

capital gains tax cut and (b) the dividend rate reductions (23.6 percentage points) far

exceeded the capital gains tax rate reductions (five percentage points).

         We advance a possible explanation for this puzzle. Ceteris paribus, dividend-

paying firms are less financially constrained than non-dividend-paying firms. In fact,

issuing dividends is prima facie evidence that the firm has excess capital, which enables

it to pay dividends. Thus, it is possible that the cost of capital response appears to vary

with the decision choice because dividend policy is closely related to financial

constraint.14 To test this proposition, we estimate the following specification:


14
   Auerbach and Hassett (2006) advance another reason why the results may not be puzzling. If managers
and investors perceived that the tax cuts would be made permanent, then “immature” companies whose
dividend payments lie solely in the future might have benefited more than dividend payers, which had
distributed part of their profits when dividend taxes were higher. Even though the rate cuts have persisted
until now, permanence would have seemed to be a risky assumption in 2003 for at least four reasons. The
cuts barely passed a Republican Congress with Vice-President Cheney casting the tie-breaking vote; they
were set to sunset in five years; the 2004 Democratic Presidential candidate John Kerry, who was narrowly
defeated, had pledged to repeal the shareholder tax cuts, if elected, and the legislation’s projected loss in
tax revenues was (and remains) substantial, making it a likely prospect for subsequent tax increases.
Subsequent distribution patterns provide mixed evidence about the perceptions of managers and investors.
Chetty and Saez (2005) and Brown et al., (2007) report that an inordinate number of firms with large
insider ownership initiated ordinary dividends soon as passage of JGTRRA, suggesting that they viewed
the cuts as temporary. However, yields were low, implying they had plenty of time to distribute at the lower
rates. Shackelford (2009) claims that, despite Microsoft’s extraordinary 2004 special dividend of $32
billion, few firms opted for special dividends, even though special dividends enable firms to make large
distributions and avoid the expectations for continued payment associated with ordinary dividends. This
may be consistent with permanence because firms forwent an opportunity to enjoy the tax benefits
immediately. Blouin et al. (2011) report that dividend-paying firms increased their repurchases more than
their ordinary dividends, perhaps inconsistent with permanence if these firms feared the need to recede
increased ordinary dividends if rates sunset. Unable to measure market perceptions about the permanence
of the rate reductions, we do not address the Auerbach and Hassett’s (2006) conjecture in our tests.


                                                    19
     rˆit    1Postt   2 NDivit   3 Postt  NDivit   4 FCit 1   5 Post  FCit 1   6 HYit
                                                                                  t
                                                                                                          (4)
           7 Postt  HYit   8 INSTit 1   9 Postt  INSTit 1   X it   Z t   it ,


where NDivit represents a non-dividend-paying dummy that equals one if firm i does not

pays dividend in quarter t and zero otherwise, HYit is one if firm i’s dividend yield is

above the median dividend yield in that quarter and zero otherwise.15 For both TRA and

JGTRRA, we estimate the model with and without the financial constraint variable to

assess the effect of financial constraint on the cost of capital for firms with different

dividend policy.

          Although the puzzle was raised in JGTRRA work, several studies of TRA (e.g.,

Blouin et al., 2009, Dai et al., 2008, and Lang and Shackelford, 2000) may suffer from

the same misidentification of dividend policy as a determinant of the impact of a change

in shareholder taxes. These studies find that, after the TRA cut in capital gains tax rates,

the equity markets responded more strongly for non-dividend-paying firms than for

dividend-paying firms. These findings are interpreted as evidence that the tax cut

mattered because all returns for non-dividend-paying firms were affected by the capital

gains tax rate reduction, while some returns of the dividend-paying firms remained

subject to the unchanged dividend tax rate. However, if the decision to issue dividends is

actually a proxy for financial constraint, then these studies may have misestimated the

impact of TRA, in particular, understating its effect of TRA for financially constrained,

dividend-paying firms and overstating its effect on less constrained, non-dividend-paying

firms.

15
  We include HYit as a control variable because both DKL and Auerbach and Hassett (2006) document that
the impact of JGTRRA on the cost of capital for dividend-paying firms is increasing in their dividend yield.
This is not surprising since the large dividend tax cut should expect benefit high-yield firms more than low-
yield firms. Including a categorical variable for yield enables us to compare those firms that issue dividends
with those that do not, conditional on the known variation among dividend-paying firms.


                                                         20
       Table 5 presents findings that are consistent with prior TRA and JGTRRA studies

misidentifying variation in financial constraint as differences in dividend policy. We find

that when the financial constraint variable is excluded, non-dividend paying firms

experience a larger reduction in the cost of capital than dividend-paying firms (as

indicated by the significant negative coefficient for Post×NDiv) for both TRA and

JGTRRA. However, after controlling for financial constraint, non-dividend paying firms

no longer experience a larger reduction in the cost of capital than dividend-paying firms

(as indicated by the insignificant coefficient for Post×NDiv). Meanwhile, the coefficient

on Post×FC is negative and significant at the 1% level, consistent with the cost of capital

moving inversely with financial constraint. These findings suggest that the prior studies,

which report that changes in shareholder taxes vary with whether a firm pays dividends,

suffer from an omitted, correlated variable, which is the extent to which a firm faces

financial constraint. In other words, financial constraint matters, not the decision to pay

dividends.

       As noted above, we control for dividend yield because both DKL and Auerbach

and Hassett (2006) report that firms with high dividend yield outperformed firms with

low dividend yield. Consistent with their findings, we find that the coefficient on

Post×HY is negative and significant at the 1% level in the JGTRRA test, both when we

include and exclude our measures of financial constraint. This implies that the added

benefits from the dividend tax cuts for high-yield issuers overwhelmed differences, if

any, in the inelasticity of demand for capital among dividend issuers.




                                            21
4.5. Tax status of shareholders

         Next, we look at differences in the taxable status of a firm’s shareholders. As

mentioned above, TRA and JGTRRA only apply to returns that are reported on personal

tax returns. While controversy remains about whether the marginal investor is a taxable

investor, numerous empirical studies document that investor tax characteristics affect

asset returns and trading volume.16 If the marginal investor is not an American individual

subject to capital gains taxation, then individual shareholder tax cuts should have no

direct effect on the cost of equity capital even for firms facing financial constraint.

Consistent with the marginal investor being an American individual, DKL show that

firms with higher tax sensitive investor ownership enjoyed a larger reduction in their cost

of capital during JGTRRA.

         We extend their analysis to see whether the impact of financial constraint varied

with the tax sensitivity of investor ownership for both TRA and JGTRRA, in particular,

whether the reduction in the cost of equity capital is larger for financially constrained

stocks with higher tax sensitivity. We use the following empirical specification to test the

effect of tax sensitivity on the changes in the cost of equity capital of firms facing

different probability of financial constraint:




16
   A host of empirical papers, besides DKL, finds that the extent of institutional ownership (measured in
various ways) is a useful proxy for the probability that the marginal investor is tax-advantaged. For
examples, see Sias and Starks (1997), Gompers and Metrick (2001), Ayers et al., (2002, 2003), Blouin et
al., (2003, 2011), Jin (2006), Dhaliwal and Li (2006), and Dai et al., (2008), among others. Nonetheless,
this measure is not without controversy. In an equilibrium model, Guenther and Sansing (2006) show that
the dividend tax premium should not vary with the mix of taxable and tax-exempt investors. Guenther and
Sansing (2010) report that the percentage of shares held by tax-exempt investors captures factors other than
differences in taxation, including differences in the relative risk tolerance of taxable investors, the riskiness
of each stock, and the stock’s dividend yield. We follow prior studies in using a stock’s institutional
ownership to measure its shareholders’ sensitivity to individual taxes. We trust that the deleterious effects
of any measurement error are mitigated since we only use institutional holdings to split the sample in half
and do not demand additional precision from the measure.


                                                      22
       rˆit    1 Postt   2 HINDit  LFCit   3 LINDit  HFCit   4 HINDit  HFCit
                 5 Postt  HINDit  LFCit   6 Postt  LINDit  HFCit                        (5)
                 7 Postt  HINDit  HFCit   X it   Z t   it ,

where HINDit (LINDit) is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if                     firm i’s

individual investor ownership at time period t is above (below) the median individual

investor ownership for all firms in period t. If the reduction in the cost of equity capital

for more financially constrained firms is larger for high tax sensitive investor ownership

than   for   low    tax   sensitive        investor    ownership,    then   the   coefficient   on

Post  HIND  HFC         should      be     more      negative     than    the   coefficient   on

Post  LIND  HFC .

       Table 6 presents the results of our panel regression analysis. Consistent with HFC

firms experiencing greater reductions in their cost of equity capital, the coefficients for

both Post  HIND  HFC and Post  LIND  HFC are negative and significant at 1%

level under both TRA and JGTRRA. We also find that the coefficients on

Post  HIND  HFC are more negative than the coefficients on Post  LIND  HFC and

significantly less at the 10% level for JGTRRA. These findings are consistent with the

tax-driven reductions in the cost of equity capital varying both with the level of financial

constraint and with the level of individual investor ownership. In other words, the firms

whose cost of equity market was reduced the most by the shareholder tax cuts were

financially constrained firms held disproportionately by individual U.S. investors.



4.6. Alternative measure of financial constraint

       Finally, we check whether the results in this study are robust to an alternative

estimate of the probability of financial constraint faced by firms. As discussed above,



                                                  23
several methods for measuring financial constraint exist. The tests detailed above use the

latest Hadlock and Pierce (2010) measure based on leverage, cash flow, size and age.

Hadlock and Pierce (2010) also suggest a measure based solely on firm size and age,

arguing that leverage and cash flow may be endogenous. Specifically, after extensive

empirical investigation, they arrive at the following ordered LOGIT specification which

allows us to compute the probability of financial constraint for firm i at period t:

                                                                           1
            SA Indexit  Pr ( Financially Constrained )  1                                and
                                                                  1  exp( ' X it  C4 )         (6)
             ' X it  0.737  Sizeit  0.043  Sizeit2  0.04  Firm Ageit ,

where SA Indexit refers to the probability of financial constraint that only uses firm size

and age, and C4 is the cumulative cut point for group four (likely financially constrained).

We estimated the average firms’ probability of financial constraint is 0.042 with a

standard deviation of 0.037 during TRA and is 0.032 with a standard deviation of 0.029

for the period surrounding JGTRRA. Both are comparable to the estimates obtained from

using four variables (cash flow, leverage, size, and age) on the specification of equation

(3).

           Using this alternative measure of financial constraint we repeat all of the tests

discussed above. Results are qualitatively the same with one exception detailed below. In

general, we continue to find strong evidence that a firm’s financial constraint is an

important determinant of the impact of shareholder tax changes on its cost of equity

capital.

           The first two columns in Table 7 present the results from estimating equation (1)

with the alternative measure of financial constraint (SA Index). The coefficients on

Post×SA Index are negative and highly significant, indicating that, after passage of the



                                                    24
tax cuts, the benefits of the shareholder tax rate reductions were increasing in the firm’s

inelasticity of demand, as measured with Hadlock and Pierce’s (2010) alternative

approach. The middle two columns present the results from estimating equation (4) with

the alternative measure. Here, the findings are mixed. As with the original financial

constraint measure, the JGTRRA results in column 4 show that it was the financially

constrained firms that enjoyed a drop in the cost of capital following enactment, not the

non-dividend-paying firms, as prior studies had suggested. Conversely, the TRA results

in column 3 differ from the original findings. The coefficient on Post×SA Index is

insignificant, while the coefficient on Post×NDiv is significant at 10%, raising doubts

about whether the inferences drawn above about financial constraint and dividend policy

apply to TRA. Finally, the last two columns present the findings from estimating

equation (5) with the alternative financial constraint measure. Once again, we find that

the coefficients on Post  HIND  HFC are more negative than the coefficients on

Post  LIND  HFC at 5% level for both TRA and JGTRRA, consistent with the

incidence of the tax reduction falling on financially constrained companies held

disproportionately by U.S. individuals. Together, these results show that the inferences

drawn earlier in the paper are largely robust to this alternative specification of the

financial constraint measure.



5.   Conclusions

       We provide the first empirical investigation of the effects of financial constraint

on the impact of shareholder taxes on a firm’s cost of equity capital. Theory suggests that

reductions in shareholder taxes should decrease the cost of equity capital. This reduction




                                            25
should be larger for firms with more inelastic demand for capital, i.e., firms facing more

severe financial constraint. Consistent with these predictions, we find that financially

constrained firms, and particularly those held disproportionately by U.S. individuals,

experienced a larger decrease in their cost of equity capital than did other companies

following enactment of the 1997 and 2003 shareholder tax rate reductions. Consequently,

to the extent that those tax cuts were designed to enable firms with the most pressing

needs for equity to better access the external capital markets, the findings in this paper

would suggest that the legislations succeeded.

       The findings in this paper also shed light on a puzzle that has eluded researchers

to date. During the JGTRRA legislative deliberations, the share prices of non-dividend-

paying firms outperformed those of dividend-paying firms even though the legislation

slashed dividend tax rates by 23.6 percentage points compared with a relatively modest 5

percentage point cut in capital gains tax rates. We find that the prior studies suffer from

the omission of a variable that is correlated with the decision to issue dividends, namely

the extent to which firms are financially constrained. When we include measures of both

dividend status and financial constraint in the regression model, we find that the prior

significance on the dividend variable goes away, while the financial constraint measure is

highly significant. Thus, the puzzle appears at least partially solved. Non-dividend-

paying firms did not benefit disproportionately from the 2003 tax rate reductions. Rather,

it was the financially constrained firms (many of which do not issue dividends) that

benefited the most.




                                            26
                                       References


Altman, E., 2000, Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate
bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 23, 589-609.

Ayers, B.C., Cloyd, C.B., Robinson, J.R., 2002, The effect of shareholder-level dividend
taxes on stock prices: Evidence from the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1993,
Accounting Review 77, 933-947.

Ayers, B.C., Lefanowicz, C.E., Robinson, J.R., 2003, Shareholder taxes in acquisition
premiums: The effect of capital gains taxation, Journal of Finance LVIII, 2783-2801.

Auerbach, A.J. and K.A. Hassett, 2006, The 2003 dividend tax cuts and the value of the
firm: an event study. In: Auerbach, A., Slemrod, J. (Eds.), Taxing Corporate Income in
the 21st Century. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Blouin, J., Hail, L., Yetman, M., 2009, Capital gains taxes, pricing spreads and arbitrage:
Evidence from U.S. cross-listed firms, The Accounting Review,1321-1361.

Blouin, J.L., Raedy, J.S., Shackelford, D.A., 2003, Capital gains taxes and equity trading:
Empirical evidence, Journal of Accounting Research 41, 611-651.

Blouin, J.L., Raedy, J.S., Shackelford, D.A., 2011, Dividends, share repurchases, and tax
clienteles: Evidence from the 2003 reductions in shareholder taxes, Accounting Review
86, forthcoming.

Brown, J., Liang, N., Weisbenner, S., 2007, Executive financial incentives and payout
policy: Firm responses to the 2003 dividend tax cut, Journal of Finance 62, 1035-1965.

Campbell, J. and R. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-227.

Chetty, R. and E. Saez, 2005, Dividend taxes and corporate behavior: evidence from the
2003 dividend tax cut, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 791-833.

Claus, J. and J. Thomas, 2001, Equity premia as low as three percent? Empirical evidence
from analysts’ earnings forecasts for domestic and international stock markets, Journal of
Finance 56, 1629-1666.

Dai, Z., E. Maydew, D. Shackelford, H. Zhang, 2008, Capital gains taxes and asset
prices: Capitalization or lock-in? Journal of Finance 63, 709-742.

Dhaliwal, D., S. Heitzman, and O. Li, 2006, Taxes, leverage, and the cost of equity
capital, Journal of Accounting Research 44, 2006, 691-723.




                                            27
Dhaliwal, D., L. Krull, and O. Li, 2007, Did the 2003 tax act reduce the cost of equity
capital? Journal of Accounting and Economics 43, 121-150.

Dhaliwal, D., L. Krull, O. Li, and W. Moser, 2005, Dividend taxes and implied cost of
equity capital, Journal of Accounting Research, 675-708.

Fama, E. and K. French, 1997, Industry cost of equity, Journal of Financial Economics
43, 153-193.

Fee, E., C. Hadlock, and J. Pierce, 2009, Investment, financing constraints, and internal
capital markets: Evidence from the advertising expenditures of multinational firms,
Review of Financial Studies 22, 2361-2392.

Feltham, G. and J. Ohlson, 1995, Valuation and clean surplus accounting for operating
and financial activities, Contemporary Accounting Research 11, 689-731.

Gebhardt, W., C. Lee, and B. Swaminathan, 2001,Toward an implied cost of equity,
Journal of Accounting Research 39, 135-176.

Gode, D. and P. Mohanram, 2003, Inferring the cost of equity using the Ohlson-Juettner
Model, Review of Accounting Studies 8, 399-431.

Gompers, P. and A. Metrick, 2001, Institutional investors and equity prices, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116, 229-259.

Graham, J., 1999, Do personal taxes affect corporate financing decisions? Journal of
Public Economics 73, 147-185.

Guenther, D., B. Jung, and M. Williams, 2005, The effect of the 2003 dividend tax rate
reduction on corporations’ cost of equity capital, working paper.

Guenther, D., and R. Sansing, 2006, Fundamentals of shareholder tax capitalization,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 42: 371-384.

Hail, L. and C. Leuz, 2006, International differences in cost of equity: Do legal
institutions and securities regulation matter? Journal of Accounting Research 44, 485-
531.

Hadlock, C. and J. Pierce, 2010, New evidence on measuring financial constraints:
Moving beyond the KZ index, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909-1940.

Jin, L., 2006, Capital gain tax overhang and price pressure." Journal of Finance 61,
1399-1430.

Kaplan, S. and L. Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities are not valid
measures of financial constraints, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 159-216.



                                           28
Lang, M., and D. Shackelford, 2000, Capitalization of capital gains taxes: evidence from
stock price reactions to the 1997 rate reduction, Journal of Public Economics 76, 69–85.

Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth and expected stock
returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815-849.

Litzenberger, R. and K. Ramaswamy, 1979, The effect of personal taxes and dividends
on capital asset prices: Theory and evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 163-196.

Naranjo, A., M. Nimalendran, and M. Ryngaert, 1998, Stock returns, dividend yields, and
taxes, Journal of Finance 53, 2029-2057.

Ohlson, J., 1995, Earnings, book value, and dividends in security valuation,
Contemporary Accounting Research 11, 661-687.

Rauh, J., 2006, Investment and financing constraints: Evidence from the funding of
corporate pension plans, Journal of Finance 61, 33-72.

Shackelford, D., 2009, Chapter 10: A response to Dhammika Dharmapala, Tax Policy
Lessons from the 2000’s, AEI Press, 232-245.

Sias, R. and L. Starks, 1997, Return autocorrelation and institutional investors, Journal of
Financial Economics 46, 103-131.

Whited, T. and G. Wu, 2006, Financial constraints risk, Review of Financial Studies 19,
531-559.




                                            29
                                                 Appendix

This appendix reviews the computations of the three estimates of a firm’s implied cost of

equity capital used in this study:

A. Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan Model (GLS)

        Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) use the following equation to estimate a

firm’s implied cost of equity:

                                FROE t 1  re      FROE t  2  re
                    Pt  Bt                   Bt                  Bt 1  TV ,                 (A1)
                                  (1  re )           (1  re ) 2

where Bt is the firm’s per share book value at the beginning of time t, FROE t i is

forecasted return on equity (ROE) for period t+i, i.e., FROEt i  FEPSt i / Bt i 1 , i  1, 2 ,

and FEPS t i is the I/B/E/S 1- and 2- year-ahead earnings per share forecast, TV is the

terminal value calculated according to

                                   T 1
                                          FROE t i  re            FROE t T  re
                           TV                          Bt i 1                  Bt T 1 ,   (A2)
                                   i 3     (1  re ) i
                                                                     (1  re ) T 1

where the forecasted ROE for period t+3 is calculated using the I/B/E/S analyst 2-year-

ahead earnings per share forecast multiplied by the I/B/E/S analysts’ consensus long-term

growth rate, the forecasted ROE for periods beyond t+3 is calculated using the linear

interpolation procedure to the industry median ROE proposed by GLS, Bt i is calculated

according to the clean surplus accounting as Bt i 1  FEPSt i  FDPSt i , where FDPS t i

is forecasted dividends per share, which is equal to forecasted earnings per share for

period t+i multiplied by the year t dividend payout ratio. Following GLS and Dhaliwal,

et al (2005, 2006, and 2007), we calculate the implied cost of equity capital for T=12.




                                                      30
B. Claus and Thomas Model (CT)

       Claus and Thomas (2001) use the following equation to estimate the implied cost

of equity capital:

               AE t 1    AE t  2       AE t 3       AE t  4       AE t 5       AE t 5 (1  g ae )
  Pt  Bt                                                                                           , (A3)
              (1  re ) (1  re )  2
                                       (1  re ) 3
                                                     (1  re )  4
                                                                    (1  re ) 5
                                                                                  (re  g ae )(1  re ) 5

where AEt i  FEPS t i  re Bt i 1 is the expected abnormal earnings for period t+i.

Following Dhaliwal, et al (2005, 2006, and 2007), when I/B/E/S earnings forecast is

unavailable, we use FEPS for the prior year multiplied by one plus the I/B/E/S consensus

long-term growth forecast, g ae is the growth rate of abnormal earnings beyond period

t+5 and is set to equal to the yield on 10-year U.S. treasury bonds minus three percentage

points as in DKL.



C. Gode and Mohanram Model (GM)

       Gode and Mohanram (2003) use the following formula to estimate the cost of

equity capital:

                                                FEPS t 1 
                               re  A  A 2             [ g 2  (r f  0.03)],                       (A4)
                                                  Pt       

where A  [(r f  0.03)  FDPS t 1 / Pt ] / 2 and g 2 is set equal to the I/B/E/S consensus

long-term growth forecast when available and equal to ( FEPS t  2 / FEPS t 1  1) when the

consensus growth forecast is unavailable, FDPS t 1 is the forecasted per share dividends

calculated as forecasted per share earnings at time t+1 multiplied by dividend payout

ratio at time t, r f is set to equal to the yield on 10-year U.S. treasury bonds.




                                                     31
                                               Figure 1
                           Cost of Equity Capital and Shareholder Taxes


This figure illustrates the effect of shareholder tax rate change on the firm’s cost of
capital. Without shareholder taxation, in equilibrium, the cost of capital and the required
return are identical, i.e. rcA  rrA (equilibrium point A). With shareholder taxation, rrB  rcB
(equilibrium point B) due to the tax wedge. As the shareholder taxation is reduced
(equilibrium point C), the cost of capital for firms is lower ( rcC  rcB ) and the required
expected return is higher ( rrC  rrB ).


       rc , rr                                                   S’
                         D                                                   S’’

                                                                                      S




            rcB                                    B
            rcC                                         C
       rcA = rrA                                             A
            rrC

            rrB


                   wedge



                                                                       Quantity of Capital




                                              32
                                              Figure 2
                  Cost of Equity Capital and Shareholder Taxes for Different Firms


This figure illustrates the effect of a shareholder tax rate change on the cost of capital for
firms with different demand elasticity. Suppose the second firm with less elastic demand
for capital (labeled as D’) also has equilibrium at point B before the tax cut. The new
equilibrium after the tax cut will be at point C’ for this second firm and C for the first
firm. The drop of cost of capital would be larger for the second firm (from rcB to rcC ' ) than
for the first firm (from rcB to rcC ).




        rc , rr                                                 S’
                           D                   D’                             S’’

                                                                                       S



        rcB                                        B


        rcC                                                 C
                                                                     A
        rcC’                                           C’




                                                                         Quantity of Capital




                                              33
Table 1 Summary statistics – firm level variables

This table reposts summary statistics for firm characteristics for the period surrounding TRA and
JGTRRA for the full sample (Panel A) and the pre- and post- subsamples (Panel B). rGLS, rCT, rGM
and rAVE are the cost of capital estimated using methods by Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan
(2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram (2003) and the average of the above
three respectively; FC is the predicted probability of a firm being financially constrained in
quarter t using Hadlock and Pierce (2010) method; INST is the percentage ownership by
institutional investors; Turnover is the moving average of the past 250 daily volume scaled by
the shares outstanding; LogBM is the logarithm of the book-to-market ratio; LogLTG is the
logarithm of the forecasted long-term earnings growth rate; LogDisp is the logarithm of the
dispersion of the forecasted long-term growth rate; ri is the industry average cost of capital for 48
industries classified according to Fama and French (1997); LogSize is the logarithm of a firm’s
market capitalization; βmkt, βsmb, and βhml are the beta coefficient relative to the market, the SMB,
and the HML factor, respectively. The sample spans 1995Q1 to 1998Q4 for TRA and 2001Q1 to
2004Q4 for JGTRRA.


Panel A: full sample
                                    TRA                                       JGTRRA
                       Mean        Median        Std Dev          Mean         Median       Std Dev

rAVE                 0.0966        0.0907         0.0402        0.0893          0.0837       0.0344
rGLS                 0.0843        0.0827         0.0343        0.0839          0.0811       0.0324
rCT                  0.1014        0.0904         0.0634        0.0895          0.0796       0.0555
rGM                  0.1047        0.0985         0.0430        0.0947          0.0901       0.0380
FC                   0.0444        0.0330         0.0412        0.0340          0.0251       0.0316
Yield                0.0199        0.0000         0.0341        0.0228          0.0037       0.0370
INST                 0.2866        0.2219         0.2466        0.3561          0.2988       0.2924
Turnover             0.0031        0.0022         0.0030        0.0041          0.0024       0.0052
LogBM               -0.6719       -0.6568         1.0248       -0.3687         -0.4934       1.2377
LogLTG               2.8625        2.8261         0.6514        2.7703          2.7081       0.6525
LogDisp             -3.0820       -3.2387         1.1467       -3.2613         -3.4340       1.2503
ri                   0.0964        0.0958         0.0110        0.0904          0.0892       0.0117
LogSize              4.7829        4.6593         1.8613        5.2070          5.1185       2.0293
βmkt                 0.9360        0.8615         1.1688        0.9902          0.8818       0.9157
βsmb                 0.8499        0.6468         1.5019        0.6052          0.4275       0.9202
βhml                 0.1473        0.2838         1.7991        0.1926          0.3857       1.1876




                                                 34
Panel B: pre- vs. post
                               TRA                              JGTRRA
                         Pre   Post      Pr(diff=0)      Pre       Post     Pr(diff=0)

rAVE               0.0974       0.0956      <.0001     0.0945      0.0827      <.0001
rGLS               0.0848       0.0837      <.0001     0.0882      0.0780      <.0001
rCT                0.1025       0.0999      <.0001     0.0963      0.0805      <.0001
rGM                0.1054       0.1038      <.0001     0.0995      0.0886      <.0001
FC                 0.0447       0.0440      0.0843     0.0361      0.0304      <.0001
Yield              0.0208       0.0187      <.0001     0.0234      0.0218      0.0015
INST               0.2800       0.2961      <.0001     0.3345      0.3919      <.0001
Turnover           0.0030       0.0032      <.0001     0.0038      0.0047      <.0001
LogBM             -0.6644      -0.6826      <.0001    -0.2198     -0.6167      <.0001
LogLTG             2.8364       2.8959      <.0001     2.8284      2.6837      <.0001
LogDisp           -3.0081      -3.1823      <.0001    -3.1738     -3.3755      <.0001
ri                 0.0971       0.0953      <.0001     0.0954      0.0824      <.0001
LogSize            4.6767       4.9345      <.0001     4.9970      5.5545      <.0001
βmkt               0.9444       0.9242      0.0080     0.9816      1.0046      <.0001
βsmb               0.8718       0.8189      0.1136     0.6260      0.5708      0.0544
βhml               0.2050       0.0655      0.0137     0.1572      0.2513      <.0001




                                            35
Table 2 Summary statistics – macro level variables

This table reports summary statistics for macroeconomic variables for the periods surrounding
TRA (JGTRRA) for the full sample (Panel A) and pre- and post- subsamples (Panel B). RREL is
the monthly stochastically detrended risk-free rate following Campbell and Shiller (1988), Xrm
is the monthly excess market return, Vm is the monthly volatility of the excess market return,
GIP is the monthly industrial production growth rate, and CAY is the consumption-wealth ratio.
For TRA, the pre-subsample spans 1/31/1995 to 3/31/1997 (firm quarters ended March 1995
through March 1997) and the post-subsample spans 7/1/1997 to 12/31/1998 (firm quarters ended
December 1996 through March 1997). For the JGTRRA in 2003, the pre-subsample spans
1/1/2001 to 3/31/2003 and the post-subsample spans 7/1/2003 to 12/31/2004.

Panel A: full sample
                                TRA                                     JGTRRA
                       Mean     Median       Std Dev         Mean        Median       Std Dev

RREL              -0.0128       -0.0259       0.0602       -0.0620       -0.0415       0.0725
Xrm                0.0480        0.1286       0.2838        0.0162        0.0477       0.2256
Vm                 3.5385        3.4695       1.9859        4.5356        4.2103       1.7549
GIP                0.0079        0.0070       0.0064        0.0010        0.0007       0.0053
CAY                0.0144        0.0216       0.0126       -0.0068       -0.0069       0.0116



Panel B: pre- vs. post
                               TRA                                   JGTRRA
                         Pre    Post       Pr(diff=0)         Pre      Post         Pr(diff=0)

RREL              0.0050       -0.0393        0.1707      -0.1015      -0.0029         0.0044
Xrm               0.1207       -0.0610        0.2377      -0.0375       0.0966         0.2748
Vm                2.7692        4.6926        0.0867       5.2779       3.4223         0.0394
GIP               0.0077        0.0083        0.8820      -0.0019       0.0053         0.0043
CAY               0.0235        0.0008        <.0001       0.0012      -0.0189         <.0001




                                              36
Table 3 Cost of capital — pre vs. post and interaction with financial constraint

Panel A in this table presents the average cost of capital in the quarter immediately before and after the
tax cut for TRA (JGTRRA) for high financial constrained (HFC) and low financial constrained (LFC)
firms. It contrasts the changes in average cost of capital between high financially constrained and low
financially constrained groups. The cost of equity capital estimates are based on Gebhardt, Lee, and
Swaminathan (2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram (2003) for firm i at time t.
Panel B shows the average cost of capital and the differences in the change of cost of capital for dividend-
and non-dividend-paying subsamples. HFC (LFC) represents firm-quarters when the predicted financial
constraint is above (below) the median financial constraint for the quarter immediately before the tax cut.
For TRA, the pre-subsample consists of firm quarter ended in 1997Q1 and the post-subsample consists of
firm quarter ended 1997Q3. For the JGTRRA, the pre-subsample consists of firm quarter ended in
2003Q1 and the post-subsample consists of firm quarter ended in 2003Q3. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5% and *** significant at 1% level.

Panel A: Whole sample
                             TRA                                            JGTRRA
                  Pre        Post      Diff (Pre-Post)         Pre          Post  Diff (Pre-Post)

                                                   Average (rAVE)

   HFC          0.1099     0.0939        0.0160***           0.0988       0.0829        0.0159***
   LFC          0.0870     0.0781        0.0089***           0.0938       0.0822        0.0116***
Diff-in-Diff                             0.0072***                                      0.0043***

                                        Gebhardt-Lee-Swaminathan (rGLS)

   HFC          0.0914     0.0792        0.0121***           0.0955       0.0780        0.0175***
   LFC          0.0797     0.0709        0.0089***           0.0933       0.0821        0.0113***
Diff-in-Diff                             0.0033***                                      0.0063***

                                                Claus-Thomas (rCT)

   HFC          0.1212     0.0997        0.0216***           0.1011       0.0791        0.0221***
   LFC          0.0879     0.0776        0.0102***           0.0920       0.0777        0.0142***
Diff-in-Diff                             0.0113***                                      0.0078***

                                               Gode-Mohanram (rGM)

   HFC          0.1204     0.1030        0.0173***           0.1013       0.0875        0.0138***
   LFC          0.0961     0.0870        0.0091***           0.0988       0.0872        0.0116***
Diff-in-Diff                             0.0082***                                      0.0022*




                                                    37
Panel B: Dividend-paying versus non-dividend-paying subsamples

                        TRA                                         JGTRRA
                Pre     Post     Diff (Pre-Post)      Pre           Post  Diff (Pre-Post)

                                     Dividend-paying firms (rAVE)

   HFC         0.1062   0.0934     0.0128***        0.0952       0.0830      0.0122***
   LFC         0.0855   0.0772     0.0083***        0.0933       0.0821      0.0112***
Diff-in-Diff                       0.0045***                                 0.0010

                                  Non-dividend paying firms (rAVE)

   HFC         0.1115   0.0941     0.0174***        0.1006       0.0828      0.0178***
   LFC         0.0931   0.0819     0.0112***        0.0953       0.0823      0.0130***
Diff-in-Diff                       0.0062***                                 0.0048***




                                             38
Table 4 Regression Analysis of the change of cost of equity capital and financial constraint
during TRA and JGTRRA
This table reports the panel regression results of the change of cost of equity capital on the probability of financial
constraint during TRA and JGTRRA using the following specification:
                             rˆit    1Post t   2 FCit 1   3 Postt  FCit 1   4 INSTit 1
                                       5 Post t  INSTit 1   X it   Z t   it ,

where r̂it is the average of three measures of the cost of equity capital based on Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan
(2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram (2003) for firm i at time t, Post is a dummy variable
which takes a value of 1 post-tax cut and 0 otherwise, FCit-1 represents the probability of financial constraint faced
by firm i at time t-1, INSTit-1 is firm i’s percentage institutional ownership at time t-1, Xit represents firm level
control variables, and Z t represents aggregate variables to control for the overall economic activities. The sample
spans 1995Q1 to 1998Q4 for TRA and 2001Q1 to 2004Q4 for JGTRRA. We exclude 1997Q2 and 2003Q2 to
remove possible transient effect. P-values are for two-sided test unless there is predicted sign.

                                                                       TRA                                 JGTRRA
                       Predicted sign                   Estimate              P-value             Estimate      P-value
Intercept                                                -0.0404              <.0001               -0.0402       <.0001
Post                           -                         -0.0066              <.0001               -0.0008       0.3419
FC                             +                          0.2059              <.0001                0.2595       0.0004
Post*FC                        -                         -0.0878              <.0001               -0.1192       0.0017
INST                                                     -0.0022               0.1357              -0.0089       <.0001
Post*INST                                                 0.0034               0.0104               0.0050       0.0003
Turnover                                                  0.4328               0.0006               0.5649       <.0001
LogBM                                                     0.0257              <.0001                0.0220       <.0001
LogLTG                                                    0.0386              <.0001                0.0296       <.0001
LogDisp                                                  -0.0009              <.0001               -0.0012       <.0001
ri                                                        0.2890              <.0001                0.3801       <.0001
LogSize                                                   0.0030              <.0001                0.0040       <.0001
βmkt                                                     -0.0003               0.2461              -0.0028       <.0001
βsmb                                                      0.0005               0.0304              -0.0006       0.4183
βhml                                                      0.0004               0.0349               0.0013       0.0004
RREL1                                                     0.0030               0.5802              -0.0088       0.3049
RREL2                                                     0.0581               0.0063               0.0164       0.0727
Xrm1                                                      0.0052               0.0613              -0.0052       <.0001
Xrm2                                                      0.0036               0.0036               0.0027       0.0001
Dvm1                                                      0.0011               0.0002              -0.0002       0.3762
Dvm2                                                      0.0000               0.8829               0.0002       0.0811
GIP1                                                      0.1679               0.0025               0.1146       0.0381
GIP2                                                      0.0380               0.4900               0.4206       <.0001
CAY1                                                     -0.3005               0.0002               0.1614       0.0018
N                                                            31,320                                      26,981
-2 Res
                                                              -172,341                                 -151,482
loglikelihood



                                                              39
Table 5 Regression Analysis of the Change of Cost of Equity Capital and Financial Constraint
for Firms with Different Dividend Policy


This table reports the panel regression results of the change of cost of equity capital and financial
constraint for firms with different dividend policy during TRA97 and JGTRRA using the
following specification:

         rˆit    1Postt   2 NDivit   3 Postt  NDivit   4 FCit 1   5 Post  FCit 1   6 HYit
                                                                                      t
               7 Postt  HYit   8 INSTit 1   9 Postt  INSTit 1   X it   Z t   it


where r̂it is the average of three measures of the cost of equity capital based on Gebhardt, Lee,
and Swaminathan (2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram (2003) for firm i
at time t, Post is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 post-tax cut and 0 otherwise, NDivit
is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i is non-dividend paying at time t and 0
otherwise, HYit is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i’s dividend yield is above
the median dividend yield for quarter t and takes a value of 0 otherwise (we calculate dividend
yield as four time the dividends declared in the most recent past quarter divided by the end of
quarter price as in Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert, 1998), FCit-1 represents the probability
of financial constraint faced by firm i at time t-1, INSTit-1 is firm i’s percentage institutional
ownership at time t-1, Xit represents firm level control variables, and Z t represents aggregate
variables to control for the overall economic activities. The sample spans 1995Q1 to 1998Q4 for
TRA and 2001Q1 to 2004Q4 for JGTRRA. We exclude 1997Q2 and 2003Q2 to remove possible
transient effect. P-values are for two-sided test unless there is predicted sign.




                                                           40
             Predicted                    TRA                                  JGTRRA
               Sign      Estimate   P-value Estimate   P-value   Estimate   P-value Estimate P-value
Intercept                -0.0314    <.0001   -0.0408 <.0001      -0.0331    <.0001   -0.0419 <.0001
Post              -      -0.0086    <.0001   -0.0069 <.0001      -0.0018    0.1665    0.0013    0.2571
NDiv              ?      -0.0004    0.5798   -0.0016 0.0357      -0.0004    0.6916   -0.0015    0.1090
Post*NDiv         ?      -0.0019    0.0009   -0.0005 0.4257      -0.0015    0.0355    0.0001    0.9146
FC                +                           0.2120 <.0001                           0.2855    0.0003
Post*FC           -                          -0.0751 0.0020                          -0.1572    0.0004
HY                ?       0.0036 <.0001       0.0039 <.0001       0.0056 <.0001       0.0058 <.0001
Post*HY           -       0.0012 0.0372       0.0008 0.1783      -0.0036 <.0001      -0.0041 <.0001
INST                     -0.0032 0.0290      -0.0021 0.1537      -0.0091 <.0001      -0.0079 <.0001
Post*INST                 0.0054 <.0001       0.0036 0.0083       0.0056 0.0002       0.0037    0.0122
Turnover                  0.4664 0.0002       0.4628 0.0002       0.5698 <.0001       0.5731 <.0001
LogBM                     0.0251 <.0001       0.0253 <.0001       0.0215 <.0001       0.0215 <.0001
LogLTG                    0.0391 <.0001       0.0388 <.0001       0.0299 <.0001       0.0297 <.0001
LogDisp                  -0.0009 <.0001      -0.0009 <.0001      -0.0011 <.0001      -0.0012 <.0001
ri                        0.2930 <.0001       0.2913 <.0001       0.3843 <.0001       0.3821 <.0001
LogSize                   0.0020 <.0001       0.0028 <.0001       0.0033 <.0001       0.0039 <.0001
βmkt                     -0.0002 0.3504      -0.0002 0.3007      -0.0025 <.0001      -0.0026 <.0001
βsmb                      0.0005 0.0096       0.0005 0.0196      -0.0003 0.7213      -0.0005    0.5045
βhml                      0.0003 0.0976       0.0004 0.0627       0.0010 0.0052       0.0012    0.0010
RREL1                     0.0043 0.4372       0.0039 0.4753      -0.0084 0.3285      -0.0090    0.2982
RREL2                     0.0511 0.0158       0.0552 0.0095       0.0150 0.0986       0.0166    0.0699
Xrm1                      0.0038 0.1682       0.0048 0.0880      -0.0051 <.0001      -0.0051 <.0001
Xrm2                      0.0029 0.0170       0.0034 0.0053       0.0025 0.0006       0.0026    0.0003
Dvm1                      0.0010 0.0010       0.0011 0.0003      -0.0002 0.3397      -0.0002    0.3362
Dvm2                      0.0001 0.5236       0.0000 0.7613       0.0002 0.0690       0.0002    0.0683
GIP1                      0.1578 0.0042       0.1644 0.0030       0.0989 0.0723       0.1126    0.0418
GIP2                      0.0545 0.3208       0.0468 0.3957       0.3708 <.0001       0.4103 <.0001
CAY1                     -0.2768 0.0006      -0.2970 0.0002       0.1389 0.0069       0.1520    0.0031
N                             31,495              31,320              27,066              26,981
-2 Res loglikelihood         -173,200            -172,417            -151,898            -151,571




                                               41
Table 6 Regression Analysis of the Change of Cost of Equity Capital for Financially Constrained
Stocks with Different Taxable Individual Investor Ownership


This table reports the panel regression results of the change of cost of equity capital on
financially constrained firms with different taxable individual investor ownership during TRA
and JGTRRA using the following specification:

             rˆit    1Postt   2 HINDit  LFCit   3 LINDit  HFCit   4 HINDit  HFCit
                       5 Postt  HINDit  LFCit   6 Postt  LINDit  HFCit
                    7 Postt  HINDit  HFCit   X it   Z t   it ,


where r̂it is the average of three measures of the cost of equity capital based on Gebhardt, Lee,
and Swaminathan (2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram (2003) for firm i
at time t, Post is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 post-tax cut and 0 otherwise, HINDit
(LINDit) is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i’s individual investor ownership
at time period t is above (below) the median individual investor ownership for all firms at period
t, HFCit (LFCit) is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the probability of financial
constraint is above (below) the firms’ median probability of financial constraint at quarter t and
takes a value of 0 otherwise, Xit represents firm level control variables, and Z t represents
aggregate variables to control for the overall economic activities. The sample spans 1995Q1 to
1998Q4 for TRA and 2001Q1 to 2004Q4 for JGTRRA. We exclude 1997Q2 and 2003Q2 to
remove possible transient effect. P-values are for two-sided test unless there is predicted sign.




                                                      42
                       Predicted               TRA                  JGTRRA
                         Sign      Estimate       P-value   Estimate       P-value
Intercept                           -0.0365        <.0001    -0.0387       <.0001
Post                      -         -0.0066        <.0001     0.0010        0.2787
HIND*LFC                  ?          0.0016        0.0170     0.0015        0.0893
LIND*HFC                  ?          0.0034        <.0001     0.0027        0.0071
HIND*HFC                  ?          0.0053        <.0001     0.0062        0.0004
Post*HIND*LFC             -         -0.0009        0.1461     0.0001        0.4361
Post*LIND*HFC             -         -0.0028        0.0002    -0.0031        0.0016
Post*HIND*HFC             -         -0.0039        0.0006    -0.0057        0.0015
Turnover                             0.4694        0.0001     0.4771       <.0001
LogBM                                0.0253        <.0001     0.0217       <.0001
LogLTG                               0.0389        <.0001     0.0296       <.0001
LogDisp                             -0.0009        <.0001    -0.0010       <.0001
ri                                   0.2931        <.0001     0.3864       <.0001
LogSize                              0.0026        <.0001     0.0036       <.0001
βmkt                                -0.0002        0.2856    -0.0027       <.0001
βsmb                                 0.0005        0.0213    -0.0003        0.6833
βhml                                 0.0004        0.0460     0.0010        0.0046
RREL1                                0.0034        0.5288    -0.0071        0.3923
RREL2                                0.0625        0.0029     0.0122        0.1730
Xrm1                                 0.0056        0.0449    -0.0051       <.0001
Xrm2                                 0.0037        0.0021     0.0028       <.0001
Dvm1                                 0.0012        <.0001    -0.0002        0.4001
Dvm2                                 0.0000        0.9120     0.0002        0.0753
GIP1                                 0.1852        0.0007     0.1101        0.0432
GIP2                                 0.0352        0.5194     0.3585       <.0001
CAY1                                -0.3265        <.0001     0.1547        0.0021
N                                         31,734                   27,958
-2 Res loglikelihood                     -174,166                 -156,681




                                       43
Table 7 Robustness Analysis on the Changes of Cost of Equity of Financially Constrained Firms
during TRA and JGTRRA


This table reports the robustness analysis of the panel regression estimation using an alternative
measure of the probability of financial constraint for firms based only on firm size and age (SA
Index) as in Hadlock and Pierce (2010). Specifically, columns (1) and (2) show the base case
results of the change of cost of equity capital on the probability of financial constraint for both
TRA and JGTRRA; columns (3) reports the results of the change of cost of equity capital for
firms with different dividend policy with and without financial constraint measure for JGTRRA;
columns (4) and (5) provide the results of the change of cost of equity capital on financially
constrained firms with different taxable individual investor ownership during TRA and
JGTRRA.

The dependent variable r̂it is the average of three measures of the cost of equity capital based on
Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001), Claus and Thomas (2001), and Gode and Mohanram
(2003) for firm i at time t, Post is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 post-tax cut and 0
otherwise, FCit represents the probability of financial constraint faced by firm i at time t, INSTit-1
is firm i’s percentage institutional ownership at time t-1, NDivit is dummy variable which takes a
value of 1 if firm i is non-dividend paying at time t and 0 otherwise, HFCit (LFCit) is a dummy
variable which takes a value of 1 if the probability of financial constraint faced by firm i at time t
is above (below) the median probability of financial constraint for all stocks at time t and takes a
value 0 otherwise, HYit is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i’s dividend yield is
above (below) the median dividend yield for quarter t and takes a value of 0 otherwise, HINDit
(LINDit) is a dummy variable which takes a value of 1 if firm i’s individual investor ownership
at time period t is above (below) the median individual investor ownership for all firms at period
t, Xit represents firm level control variables, and Z t represents aggregate variables to control for
the overall economic activities. The sample spans 1995Q1 to 1998Q4 for TRA and 2001Q1 to
2004Q4 for JGTRRA. We exclude 1997Q2 and 2003Q2 to remove possible transient effect.




                                                 44
                Predicted    TRA    JGTRRA       TRA    JGTRRA      TRA    JGTRRA
                  sign        (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)
Post                -       -0.0071  -0.0005    -0.0077   0.0023   -0.0064   0.0009
                             <.0001   0.8010     <.0001   0.2627    <.0001   0.5777
NDiv               ?                            -0.0013  -0.0021
                                                 0.1003   0.0242
Post*NDiv          ?                            -0.0011   0.0004
                                                 0.0918   0.6541
SAIndex            +         0.2184    0.4468    0.2288   0.5124
                             <.0001    <.0001    <.0001   <.0001
Post*SAIndex        -       -0.0574   -0.1134   -0.0286  -0.1763
                             0.0071    0.0034    0.2613   <.0001
HY                 ?                             0.0038   0.0061
                                                 <.0001   <.0001
Post*HY             -                            0.0007  -0.0042
                                                 0.2140   <.0001
INST                        -0.0021   -0.0081   -0.0021  -0.0068
                             0.1598    <.0001    0.1637   <.0001
Post*INST                    0.0039    0.0050    0.0044   0.0033
                             0.0021    0.0003    0.0010   0.0265
HIND*LFC                                                            0.0028    0.0013
                                                                    0.0007    0.1870
LIND*HFC                                                            0.0031    0.0040
                                                                    <.0001    <.0001
HIND*HFC                                                            0.0041    0.0072
                                                                    <.0001    <.0001
Post*HIND*LFC       -                                              -0.0011    0.0002
                                                                    0.2724    0.8216
Post*LIND*HFC       -                                              -0.0025   -0.0019
                                                                    0.0003    0.0236
Post*HIND*HFC       -                                              -0.0035   -0.0040
                                                                    0.0020    0.0062




                                        45
