                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SHORT-TERM AND LONG-TERM INTEREST
                  RATES IN A MONETARY MODEL OF
                      A SMALL OPEN ECONOMY


                      Stephen J. Turnovsky



                     Working Paper No. 1716




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 1716
                                                   October 1985




                   Short-Term and Long-Term Interest
                     Pates in a Monetary Model of
                         a Srrll Open Economy



                               ABSTRACT




     This   paper analyzes the effects of both anticipated and unanticipated

monetary and fiscal disturbances, on the dynamic behavior of a monetary

model of a small open economy. It focuses on the adjustment of the short—

term and long—term interest rates and   the   divergence of their transitional

paths, particularly in anticipation of these disturbances. The analysis

demonstrates how anticipation of a future policy change can generate

perverse short—run behavior. The essential reason for the divergence

between the short and long rates is that the latter is dominated by long—

term expectations, while the former is primarily determined by current

influences.




                                    Stephen J. Turnovsky
                                    Department of Economics
                                    University of Illinois
                                    330 Commerce West
                                    1206 South Sixth Street
                                    Champaign, Illinois 61820

                                    217—333—2354
 1. INTRODUCTION

          Most economists would subscribe to the view that portfolio

 decisions are generally more flexible than real expenditure decisions.

 Consequently, it seems reasonable to assume that the former are based

on short—term rates of interest, while the latter are more likely to

depend upon long—term rates. Nevertheless, most existing macroeconomic

models treat assets as being of common maturity in these two sets of

decisions. Typically, this is assumed to be either extremely short (a

short—term bill) or infinitely long (a perpetuity). Recently, several

authors have recognized the fact that different agents in the economy

are concerned with rates of return over different time horizons. Using

standard domestic macro models they have shown how arbitrage between

the long—term and short—term rates in efficient financial markets

provides important linkages between the present and the future. The

forward—looking information contained in the long rates turns out to

have important implications for the effects of monetary and fiscal

policy; see Blanchard (1981, 1983), Turnovsky and Miller (1984).

          In this paper, we introduce the distinction between short—term

and long—term interest rates in a standard monetary model of an open

economy. Much of the current literature in this area ehasizes the

informational content of the exchange rate.   It is clear that a similar

informational role is played by the long—term interest rate. The paper

analyzes the effects of a variety of disturbances, both unanticipated

and anticipated, and discusses the time paths followed by the short—

term and long—term interest rates in response to these disturbances.
                                               —2—


 In particular, the divergence in the adjustment between the short—term

 and long—term rates in anticipation of such disturbances, is highlighted.

             The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the model,

 (which for the most part is familiar), together with its solution, is

outlined. Sections 3, 4 analyze two alternative disturbances, namely:

(i) domestic monetary expansion; (ii) domestic fiscal expansion. The

conclusions are summarized in Section 5, while an Appendix contains

some of the technical details of the analysis.




2. THE MODEL

            The model we employ is a variant of the standard Dornbusch

(1976) model, embodying perfect foresight, see Gray and Turnovsky (1979).

It consists of the following equations


        Z                   +
                                133(E-P)
                                           +   G


                                                          133
                                                                <


                                                                    >
                                                                        l
                                                                        0
                                                                            <   '
                                                                                     2   >


                                                                                             Cia)
                    M — P           —                      >        0
                                                     a1                     a2 > 0           (lb)


                                        i i*+E                                               (lc)


                                        r=i—P                                                (id)



                                        r=R—                                                 (le)


                                P    y(Z-Y)           y > 0                                  (if)

where


            Z     real aggregate demand for domestic output,

            Y =   supply of domestic output, assumed to be fixed
                  at full employment,
                                       —3—


           G =   real   domestic government expenditure,

           R =   domestic long—term real rate of interest,
           r =   domestic short—term real rate of interest,
           i =   domestic short—term nominal interest rate,
            =    foreign nominal (and real) interest rate,
                 taken to be fixed,

           E = exchange rate (expressed in terms of units of
               foreign currency per unit of domestic currency),
               expressed in logarithms,

          P =    domestic price level, expressed in logarithms,
          M = domestic nominal money supply, expressed in
                 logarithms.


          Equation (la) specifies the aggregate demand for domestic

output to be a negative function of the domestic long—term real interest

rate and a positive function of the relative price (E—P) where we

assume that the foreign price level remains fixed at unity. It also

depends positively upon the fixed level of output and upon real govern--

ment expenditure.

          The introduction of the long—term real interest rate R into

the real expenditure function Z is a key part of the model. While this

specification has by now been adopted by several authors, it nevertheless

merits further comment; see also Blanchard (1981, 1984), Miller and

Turnovsky (1984), Sachs and Wyplosz (1984). Several justifications

for this can be given. First, to the extent that Z includes expenditures

on investment goods, it depends upon "Tobin's q,' which in turn is

inversely related to the long—term real interest rate. Secondly, it

reflects asset values, and their impact through the wealth effect on
                                   —4—


current consumption; see Blanchard (1981). Finally, Buiter and Miller

(1983) suggest that for Britain, most government debt is held by

institutional investors, such as pension funds, having long term

horizon so that some notion of permanent real interest income, based

on a long—term rate, provides a better approximation of the actual flow

of disposable interest income to the ultimate wealth owning and spend-

ing units. This leads them to argue for the plausibility of the long—

term rate as a determinant of private expenditure. It is also possible

for consumption to depend upon the short—term real rate of interest r,

as well. The inclusion of this variable, in addition to R, does not

alter the substance of our analysis in any essential way.

          Domestic money market equilibrium is specified by (ib), with

the demand for money depending upon the short—term nominal interest rate.

Note that we follow Dornbusch and do not introduce the distinction between

the price of domestic output and overall domestic cost of living. To

introduce this distinction adds little insight and merely complicates

the analysis.-' Domestic and foreign bonds are assumed to be perfect

substitutes on an uncovered basis, so that the uncovered interest parity

condition (ic) applies, while the short-term real rate of interest is

defined in (id).

          The long—term real rate of interest is defined to be the yield

on a consol paying a constant (real) coupon flow of unity. If we denote

such a yield by R, the price of the consol is hR. The instantaneous

rate of return on consols is therefore


                       R +   d(l/R)/dt   = R - R/R
                                           —5—


We assume that the long—term bonds and the short—terra bonds are per-

fect substitutes, so that their instantaneous real rates of return

are equal, as in (le).-' Integrating this equation, we obtain

                                                    1        —
                        R(t) =                                        (le')
                                       et r(t')dt'
                                   t


This relationship shows explicitly how the current long—terra rate

embodies information about the future (expected) short rates.-1

Finally, equation (if) describes the rate of price adjustment in

terms of a simple Phillips curve relationship.

          The steady state of the economy is attained when R =    P   = E = 0

and is described by


                      (i-1)Y =              + 3(E-P) + G              (2a)



                                                                      (2b)
                                M—Pct1Y-ct2R

                                 R=r= i                 i*            (2c)


where tildes denote steady—state values. In equilibrium, the product

market clears and the short—term and long—term real and nominal rates

are all equal to the exogenously given world interest rate i*. The

following long—run equilibrium effects are immediately deduced

                           dE
                           dM dM
                                  dP
                                                '   dR0
                                                    dM
                                                                       a
                                                                      (3)


                                       '
                                           dG                         (3b)
                      dG    dG
                                         —6—

An expansion in the domestic nominal money supply leads to           long-run
proportional changes in the exchange rate and domestic        price level,

leaving the long—run interest rates unchanged. An expansion in domestic

government expenditure leaves the domestic price level and interest rate(s)

unchanged. The exchange rate must appreciate, thereby lowering private

demand, and accommodating the increased government expenditure, given

the fixed output.

             Linearizing the system about the stationary equilibrium and

substituting, the dynamics can be reduced to the following matrix equa-

tion in R, E, and P



              r                      Ri3        -R[l/a2 +
                    =     0                                    E-E
                                                   l/c2                   (4)
              LPJ                                           _ L—
It   can be shown that the three eigenvalues A, A2, A3, of this system
have the following properties

                              A1A2A3 =   —y83
                                           —R    < 0



                    +         + A3A1 = —y[R63   + 63— + R 63
                                                          —] < 0

It   then follows from these two relationships that there must be one

negative    and two positive roots, say A1 <     0, A2 > 0, A3 > 0.    The system
therefore   possesses saddlepoint behavior. We assume that while the price
                                    —7—




level   P always evolves continuously, in accordance with the Phillips

curve, both the exchange rate and the long—term real rate can jump

discontinuously in response to unanticipated disturbances. They are

therefore "news" variables.

           In Sections 3,4 below, we consider once—and—for—all unit

increases in the following quantities

            (i) domestic nominal money supply,

           (ii) domestic government expenditure.



These changes are assumed to be announced at time 0 for time T > 0,

with the limiting case T = 0 describing an unanticipated shock.

           In the Appendix, we derive the general solution to (4) on the

assumption that the economy begins in an initial steady state. Given

the assumptions we have made about the nature of the dynamic variables,

these solutions are unique. They form the basis for our subsequent

descriptions of the response of the economy to the various disturbances.

Because the dynamics is third order, we are unable to give a simple

two—dimensional illustration of the phase diagram in the three state

variables R, P, and E. However, we do see from the solutions (A.3a')—

(A.3c') that when t > T, that is after the announced disturbance has

occurred, that R, E, and P follow the pairs of linear relationships,

which ensure stable adjustment of the economy:


                            E — E   =—-   (P—P)                   (5a)
                                     A1

                                     + h12h73]
                                           - (P—P)
                     R — R = -[A1h13                              (b)
                                (h11-X1)A1
                                   —8—


where X < 0 and h. are the elements of the matrix of coefficients
      1           ij
appearing in (4). It is seen that h13 <    0, h2 > 0, h23 > 0, while
adding the restriction 1 >
                             y32, ensures h11 > 0.   Equation (5a) is

indeed the locus of the stable arm of the saddlepoint in terms of the

exchange rate and the domestic price level, familiar from the Dornbusch

model, and is negatively sloped. Equation (5b) is an analogous rela-

tionship between the long—term real rate and the domestic price level.

Under the conditions stated above, it is positively sloped.


3. DOMESTIC MONETARY EXPANSION

          Insofar as possible, our treatment shall be graphical. Formal

solutions for the time paths for this (and other) disturbances can be

obtained from the general solution given in the Appendix. Following the

monetary expansion, the economy follows a stable first order locus (the

stable arm of the saddlepoint) and is easily illustrated. In the case

of an announced increase, however, during the period after the announce-

ment, but prior to the change, the economy follows an unstable third

order locus. In this case it is difficult to illustrate the time paths

precisely and the paths we have illustrated in a few instances are based

on a consideration of plausible limiting cases.-'

          Figure 1 describes the adjustment of the exchange rate, the

long—term real rate, and the price level, in phase space. Figure 2

illustrates the paths for the short—term real and nominal, and long—

term real, interest rates over time. For ease of comparison, the short—

term real rate r appears in both graphs in Figures 2A, 2B. Unanticipated and

anticipated monetary expansions are considered in turn, and illustrated

separately in Figure 2.
                                  —9—


          As shown in Section 2, a permanent unit increase in M increases

the exchange rate and the price level proportionately, while leaving the

long—term rate R unchanged. Accordingly, if 0 depicts the original

steady state in both Figures 1A, 1B, the new equilibria are at N and W,

respectively. Thus the monetary expansion causes the stable locuses,

corresponding to (5a) and (5b), and illustrated by XX', YY', to move to

X1Xj, Y1Y, respectively.


A. Unanticipated Domestic Monetary Expansici

          An unanticipated increase in th domestic money supply causes

the exchange rate to jump instantaneously from 0 to L on X1X. There-

after, the exchange rate begins to appreciate gradually, while the price

level begins to increase, taking the system towards N. This figure

illustrates the well known 'overshooting' of the exchange rate in the

Dornbusch model.-' At the same time, the monetary expansion causes the

long—term real rate to fall instantaneously from 0 to U. It then begins

to climb gradually back towards its original level, as the price level

begins to increase.

          The time paths for the interest rates i, r, and R are illustrated

in Figure 2A. The fact that following the initial depreciation, the

exchange rate begins to immediately appreciate at A (E <   0),   means that


                               i(0) K


so that the domestic short—term nominal interest rate is immediately

driven below the world rate. With the price level rising and the nominal

money stock now fixed at its new (higher) level, the real money stock

begins to fall and the domestic short—term nominal rate rises back up
                                      —10--



 begins to fall and the domestic short—term nominal rate rises back up

 towards the equilibrium world rate.

              A further consequence of the steadily rising price subsequent

 to the monetary expansion (P > 0) is that


                                       r<i

 so that the short—term real rate lies below the short—term nominal rate.

 At the same    time, since   the short—term rate is rising over time, and

 since the long—terni real rate R is discounting the expected future time

path of r, it follows that the current long—term real rate must always

exceed the current short—term real rate. Another way of seeing this

is from the arbitrage relationship (le), which we may write as


                                                                      (le')


Since the long—term real rate rises continuously, following the initial

drop, for the short—term and long—term rates of return to be equal,

R >   r,   as illustrated.


B. Anticipated Monetary Expansion

             Suppose that at time 0 the domestic monetary authorities

announce an expansion in the money supply to take effect at time T say.

The announcement of this event causes the exchange rate to depreciate

to L', while the long—term real rate of interest falls to U'. The

combination of the fall in the long—term real rate coupled with the

devaluation of the exchange rate, leads to an increase in real demand

Z, causing the domestic price level to begin rising.
                                            —11—


            Given that the money supply remains fixed prior to time T

and that the price level is constrained to move continuously, the real

money stock remains fixed at the time of announcement, t =            0.   Hence,

the short—term nominal interest rate i also remains fixed at time 0.

The interest rate parity condition (lc) therefore implies that follow—

ing the initial jump in the exchange rate, the rate of exchange deprecia-

tion is immediately zero          =   0).     As the price level begins to rise,

however, in anticipation of the monetary expansion, the domestic real

money stock begins to fall and the exchange rate starts to increase

again to equilibrate the money market; in E—P space, the economy moves

along the locus L'M' in Figure 1A. At time T, when the anticipated

monetary expansion takes place, E and P begin to move along the stable

locus XXj.
            The behavior of the long—term real rate is given in Figure lB

and is more difficult to establish. The arbitrage condition indicates

that the behavior of R depends upon the difference between the

short—term and long—term real rates of interest. On the one hand, the

announcement of the monetary expansion causes the long—term real rate

to fall. At the same time, the short—term real rate also falls, by

virtue   of the short—run rise in the rate of inflation and the fact that

the nominal interest rate remains fixed. A linear approximation to the

difference R —   r,   and therefore to the initial rate of change R, expressed

in terms of the initial discrete change in R and E is given by


                      dR(O) =   R(l   -             +                        (6)
                                                        Ry3dE(O)
                                 —12—


In principle, it appears that either the long—term real rate effect, or

the short—term real rate effect (which operates via the inflation rate)

may dominate, in which case R(O) may either begin to rise or fall

(I(O)   0). Much depends upon the flexibility of the domestic price

level, as described by y. However, if we assume that the price level

moves sufficiently slowly for the fall in the long—term real rate to

dominate, then R will continue to fall following its initial fall.

Thus the real rate follows a time path such as illustrated by U'V' in

Figure lB. Following the monetary expansion at time T, the long—term

real rate begins to rise, along with the price level, as R and P move

along the locus Y1Y.

          We turn now to the time paths of interest rates, illustrated

in Figure 2B, As noted, at the time of announcement, the real money

supply remains fixed, so that for money market equilibrium to prevail,

the demand for money, and hence the short—term nominal interest rate,

remains fixed instantaneously. As the price level rises during the

period prior to the monetary expansion (the interval 0, T), the real

money stock falls and the short—term nominal interest rate rises along

AA. At the time of the monetary expansion, the real money stock M —     P


rises, so that the short—term nominal interest rate falls. Thereafter,

with the nominal money supply fixed at the new level and the price level

continuing to rise, the real money stock falls continuously and the short—

term nominal interest rate must again be rising, the short—term nominal

rate must fall to a point such as B, which lies below the equilibrium

level, i*, which it then approaches along the path BB'.
                                 —1 3—



          The initial positive inflation rate, generated by the announce-

ment, means that on impact the short—term real rate of interest falls,

as already noted. With prices rising throughout the adjustment, this

also means that the short—term real rate is always less than the short—

term nominal rate; see Figure 2B. The adjustment of the short—term

rate during the period (0, T) depends upon whether the exchange rate

increases faster than the price level. We have drawn the time path on

the assumption that this is the case, so that r rises along with the

nominal rate i. However, we cannot rule out the contrary behavior.

          At the time of the monetary expansion (time T), the inflation

rate moves continuously. This is seen from equation (la) and (if),

where with E, P, R constrained to adjustment continuously everywhere

(other than for possible jumps in the latter two at the announcement

date), the same must apply to the rate of inflation P. It then follows

that the fall in the short—term real rate at time T must equal that of

the short—term nominal rate at that time; i.e., the distances A'B, C'D

in Figure 2B must be equal.

          In the second part of Figure 2B we have plotted the short—term

and long—term real rates. We have commented how at time 0, the long—

term rate drops by an amount which is likely to exceed the fall in the

short—term real rate. This means that for the arbitrage condition to

hold, the long—term real rate must continue to fall (at least initially)

If the short—term real rate r, beging driven primarily by the rise in

the short—term nominal rate, begins to rise, then the long—term rate

will lie below it and will continue to fall, in order to generate the

capital gains to ensure the equality between the real rates of return

on the short—term and long—term securities.
                                  —14—



           The long—term real rate fails along FF' and therefore is less

 than the short—term real rate, until F', when the monetary expansion

 takes place. At that time, the stable locus is reached and R begins to

 rise. At the same instance, the downward jump in the short—term rate

 occurs, so that DD' lies below F'G as R and r approach their common

 equilibrium level i'.

          Looking at Figures 2B together, we see that the various interest

 rates being considered exhibit diverse behavior during the various phases

of the adjustment. The short—run monetary contraction generated by the

rising price level, which inmiediately follows the announcement, causes

the nominal interest rate to begin rising in the short run. The short—

term real rate will initially fall, but will likely then begin rising

and follow the nominal rate. The long—term real rate, on the other hand,

also falls initially, but in contrast to the short—term real rate, will

likely continue falling, as it discounts the expected future downward

jump in the short—term real rate which will take place at time T. Prior

to the monetary expansion at time T, the long—term real rate lies below

the short—term real rate; after the policy change is introduced, this

relationship is reversed.


4. DOMESTIC FISCAL EXPANSION

          A permanent unit increase in domestic government expenditure

leads to a long—run appreciation of the exchange rate, while leaving the

steady—state domestic price level and real rate of interest unchanged.

This means that the stable locus in E—P space shifts down from XX' to

X1Xj, while YY' remains fixed in R—P space.
                                  —15—


A. Unanticipated Increase in Government Expenditure

          The effect of an unanticipated fiscal expansion on the economy

is very simple. All it does is to cause the exchange rate to appreciate

instantaneously to its new steady state level at N in Figure 3A, with

the domestic price level and real (and nominal) interest rates remaining

unchanged. The transitional dynamics generates.


B. Anticipated Increase in Government Expenditure

          The response of the economy to an announced fiscal expansion

is very different. At the time of the announcement, the exchange rate

immediately appreciates to L in Figure 3A. The immediate response in

the long—term real rate, R(O), however, is not clear. It is shown in

the Appendix that in the short run, the long—term real rate of interest

will rise if the interest elasticity of the demand for money, fl Say,

evaluated at the long—run equilibrium is greater than unity (in magnitude);

it will fall otherwise.

          An intuitive explanation for this behavior runs as follows.

A large value of the equilibrium rate of interest R, and hence for a

given value of c2, a large value of the interest elasticity of the demand

for money, r, will tend to generate a low level of real private expenditure.

This in turn generates a high rate of deflation, thereby leading to a

high level of the short—term real rate. Now the long—term real interest

rate at any moment of time is a discounted average of all the expected

future short—term real rates. As we shall see below, following an announced

fiscal expansion, the short—term real rate initially rises above its

steady—state equilibrium and subsequently falls below this level. Thus
                                 —16--



if the elasticity n is large and r is relatively large, the positive

movements in r, which oLcur during the initial phases of the adjust-

ment, will dominate and initially, the long—term real rate will rise.

On the other hand, if r is small so thatr is relatively low, the nega-

tive movements in r, which occur during the latter phases of the adjust-

ment, will cominate and the initial long—term real rate will fall.

          Consider the case where the interest elasticity of the demand

for money is greater than unity. The initial rise in the long—term real

rate, together with the appreciation of the exchange rate means that at

the time of the announcement, demand for domestic output falls, causing

the domestic price level to begin falling. In the other case where the

elasticity exceeds unity, the fall in the long—term real rate offsets

the effect of exchange rate on demand, and in general we are unable to

determine which influence dominates. However, if T is taken to be

sufficiently small, the exchange rate effect dominates and the domestic

price level begins to fall as illustrated in Figure 3B.

          With the real money stock fixed instantaneously, the short—

term nominal interest rate remains fixed, so that following its initial

jump, the rate of exchange depreciation is zero initially. As the price

level begins to fall, the real money stock begins to rise and the short—

term nominal interest rate falls in order to equilibrate the money mar—

ket. The appreciation of the exchange rate, together with the falling

domestic price level means that E and P move in the direction of LM in

Figure 3A. At time T, when the anticipated fiscal expansion occurs,

the increase in the demand for output so generated causes the domestic
                                 -17-



price level to begin rising. The exchange rate, however, will continue

to fall as long as the price level has not been restored to its initial

equilibrium level. This is necessary because until this occurs, there

will be an increase in the real money stock and for money market equilibrium

to be maintained there must be an appreciating exchange rate.

          The behavior of the long—term real rate is illustrated in Figure

3B. If the interest elasticity n > 1, so that R rises initially, then R

may either begin to continue rising, or it may immediately begin to

start falling; i.e., R(O)   O.k' We have drawn it falling and initially

following the path U'V'. This seems the most plausible case since we

know that eventually R must return to its initial level. On the other

hand, if the interest elasticity n < 1 and R initially falls, then it

will definitely initially continue to fall following the initial jump;

ie,, R(O) < 0. A path such as U"V" will be followed. During the trans-

ition, following the announcement but prior to the fiscal expansion,

the long—term real rate will have fallen below its equilibrium. At

time T, when the expansion occurs, the knowledge that the short—term

real rate of interest is below its equilibrium and will therefore rise

in the future, causes the long—term real rate to begin rising at time



         We now consider the time paths of the interest rates, depicted

in Figure 4. The short—term nominal rate remains fixed at the time of

announcement. With the price level falling during the perior prior to

the expansion (0, T), the real money stock rises and the short—term

nominal interest rate falls along the path AA'. At the time of the

fiscal expansion, the real domestic money stock remains unchanged, SO

that the path for the nominal interest is continuous at that point.
                                 -18—


However, with the price level now beginning to rise, the real money

stock now begins to fall and the nominal interest rate begins to rise

back up towards the equilibrium world rate.

          The initial deflation at time 0, generated by the announce-

ment, means that the short—term real rate immediately rises above the

short—term nominal rate. With prices falling throughout the entire

period (0, T), this means that r always lies above i during that phase.

Whether the short—term rate is actually rising or falling depends upon

whether the exchange rate falls faster than the price level. We have

drawn the time path on the assumption that this is the case, so that r

falls with i. At the time of the fiscal expansion the price level

begins to rise. The short—term real rate therefore immediately falls

below the short—term nominal rate. It remains there during its subse-

quent adjustment to equilibrium as prices continue to rise during this

phase.

          The short—term and long—term real rates are drawn in Figures

4B and 4C for the two cases where the latter rises in the short run and

falls in the short run, respectively. Consider Figure 4B first. With

R falling during period (0, T), after its initial increase, it follows

from the arbitrage condition (le) that the short—term real rate must

exceed the long—term real rate. When R begins to increase following

the fiscal expansion, the short—term real rate drops below it and

remains below during the subsequent transition.

          Figure 4C illustrates the case where R initially falls. While

we have seen that in the short run R will continue to fall, it is reason-

able to suppose that the declining price level, together with the falling
                                  19—


R, will tend to reduce the rate of deflation, As a consequence, the

divergence between the short—term and long—term real rates is eliminated

and this causes R to begin rising as it approaches the locus YYV. In

that case, the time paths for the short—term and long—term real rates

will intersect at the point where R reaches its minimum level.

          As in the case of an anticipated monetary expansion, Figure 4

illustrates the divergent behavior of the various rates of interest,

in response to an anticipated fiscal expansion, particularly during the

initial phase. The short—term nominal rate follows the smoothest path,

gradually declining initially before eventually increasing back to its

equilibrium level. The short—term real rate undergoes two jumps; an

upward jump at the announcement date, a downward jump when the expan-

sion actually occurs. During the early phase it declines gradually,

while following the downward jump at time T, it gradually increases

towards its equilibrium level. The long—term rate undergoes only jump,

namely at the initial time of announcement. Thereafter, it will tend

to decline before subsequently increasing back up to its equilibrium

level. Like i it may also always lie below the equilibrium world rate,

but this need not be the case.


5. CONCLUSIONS

          In this paper we have analyzed the effects of monetary and

fiscal disturbances, both unanticipated and anticipated, on the dynamic

behavior of a monetary model of a small open economy. Attention has

focused on the adjustment of the short—term and long—term interest

rates and the divergence of their transitional time paths, particularly
                                  —20—


 in anticipation of these disturbances. We have shown how the anticipa-

 tion of a future policy change can generate perverse short—run behavior.

Thus, for example, the announcement of a future fiscal expansion may

cause the long—term rate to rise initially. In this case, initial

contractionary effects in the economy are generated, though these are

eventually reversed when the fiscal expansion occurs. It is also possible

for the initial responses of the short—term and long—term rates to be

in opposite directions, thereby twisting the yield curve in the short

run. The essential reason for the difference in behavior of the short

and long rates is the fact that the long rate is
                                                   dominated by anticipated
future events, while the short run is primarily determined by current

influences.
                   E




xl



              L'                N



 x

                                                         P
               0
                                                             x;



                   A. Adjustment of E and P



                   R




                                              '7;



               0
                                                         P



Y


                   B Adjusttnent 1 R atul P

     Figure 1 Response to 1)omestk \Ionetarv Expansion
 i,r                                                  r,R




i*                                            i,R    i*




                                    t                 0



                    A. Unanticipated Monetary Disturbance




 i,r                                                  r,R




                                             r,R                         C,

                             D'
                     r                                                        r



0          T                                                         T

                      B. Anticipated \ionetarv Disturbance

       Figure 2: Response of Interest Rates to Domestic NIoIleLttv Increase
                  E




      x
                  0


x

              N


    A. Adjustment of E and


                  R
                                            x




      v,,
                      '\7;

Y




    B. Adjustment of R and P

Figure 3: Response to Anticipated Domestic Fiscal EXpanSioll
                            C
                     i,r




                             0              T

                                          A.




R,r                                                      R,r




C     r                                                 C
F
                I-              G               R,r
                                    D'                                                D'




                                                        0                                  t
               T                                                       T

              B.                                                      C.


      Figure 4: Response of Interest Rates to Anticipated Domestic Fiscal Expansion
                               FOOTNOTES


-'The distinction between short—term and long—term interest rates in
  the context of an open economy is briefly considered by Sachs and
  Wyplosz (1984) in their simulation model.

'Most importantly, this would introduce the distinction between
  alternative measures of real interest rates.

-'This relationship is based on the assumption of risk neutrality.
  To take account adequately of risk averse agents would require a
  full stochastic model, going beyond the scope of this paper.

-'Equation (le') assumes that the future short—term rates are known
  exactly. If this is not the case, r(t') would be replaced by
  r*(t',t), the prediction of the future short—term rate for time
  t' formed at time t. One can define an analogous relationship
  between the short—term and long—term nominal rates. However,
  since the latter does not play any role in the model, this is
  not required.


-WIn an expanded version of this paper, we also analyze the effects
  of a once—and—for—all unit increase in the foreign interest rate.

'For example, the limiting cases          (purchasing power parity)
  and 83   0, (zero substitutability between domestic and foreign
  goods in demand) provide some insight into the behavior of the
  economy in these special cases.


-From equation (5a), we see

                         dE(O) =           >1
                                 1 —


  This is identical to the expression obtained by Gray and Turnovsky
  (1979) for the amount of exchange rate overshooting in the Dornbusch
  model.


'The behavior of R(O) can be seen from equation (6) and noting that
  while R(O) may either rise or fall, E(O) definitely falls.

21in considering the partial phase diagrams illustrated in Figure 3,
  it is interesting to note that if the fiscal expansion is unannounced,
  the adjustment is instantaneous. On the other hand, the adjustment
  to an anticipated disturbance takes an infinite time, even if the
  lead time T is small but strictly positive. In this case, the adjust-
  ments in R and P would be small, while E would jump close to its new
  equilibrium level. But in a strict formal sense, it would still take
  an infinite time to reach the new equilibrium.
                                                           APPENDIX


1.       General Solution to Model

                       We shall write the dynamic system (4) as



                                  Hi
                                      E =
                                                 ll
                                                  0
                                                                     h12 h1 RR1
                                                                     0
                                                                                       h23 E—E
                                                                                                        (A.l)


                                  L]             Lh3l                h32               h33JLPPJ
where         the h.. are identified by the corresponding elements in the

matrix in (4). We assume that at time 0 the system is in steady state

with R =                  E =         P =                 At time 0 a change is anticipated to take
                                E1,         P1.
effect at time T. The new steady state is given by R2, E2, P2.

                       The solution to (A.l) is as follows:


0 <      t    <   T:


                                R-         =-
                                                    .h +h h X.t
                                                      3
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                        (A.2a)
                                                  i=lL lii ij1       (h          -x


                                                                             3    C. A.t
                                                                                      1
                                       E —                                              e               (A.2b)
                                                 E1            h23
                                                                         i=l 1

                                                                         3             A.t
                                                               =                        1
                                                P —                              G.e                    (A.2c)
                                                          P1
                                                                     i=l


t    >   T:


                                R -        =-
                                                      3 rA.h
                                                          1 13                   +h ---Ce
                                                                                     hi A.t
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                1       (A.3a)
                                                  1=1          L 1iii
                                                                             3    C X,t
                                       E    -             = h23
                                                                                      1
                                                                                       e                (A.3b)
                                                                     i1 1
                                                                     3                      t
                                                                                       1
                                            P—
                                                      P7-
                                                               =                 Ce
                                                                                  -                     (A.3c)
                                                                   i=1
                                            -A2-


where A1 <      0,    A2 > 0, A3 > 0 are the eigenvalues. There are six arbi-

trary constants to be determined: C1, C, i = 1, 2, 3. They are

determined as follows:


               (i) In order for the system to remain bounded as t                         -
we require



                                           C C 0                                              (A.4a)


           (ii) We assume that P evolves continuously from its initial

given condition, so that



                                      C1+C2+C3=0                                              (A.4b)


          (iii) The time paths for R, E, and P are assumed to be continuous

for t >   0.        In particular, at t = T, the solutions for (A.2) and (A.3)

must coincide. Thus

                               AT           A2T             A1
                        (C1_C)e       + Ce + C3e                      p2 — p1                 (A.4c)



               h2
                             AT h                AT
                                                  2 h23               AT
           —-- (C1—C)e            +                 + ---— C3e
                                                                                —
                1
                                           C2e                             E2
                                       2                    3
                                             AT
                                              1                                     A2T
                                                       [Ah + h12h23]C2e
          - {A1h13 + h12h23J(C1-C)e                -                                          A 4d
                         (h11-X1)X1                               (h11-A2)A2

                                                       AT
                          -[A3h13 + h12h23]C3e              =         -                       (A.4e)
                                                                 R2
                                  (h11-A3)A3


Thus the general solution for the system is as follows:
                                                  -A3-


0 <   t < T:

                      R -           =-                                            (A.2a)
                                           i=l                   1 1   1
                                                              11-A.)A.1C.e

                                       -                C. A.t
                                                             1
                                                              3
                                E —
                                       E1
                                            =
                                                 h23
                                                     i=l 1
                                                           e      -               (A.2b)

                                            -             3             A.t
                                                  =                      1
                                      P —                 E       C.e             (A.2c)
                                            P1
                                                      i=l

t   > T:

                                -               + h12h23]
                          R —   It,   = —[A1h13           C.e
                                                              Alt
                                                                                  (A.3a')
                                                '11 ii
                                                      h C' At
                                      E-E2= 31e1
                                            1
                                                                                  (A.3b')

                                                                   At
                                                                    1
                                            -         =
                                                 P2       Ce                      (A.3c')


where C1, C2, C3, C are determined by (A.4a)—(A.4d). The values of

these constants depend upon the change in the steady state. This in

turn depends upon the particular disturbance to the system and in

each case can be obtained from equations (3) of the text.


2. Determination of Sgn R(0) Following Announcement of Fiscal Expansion

            To begin, note that A, A, A3, being eigenvalues, satisfy

the characteristic equation of the dynamic system (4), namely


    A3 -
           [R(l-y2)
                      -
                          y3]A2
                                      -
                                           [3         +
                                                          32 + R2/2]A + 3R/n2 =   0    (A.5)


Using the standard properties of roots of polynomials, we have


                                      X1A2X3 =        —'y'3R/n                    (A.6a)
                                             -A4-


                  A1A2 + A2A3 + A3A1 =                  +           +                             (A.6b)


                                                              —
                               A1 + A2 + A3 =   R(1-y2)           Y3                              (A.6c)


These relationships can be easily expressed in terms of the h... We

define the quantity


                         (A)           -            +
                                                        3] + 32                                   (A.7)


so that (A.5) may be written as


                          (R A)X) ÷ Ry2A(R              —           = 0
                                                            l/n2)                                 (A.8)


             In the case of a fiscal expansion,


                   =       (       say), P2 —       = , E2                  =
                                                                                —l/i.33


Solving equations (A.4b)—(A.4e) for C1, C2, C3, C, and substituting

back into (A.2a), we may express the solution as


                       - (h23h32 + A1A3)(h23h32 + A1A2)
                                      223311                        L
                                                                        -A3T -

                                                                                2
                                                                                     e2   3   J

                                                      —AT    —AT
where A1 <   0,           0, A3 > 0.       The term [e    — e 2
                  A2 >                                           ]/(A2—X3) > 0 and
thus


       sgn{R(0) -              = sgn{(h23h32 + A1A3)(h23h32 + A1A2)}                              (A.l0)


Multiplying out the expression on the right hand side of (A.10) and

using (A.6a)—(A6c), we find

                                                                        3
                       (h23h32 + X1A3)(h23h32 + X1X2) =             —h
                                       —A5 —




where




Thus


                         sgn[R(O) — Ri            sgn                        (A.il)


Now setting X =    in   (A.8) yields


                                   R2X1(1
                                                 -
                               =                                             (A.12)
                                       2X1)
so that


                         sgn       =   sgn     {ct2R
                                                       —
                                                           ii                (A.13)


Since the money supply is measured in logarithms —a2 is the semi—elasticity

of demand, so that —a2R measures the interest elasticity of demand,

evaluated at steady state equilibrium. Letting '                a2R, and combining
(A.ll) and (A.12) we obtain


                        sgn[R(O) — Ri =          sgn(—l)                     (A.14)
                              REFERENCES


Blanchard, 0., 1981, "Output, the Stock Market, and Interest Rates,"
     American Economic Review, 71, 132—143.

Blanchard, 0., 1984, "Current and Anticipated Deficits, Interest Rates
     and Economic Activity," European Economic Review, 25, 7—27.

Buiter, W. H. and M. H. Miller, 1983, "Changing the Rules: Economic
     Consequences of the Thatches Regime," Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 2, 305—365.

Dornbusch, R., 1976, "Exchange Rate Expectations and Monetary Policy,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 84, 1161—1176.

Gray, M. R. and S. J. Turnovsky, 1979, "The Stability of Exchange Rate
     Dynamics under Perfect Myopic Foresight," International Economic
     Review, 20, 643—660.

Sachs, J. and C. Wyplosz, 1984, "Real Exchange Rate Effects of Fiscal
     Policy," NBER Working Paper No. 1255.

Turnovsky, S. J. and M. H. Miller, 1984, "The Effects of Government
     Expenditure on the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal
     of Money, Credit, and Banking, 16, 16—33.
