                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE INCIDENCE OF LOCAL LABOR DEMAND SHOCKS

                                        Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                         Working Paper 17167
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17167


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




This is a revised version of the first chapter of my dissertation. I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, David
Autor, and Amy Finkelstein for their guidance and support. I also thank Leila Agha, Josh Angrist,
Fernando Duarte, Tal Gross, Erik Hurst, Cynthia Kinnan, Jean-Paul L.Huillier, Amanda Pallais, Jim
Poterba, Michael Powell, Nirupama Rao, Bill Wheaton, and seminar participants at MIT, Northwestern,
Berkeley, Harvard Kennedy School, University of Chicago, Wharton, Stanford, Yale School of Management,
and Brown for helpful comments. I gratefully acknowledge the National Institute of Aging (NIA grant
number T32-AG000186) and the MIT Shultz Fund for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks
Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 17167
June 2011, Revised July 2011
JEL No. H53,J01,R31

                                             ABSTRACT

Low-skill workers are comparatively immobile: when labor demand slumps in a city, low-skill workers
are disproportionately likely to remain to face declining wages and employment. This paper estimates
the extent to which (falling) housing prices and (rising) social transfers can account for this fact using
a spatial equilibrium model. Nonlinear reduced form estimates of the model using U.S. Census data
document that positive labor demand shocks increase population more than negative shocks reduce
population, this asymmetry is larger for low-skill workers, and such an asymmetry is absent for wages,
housing values, and rental prices. GMM estimates of the full model suggest that the comparative immobility
of low-skill workers is not due to higher mobility costs per se, but rather a lower incidence of adverse
labor demand shocks.


Matthew J. Notowidigdo
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
noto@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction

When a city experiences an adverse labor demand shock, the share of the adult population
with a college degree tends to decline (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005). A standard explanation
for this pattern is that barriers to mobility are greater for low-skill workers (Topel, 1986;
Bound and Holzer, 2000).1
        This paper proposes and tests an alternative explanation which focuses on why low-skill
workers may be disproportionately compensated during adverse labor demand shocks, rather
than why it may be disproportionately costly for them to out-migrate.                     This explanation
has two components. First, as documented below, adverse shocks substantially reduce the
cost of housing. This fact and the existing evidence that the expenditure share on hous-
ing declines with income imply that low-skill workers are disproportionately compensated
by housing price declines.2         Second, means-tested public assistance programs dispropor-
tionately compensate low-skill workers during adverse shocks. I document below that, not
surprisingly, aggregate transfer program expenditures are highly responsive to local labor
market conditions.
        These two di¤erent types of explanations – one based on mobility costs and one based
on compensating factors – are not incompatible; however, their relative importance ulti-
mately determines the actual incidence of local labor demand shocks. If out-migration of
workers is low primarily because of mobility costs, then the incidence of local labor demand
shocks will be primarily borne by workers; additionally, to the extent that mobility costs are
greater for low-skill workers, they may disproportionately bear the incidence of the adverse
shock.       Alternatively, if the incidence of adverse local labor demand shocks is primarily

    1
      The existence of greater barriers to mobility for low-skill workers is consistent with a large empirical
literature that has documented that the local labor supply elasticity is larger for high-skill workers than for
low-skill workers. For example, Bound and Holzer (2000) …nd that the elasticity of local labor supply with
respect to wages is signi…cantly higher for college-educated workers than for workers with no more than a
high school education. Similarly, Topel (1986) …nds that local labor demand shifts generate much smaller
wage di¤erentials among more educated workers. Topel writes “consistent with the greater geographic
mobility of more educated workers, their wages are less sensitive to both current and future changes in
relative employment.”
    2
      Of course, if low-skill workers are homeowners and not renters, then there is a negative wealth e¤ect in
addition to the decline in the user cost of housing following a negative local labor demand shock. Consistent
with much of the recent urban economics literature (e.g., Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) and Moretti (2009)),
I assume in the model below that everyone is a renter. I also explore alternative speci…cations which assume
that the demand for housing is homothetic, so that the expenditure share on housing is assumed to be the
same for high-skill and low-skill workers.



                                                      1
borne by immobile housing and social insurance programs, then low-skill workers will be
disproportionately compensated and, consequently, less likely to out-migrate.
         In this paper, I develop and estimate a spatial equilibrium model which captures how
wages, population, housing prices, and transfer payments re-equilibrate following a shift in
local labor demand. The model is based on the spatial equilibrium model in Roback (1982).
Following Glaeser and Gyourko (2005), the model in this paper allows for a concave local
housing supply curve, arising from the durability of the local housing stock.3                     While the
Glaeser and Gyourko model assumes perfect mobility, I allow for heterogeneous mobility
costs which limit spatial arbitrage, as in Topel (1986).                 Unlike the preceding models, I
explicitly model local labor demand.
         To give the basic intuition of the model, consider the following simpli…ed version.4 The
main conceptual experiment in the model is that a single city experiences a (positive or neg-
ative) labor demand shock while a large number of other cities remain unchanged. Figures
1 and 2 provide graphical representations of the di¤erent equilibrium responses of wages,
population and housing prices for four scenarios, depending on whether housing supply is
constant elasticity or asymmetric and whether workers are perfectly mobile or face mobility
costs when out-migrating.
         Figure 1 depicts the equilibrium response when the elasticity of supply of housing is
constant.5 The …gure shows a positive shift in the labor demand curve which raises wages
by        . This increase in wages causes in-migration, which bids up housing prices until the
increase in housing costs exactly o¤sets the wage increase (thus restoring the equilibrium
no-arbitrage condition for workers). If workers are perfectly mobile, then the …gure shows
that the e¤ect of a negative shock (               ) is symmetric; i.e., wages, housing prices, and
population adjust by equal and opposite magnitudes (as shown by LA in the …gure). This

     3
      Throughout the paper I use the term “concave housing supply curve” to imply that positive housing
demand shocks increase housing prices less than equal-sized negative shocks reduce housing prices. More
formally, a concave housing supply curve implies that @ 2 (housing price)=@(housing supply)2 < 0.
    4
      In this simpli…ed version of the model, workers in a city inelastically supply labor so that net migration
fully determines local labor supply. Workers also do not di¤er in productivity, and there are no transfer
payments. The full model below introduces high-skill and low-skill workers as well as transfer payments.
Firms are perfectly mobile so that labor demand is perfectly elastic. Homogeneous housing units are supplied
by absentee landlords who live in other cities, and workers consume a …xed expenditure share of housing
(sh ).
    5
      This is equivalent to assuming that the housing supply curve is log-linear.




                                                       2
symmetry comes from the log-linearity of the housing supply curve and the perfect mobility
of workers. If, alternatively, workers face non-negligible mobility costs, then there will be
less out-migration following a negative shock. With non-negligible mobility costs, the no-
arbitrage condition is now that the marginal worker must be indi¤erent between staying and
paying c to out-migrate.    In this case, both the population and housing price responses
are asymmetric: positive shocks increase population and housing prices more than negative
shocks reduce them (see LB in the …gure). Intuitively, while mobility costs constrain out-
migration, they do not similarly constrain in-migration because there are a large number of
potential in-migrants with negligible mobility costs (since the single city is assumed to be
small relative to the rest of the world). Therefore, the increase in population following a
positive shock is the same whether or not workers face heterogeneous costs of out-migration
(see L+ in the …gure)
   In Figure 2, the housing supply elasticity is no longer constant. Speci…cally, housing is
more elastically supplied following an increase in housing demand than a decrease in demand.
As discussed in greater detail in the main text below and in Online Appendix Section A.2,
this asymmetric housing supply curve is consistent with a simple model of durable housing
where housing units are not destroyed once created (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005).         When
workers are perfectly mobile, housing prices respond symmetrically (despite the asymmetry
in the housing supply curve). Intuitively, housing costs still must adjust to exactly o¤set the
wage changes. Only population responds asymmetrically (as shown by LC in the …gure).
However, if workers have heterogeneous mobility costs to out-migrate as described above,
then in this case the asymmetry of the population response is even greater (see LD in the
…gure), and housing prices also respond asymmetrically.
   These scenarios give the intuition for the following two implications of the full model
derived below: (1) if positive labor demand shocks increase population more than negative
shocks reduce population, this suggests the existence of a concave housing supply curve
and/or heterogeneous mobility costs, and (2) if positive shocks increase housing prices more
than negative shocks reduce housing prices, that is consistent with the existence of hetero-
geneous mobility costs. The full model below shows that these implications continue to hold
in a richer setting with transfer payments and two types of workers.
   The model guides the empirical strategy, which consists of two steps. In the …rst step,



                                              3
I test for asymmetric responses of wages, employment, population, and housing prices to
symmetric labor demand shocks. The validity of this exercise requires constructing plausibly
exogenous positive and negative shifts in local labor demand of equal magnitude. This paper
follows Bartik (1991) in constructing an instrumental variable for local labor demand shocks
by interacting cross-sectional di¤erences in industrial composition with national changes in
industry employment shares. I …nd robust evidence using U.S. Census data that positive
local labor demand shocks increase population (and employment) more than negative shocks
reduce population (and employment) and that this asymmetry is greater for low-skill workers.
These robust asymmetric relationships for local population and employment contrast sharply
with the absence of any evidence of a similar asymmetric relationship for (any measure of)
wages, housing values, and rental prices, though all of these other variables respond strongly
to local labor demand.6        As the spatial equilibrium model makes clear, these results are
consistent with a concave local housing supply curve and limited mobility costs. While the
Bartik (1991) procedure has been widely used in labor economics and urban economics, to my
knowledge this is the …rst paper which uses this procedure to explicitly test for asymmetric
responses of wages, employment, and population to local labor demand shocks.
       To quantitatively estimate the magnitude of mobility costs by skill and the shape of
the housing supply curve, in the second step of the empirical analysis, I estimate the full
spatial equilibrium model using a nonlinear, simultaneous equations GMM estimator. The
GMM estimates suggest that the housing supply curve is concave and that mobility costs
(de…ned as a fraction of income) are at most modest and are comparable for both high-skill
and low-skill workers.      The GMM results reveal several other important …ndings.                 First,
the observed asymmetric population responses are primarily accounted for by an asymmetric
housing supply curve rather than due to substantial barriers to mobility. Second, the results

   6
    The model in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) predicts a concave relationship between housing prices and the
exogenous labor demand, and these authors …nd supportive evidence of this prediction using an exogenous
shock based on climate. As discussed in more detail in the Online Appendix Section A.4, the key di¤erence
between the model in this paper and the model in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) is that the model in this paper
assumes that housing units are homogeneous, while in the Glaeser and Gyourko model housing units have
heterogeneous, location-speci…c amenities. In other words, in the Glaeser and Gyourko model, exogenous
shocks induce compositional changes in the distribution of location-speci…c amenities in the housing stock,
and these compositional changes a¤ect the (unconditional) average housing price. The di¤erence in empirical
results comes from the fact that Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) use mean temperature to construct local amenity
shocks based on a dummy variable for whether or not the January mean temperature is greater than 29.1
degrees whereas I use variation in local labor demand.



                                                    4
suggest that the observed di¤erence in out-migration by skill is primarily accounted for by
transfer payments rather than to di¤erences by skill in housing expenditure shares. Third,
the results suggest that the primary explanation for the comparative immobility of low-skill
workers is not higher mobility costs per se, but rather a lower incidence of adverse local
labor demand shocks. Consequently, much of the incidence of adverse labor demand shocks
is di¤used to homeowners, landlords, and public assistance programs.7
       Finally, I use the GMM estimates to construct counterfactual estimates of how local
labor markets would adjust to shocks if the system of means-tested transfer payments was
replaced with a system of mobility subsidies for both high-skill and low-skill workers. In this
alternative system, the skill composition of the local labor force is much less responsive to
shifts in local labor demand, but population continues to respond strongly asymmetrically
due to the asymmetric housing supply curve.
       The estimation of the full model necessarily requires stronger assumptions than were
needed to test for asymmetric responses to shocks.                In order to be able to consistently
estimate the relative magnitude of mobility costs by skill, I must assume that unobserved
changes in local amenities induced by local labor demand shocks are not di¤erentially valued
by high-skill and low-skill workers. To be able to consistently estimate the absolute magni-
tude of mobility costs, however, a stronger assumption is needed; namely, that unobserved
changes in local amenities are uncorrelated with local labor demand shocks.                      Because of
this, the analysis of the absolute magnitudes of mobility costs should be interpreted more
cautiously.
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical framework.
Section 3 discusses the empirical strategy and the data. Section 4 presents the reduced form
empirical results. Section 5 investigates the robustness of these results. Section 6 presents
GMM estimates of the full model. Section 7 concludes.

   7
     There is a related literature on the e¤ect of income on migration (Kennan and Walker, 2009) and the
e¤ect of welfare decisions on the individual migration decision (Kennan and Walker, 2008). Both of these
papers are highly complementary to this paper, as they employ a very di¤erent empirical approach. Kennan
and Walker (2008) use NLSY data to estimate a rich structural model of migration. Their data set of welfare-
eligible women with a high-school education contains 88 moves (out of 3,466 person-year observations and
694 individuals), and the data are used to identify the e¤ect of income on migration probability. Also related
to this paper is the recent literature on the causal e¤ect of education and geographic mobility (Wozniak,
2006; Malamud and Wozniak, 2008).




                                                      5
2        Theoretical Framework

This section presents a simple spatial equilibrium model of a local labor market that captures
how wages, population, housing prices, and transfer payments re-equilibrate following a local
labor demand shock.8          The heart of the model is a no-arbitrage condition in which the
marginal worker is indi¤erent between remaining in the city receiving the shock and moving
away (Roback, 1982).         This condition implicitly de…nes a local labor supply curve which
determines the amount of migration in response to a labor demand shock.                       The model
below allows for mobility costs, which limit spatial arbitrage and cause the incidence of
the labor demand shock to fall at least partially on workers (Topel, 1986).9 Additionally,
the model admits two types of workers (high-skill and low-skill) who di¤er in productivity,
imperfectly substitute in production, and may potentially di¤er in their housing expenditure
shares, eligibility for transfer payments, and mobility costs.            If an adverse labor demand
shock causes relatively greater out-migration of high-skill labor, the model clari…es when
this is because the incidence of the shock is borne by other factors that disproportionately
compensate low-skill workers and when this is due to greater barriers to mobility for low-skill
workers.
        The conceptual experiment is that a single city (out of a large universe of cities) experi-
ences a labor demand shock between the …rst and second period. For simplicity, the model
is presented as a two-period model in order to rule out the e¤ects of long-run expectations,
the di¤erences between temporary and permanent shocks, the option value from moving,
and other issues arising in dynamic spatial equilibrium models. I focus on decadal changes
in the empirical analyses below in order to minimize the in‡uence of these other factors, and
I leave a rigorous treatment of these dynamics for future work.
        To give the general intuition of the model, consider an adverse local labor demand shock in
a city. This shock will reduce wages, which encourages out-migration and, ultimately, lowers
housing prices until the no-arbitrage condition is restored for the marginal worker.                   The
amount of out-migration is determined by the magnitude of mobility costs, the generosity of

    8
     The model is a “local general equilibrium”model in the sense that labor demand shocks a¤ect non-labor
markets within the city; however, it is not a full general equilibrium model because when the single city is
shocked, the (minimal) e¤ects on the rest of the universe are ignored.
   9
     Topel (1986) is primarily concerned with understanding di¤erences between permanent and transitory
shocks; in the simple two-period model in this paper, all shocks are necessarily permanent.



                                                     6
transfer payments, and the elasticity of supply of housing in response to a decline in housing
demand.
       The four main components of the model (labor demand, transfer payments, housing
market, and labor supply) are now discussed in detail.


2.1      Labor Demand

Assume a large number of cities indexed by i, and de…ne the (large) number of high-skill
and low-skill workers in city i and time t as Hit and Lit . Production of the homogeneous
tradable good y is given by the following CES aggregate production function:10

                                                                                  =
                                  yit =      it ((1      )Lit + ( Hit ) )


where       is a share parameter,         measures the returns to scale of the labor aggregate,                  is the
relative e¢ ciency of high-skill labor and              is related to the elasticity of substitution between
high-skill and low-skill labor by          H;L        1=(1       ).11 The    it   term is a city-speci…c index of
local labor demand. In the empirical section below, I argue that my instrumental variable
for local labor demand is a plausibly exogenous source of variation in                             it .

       Assuming wages are set on the demand curve, then they are given by the following
marginal productivity conditions:


                      witH =     it ((1       )Lit + ( Hit ) )(        )=
                                                                                  ( Hit )   1


                      witL =     it ((1       )Lit + ( Hit ) )(        )=
                                                                            (1        )(Lit )       1




       Totally di¤erentiating the above wage expressions results in the following conditions for
the evolution of wages in terms of exogenous labor demand shock (                           it )    and the endogenous

  10
     For simplicity, capital is not included in the model. This could be important if part of the incidence of
labor demand shocks falls on owners of capital. Since the empirical results are based on decadal changes, it
seems reasonable to assume that the elasticity of supply of capital over this time period is fairly large.
  11
     Let be the share of high-skill workers in the labor market. Then if = (1 ) 1 =(( ) 1 +(1 ) 1 ),
  will give the equilibrium wage premium.




                                                             7
migration responses ( Hit and           Lit ):


                  witH =    it   + ((    1) + (            )( )) Hit + (             )(1      ) Lit         (1)

                  witL =    it   + ((    1) + (            )(1          )) Lit + (         )( ) Hit         (2)


where      =    ( H) =((1         )L + ( H) ), and the                     operator represents the percentage
change over time.


2.2     Transfer Payments

Means-tested public assistance programs are available only to low-skill workers and are mod-
eled as a constant elasticity function of wages:12


                                                 tit = T (witL )


where tit is the transfer income for the representative low-skill worker, T is a constant, and
  is the elasticity of public assistance income with respect to low-skill wages. The constant
elasticity assumption is a simpli…cation; empirically, I do not …nd robust evidence of a
nonlinear or asymmetric e¤ect of labor demand shocks on aggregate expenditures on transfer
programs, so this assumption appears to be a reasonable approximation.                            The equations
above imply the following expression for the evolution of transfer income in response to
changes in low-skill wages:
                                                   tit =         witL                                       (3)

I assume       < 0, which implies that transfer programs provide wage insurance, and I de…ne
sLt as the share of total income that comes from transfer programs for low-skill workers; for
high-skill workers, sH
                     t = 0.


  12
     Using PSID data from 1990, I calculate that 0:5% of households receiving AFDC income during the past
year had a household head with at least a college degree. Among households receiving food stamps during
the past year, the fraction is 0:7%. The percentages for a household head with a high school education or
less are 79:1% (AFDC) and 82:6% (Food Stamps).




                                                        8
2.3      Housing Market

A homogeneous housing stock is supplied by absentee landlords, and the aggregate housing
supply curve is given by H S (phit ), where phit is the price of housing. Workers have identical
preferences over housing and the homogeneous tradable consumption good. Existing empiri-
cal estimates suggest that housing consumption is a normal good with an income elasticity of
demand less than one; for example, Polinsky and Ellwood (1979), …nd a (permanent) income
elasticity of 0:80      0:87. These results imply that the demand for housing is non-homothetic
and suggest that the expenditure share of housing should be lower for high-skill workers.
Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, this is evident in the cross-section: in
1995, the housing expenditure share declines by more than 8 percentage points going from
bottom 20% in income to top 20% in income distribution, declining from 38:5% to 30:0%.13
De…ning sH      L
         h and sh as the housing expenditure shares for high-skill and low-skill workers,

respectively, then these facts indicate that sLh > sH
                                                    h . In the GMM estimates below, I report

results assuming sLh > sH                           L    H
                        h and results which assume sh = sh .

       Insetad of assuming a speci…c utility function to derive the demand for housing, I instead
approximate aggregate demand for housing as follows

                                 D               sH  H         L L L
                                                  h wit Hit + sh (st tit + (1   sLt )witL )Lit
                             H       (phit )   =
                                                                     phit

This expression is an approximation since I am implicitly assuming that any changes in
income induced by a shift in labor demand are small so that income e¤ects can be ignored.
Empirically, the changes in wages within skill groups are small relative to the di¤erences in
wages across skill groups, so this assumption is sensible.
       The initial supply-demand equilibrium in housing market in the …rst period is given by
H S (phit ) = H D (phit ).     Totally di¤erentiating this equilibrium condition gives the following
expression for the housing market response:


                      phit +     H S ( phit ) = ( yitH +           Hit ) + (1     )( yitL +      Lit )   (4)

  13
    Expenditure share by quintile (going from lowest to highest income quintile) is the following: 38:5%,
32:9%, 31:8%, 30:0%, and 30:0%.




                                                               9
where     is the high-skill share of aggregate housing demand and        yitj gives the change in total
income for skill group j (2 fH; Lg); i.e.,    yitj = sjt tjit + (1   sjt ) witj . If the housing supply
curve has constant elasticity, then     H S (phit ) =      phit . Since housing is a durable good,
however, the housing supply elasticity is not likely to be constant.            Instead, the housing
supply elasticity will be larger for increases in housing demand than for decreases in housing
demand due to the durability of the housing stock (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005). Formally,
durable housing implies that     H S ( phit ) is increasing in   phit . The Online Appendix Section
A.4 presents a simple model which provides microfoundations for a concave housing supply
curve based on slow depreciation of the housing stock and a heterogeneous distribution of
costs of supplying housing.


2.4     Labor Supply

For simplicity, I assume that workers inelastically supply labor to their local labor market,
so that all variation in local employment comes only from migration decisions. The local
labor supply curve is then implicitly de…ned by a mobility condition which states that the
marginal migrant must be indi¤erent between remaining in city i and moving to any other
city.
      I introduce costly spatial arbitrage by assuming that workers have heterogeneous mobility
costs. I construe mobility costs broadly to encompass both …nancial and psychic barriers
to out-migration as well as heterogeneous tastes and distastes for a given location. Thus
unlike Topel (1986), I allow mobility costs to take on positive and negative values. Positive
values encompass both actual moving costs as well as preferences for the current city, while
negative values represent distaste of potential in-migrants for a given area.             Formally, I
model this by assuming that mobility costs for workers in city i are independently drawn
from distributions MiH (m) and MiL (m) (with support [0; 1)), while the mobility costs of
in-migrating into city i for the workers living in all of the other cities are drawn from the
distributions M Hi (m) and M Li (m) (with support ( 1; 0]). Mobility costs are de…ned as
a fraction of total income, so that the marginal migrant receiving (w + t) in city i will pay
(w + t)m to out-migrate. These mobility cost distributions imply mobility cost functions
cH ( Hit ) and cL ( Lit ), which return the mobility cost of the marginal migrant given the
change in population between the …rst and second period.              For a smooth distribution of


                                                 10
mobility costs, the mobility cost function will be strictly decreasing, so that the mobility
cost of the marginal migrant increases as more workers out-migrate.14
       To derive the (implicit) labor supply curve for low-skill workers, let vi (witL + tLit ; phit ) be the
indirect utility function for the marginal low-skill worker in city i. Spatial equilibrium in
the …rst period requires that the following condition holds for the marginal low-skill migrant
in city i:
                                 vi (witL + tLit ; phit ) = vj (wjt
                                                                 L
                                                                    + tLjt ; phjt ) 8j 6= i

       Now consider a shock to        i   in city i. The shock will cause a wage di¤erential which will
encourage costly migration to arbitrage the wage and employment di¤erential, and the price
of housing and transfer payments will also adjust as a local general equilibrium response
to the shock.        Di¤erentiating the above spatial equilibrium condition and applying Roy’s
Identity results in the following expression:


                            (1     sLt ) witL + sLt tLit         sLh phit + cL ( Lit ) = 0               (5)


where sLt (= tL =(wL + tL )) is public assistance income as a share of total income.                     An
analogous expression holds for high-income workers (where sH
                                                           t = 0):



                                          witH    sH
                                                   h phit + cH ( Hit ) = 0                               (6)


       Equations (5) and (6) are implicit labor supply curves because net migration is determined
by the spatial equilibrium condition for the marginal migrant. In words, the conditions above
state that the change in indirect utility in response to changes in wages, transfer payments,
and housing prices must equal the mobility costs of the marginal migrants. The                      Lit and
  Hit terms represent the amount of net migration that needs to occur to make these two
equations hold.

  14
    Note that this two-period model contains two important simpli…cations which make it straightforward
to study mobility costs. First, following Topel (1986), gross migration will always equal net migration, so
that there is only one marginal migrant per worker type in each city. The work of Artuc, Chaudhari, and
McLauren (2009) and Chaudhari and McLauren (2007) suggest a tractable way to relax this assumption
and allow gross migration ‡ows to exceed net migration ‡ows. Second, the mobility cost function is allowed
to be asymmetric, but since this is a two-period model the shape of this function does not depend on the
history of past shocks. In a fully dynamic model, the history of past shocks may a¤ect the elasticity of
supply of in-migrants and out-migrants.



                                                            11
      These two equations highlight the three reasons discussed in the introduction why net
migration rates may di¤er by skill.            First, public assistance programs are means-tested,
so that sLt > sH
               t .      Second, low-skill workers consume a larger fraction of their income on
housing sLh > sH
               h , meaning that housing price declines disproportionately compensate low-

skill workers. Finally, the mobility cost functions may di¤er by skill. If low-skill workers
typically face higher mobility costs following a negative shock, then cL (x) > cH (x) 8x < 0.


2.5     Equilibrium

Following an exogenous shock to local labor demand (              it ),   the new equilibrium of the model
is de…ned by the following conditions:

        Labor demand adjusts so that high-skill and low-skill wages equal marginal products
        (equations (1) and (2)).

        Transfer payments adjust according to changes in low-skill wages (equation (3)).

        Housing prices adjust so that the change in housing demand equals the change in
        housing supply (equation (4)).

        Population adjusts so that the marginal high-skill and low-skill migrant is indi¤erent
        between staying and leaving (equations (5) and (6)).

      Although the nonlinearities in the housing supply curve ( H S ( phit )) and the mobil-
ity cost functions (cH ( Hit ) and cL ( Lit )) preclude analytical solutions without particular
functional form assumptions, Section A.2 in the Online Appendix derives comparative sta-
tics for speci…c scenarios under the special case of constant returns to scale of production
( = 1).
      Figure 3 reports results from simulating the model.15 The …gure shows that if population
responds asymmetrically, it suggests the existence of a concave housing supply curve and/or
the existence of heterogeneous mobility costs. The responsiveness of housing prices isolates
the importance of heterogeneous mobility costs, since mobility costs cause immobile workers
to bid up the price of housing during negative shocks, causing housing prices to respond

 15
      The details of the simulation are given in Section A.3 in the Online Appendix.



                                                     12
asymmetrically. Therefore, the model suggests that it is possible to identify both mobility
costs and the shape of the housing supply curve by using information on the joint responses
of wages, population, housing prices, and transfer payments to exogenous labor demand
shocks.
     These simulations motivate the two-part empirical strategy below. First, I will estimate
nonlinear reduced form regressions to test for asymmetric responses to labor demand shocks.
Second, I will carry out a full estimation of the model to recover the parameters which govern
the distribution of mobility costs and the shape of the housing supply curve.


3     Empirical Strategy and Data

As the model makes clear, the reduced form relationships between each of the endogenous
variables ( wH ,          wL ,   H,     L,     ph ,   tL ) and the labor demand shock                        are informative
about the shape of housing supply curve and the presence of heterogeneous mobility costs.
This motivates the following reduced form estimating equation:


                                              xit = g x (      it )   +    t   +       "it


where i indexes cities, t indexes time periods, x is one of the endogenous variables above,                                t

captures proportional shocks to all cities in a given time period, "it is an error term, and g() is
a function to be estimated. Nonparametric estimates of g() are reported graphically below.
In addition to the nonparametric estimates, I also parameterize g x (                                    ) as (   )+ (    )2
which leads to the following baseline reduced form empirical speci…cation that is reported in
the tables:
                                                                                   2
                                      xit =           it   +          (        it )    +     t   + "it                   (7)

where x is the endogenous variable of interest,                           and          are the coe¢ cients on a quadratic
in     it ,   and   t   are year …xed e¤ects. This reduced form speci…cation is estimated by OLS
using a proxy for local labor demand (described below). The quadratic speci…cation allows
the elasticity of xit with respect to it to vary: speci…cally, the elasticity at   i;t = 0 is

given by ^ , while ^ + 2^ it is the elasticity at    it . Since the equation is estimated in

…rst di¤erences it implicitly controls for time-invariant di¤erences across geographic areas,



                                                               13
while the inclusion of year …xed e¤ects captures any (proportional) changes in xit common
to all cities.    Formally, the statistical test of                  6= 0 is su¢ cient to establish that positive
and negative shifts in labor demand of equal magnitude have unequal e¤ects. However, this
test is evaluating the null hypothesis of a linear relationship against a speci…c parametric
alternative. Therefore, I will also report nonparametric speci…cation tests which test the null
hypothesis of a linear relationship against a nonparametric alternative (Ellison and Ellison,
2000).
       Lastly, I also estimate the full model developed above to recover ‡exible estimates of
the mobility cost functions of high-skill and low-skill workers and the housing supply curve
parameters.       The estimation is a nonlinear, simultaneous equations problem, and it is
implemented using a two-step GMM estimator.                               The details of the GMM procedure are
described in more detail below.


3.1      An Omnibus Instrumental Variable for Local Labor Demand

In order to estimate equation (7) above, a valid instrumental variable for local labor demand
is needed.       I follow the empirical strategy of Bartik (1991) and construct a measure of
plausibly exogenous labor demand shocks derived by interacting cross-sectional di¤erences in
industrial composition with national changes in industry employment shares.16 This relative
demand index can be used to predict changes in wages and employment. The identifying
assumption is that changes in industry shares at the national level are uncorrelated with
city-level labor supply shocks and therefore represent plausibly exogenous (demand-induced)
variation in metropolitan area employment. This predicted employment variable (E^it ) is
used to create a predicted change in local area employment ( ^it ) as follows:                      ^i;t = (E^it
                                                                                    17
Ei;t )=Ei;t . This measure is used as a proxy for                               it .

       The key identifying assumption is that this proxy is uncorrelated with unobserved shocks

  16
     See Blanchard and Katz (1992), Bound and Holzer (2000), Autor and Duggan (2002), and Luttmer
(2005) for other applications of this instrumental variable.
  17
     Formally, predicted employment growth is computed as follows:
                                            K
                                            X                       i;k;t           i;k;t
                                   it   =         'i;k;t
                                                                            i;k;t
                                            k=1
                                 ^it = (1 +
                                 E                   i;t )Ei;t
                                 ^it = (E
                                        ^it          Ei;t        )=Ei;t



                                                            14
to local labor supply. In this paper a stronger assumption is also needed –speci…cally, I must
assume that       i;t   = X and      i;t   =   X represent shifts in local labor demand of plausibly
equal magnitude.        This requirement gives a clear advantage to the Bartik procedure over
other identi…able shocks to local labor demand, as this instrumental variable is an omnibus
measure of changes in local labor demand. By contrast, if one were to use identi…able shifts to
labor demand such as movements in oil prices, coal prices, or other natural resource shocks it
would require that equal-sized positive and negative price changes represent equal-sized shifts
in local labor demand. This may be di¢ cult to justify in natural resource industries that are
typically characterized by high amounts of speci…c capital and/or irreversible investments.
A related bene…t of the Bartik procedure is that subsets of industries can be excluded when
constructing the instrumental variable to verify that the results are not driven by particular
sectors.


3.2     Data and Descriptive Statistics

The data sources are brie‡y described here. The Data Appendix (Online Appendix Section
A.1) gives more detail on how the data set was created.
      Census Integrated Public Use Microsamples (IPUMS) The basic panel of metropol-
itan area data comes from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census individual-level and household-
level extracts from the IPUMS database (Ruggles et al., 2004).18                 The baseline data are
limited to individuals and households living in metropolitan areas. The IPUMS data are
used to construct estimates of local area wages, employment, population, housing prices, and
rental prices in each metropolitan area. The primary advantage of the Census data is the
ability to construct city-level measures disaggregated by skill. These data are also used to
construct the predicted labor demand instrumental variable by using the industry categories
of the individuals in the labor force. See the Data Appendix for remaining details.
      Regional Economic Information System (REIS) The metropolitan-area measures
of expenditures on public assistance programs are computed by aggregating the county-
level aggregate data in the REIS. The REIS contains annual county-level data on total

where 'i;k;t is the employment share of industry k in city i and      i;k;t is the national employment share
of industry k excluding city i.
  18
     The 2007 American Community Survey (ACS) is included as a robustness check. The 1970 Census is
not used at all because it identi…es only a small subset of the MSAs that appear in later years.



                                                     15
expenditures broken down by transfer program (e.g., food stamps, income maintenance pro-
grams, public medical bene…ts, veterans bene…ts, SSI bene…ts).                 Counties are aggregated
into metropolitan areas using the 1990 Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) de…nitions. Be-
cause of the di¢ culty in aggregating counties into MSAs within Alaska and Virginia during
this time period, MSAs in these states are dropped from the baseline sample. Though the
data are not disaggregated below the county-level, the data are based on government agency
reports and are therefore quite reliable.          According to recent work by Meyer, Mok, and
Sullivan (2009), aggregate expenditure data may be sometimes preferable to individual or
household survey data due to substantial underreporting in the latter.19 All transfer pro-
gram measures are adjusted per low-skill capita based on the non-college adult population.
         Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the …nal data set.


4         Results

4.1        Graphical Evidence

Figures 4 and 5 report nonparametric reduced form estimates for the primary dependent
variables.        In addition to the nonparametric estimates, linear estimates are graphed for
comparison.         The …gures also display bootstrapped (uniform) 95% con…dence intervals.20
The con…dence intervals are very wide at the extremes, making it di¢ cult to reject the null
hypothesis that the data are described by any linear relationship. However, in some cases the
con…dence intervals reject the speci…c linear relationship estimated using a parametric linear
model, though this visual test ignores estimation error in the linear model. Consequently,
the nonparametric speci…cation tests reported below will be useful in assessing whether the
data reject the null hypothesis that the parametric linear model is appropriate.21

    19
     Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2009) …nd substantial underreporting of bene…t receipt in a wide range of
data sets, including the CPS, PSID, SIPP, PSID, and the Consumer Expenditure Survey for a wide range
of transfer programs. They also document that the under-reporting is not consistent over time.
  20
     The bootstrapped con…dence intervals are computed based on 10,000 replications, where MSAs are sam-
pled with replacement. In each bootstrap step, an undersmoothed local linear bandwidth is chosen following
Hall (1992). That paper reports Monte Carlo results which suggest that undersmoothing produces con…-
dence interval estimates with greater coverage accuracy than con…dence intervals obtained by explicit bias
correction. The bandwidth of the Epanechnikov kernel used for point estimation is 0:041; the undersmoothed
kernel bandwidth is 0:75 0:041 = 0:031.
  21
     In all …gures, the nonparametric estimates are local linear regressions. The nonparametric reduced form
estimates are also constrained to be monotonic following the rearrangement procedure of Chernozhukov,



                                                    16
      Overall, across all of the graphs the only clear evidence of an asymmetric response is
for employment and population.           The population and employment graphs show a convex
relationship with the labor demand instrumental variable. By contrast, there is no evidence
of a similar asymmetric relationship for housing values, rental prices, or any measure of wages
(wage measures are de…ned below). As shown by the simulated data in Figure 3, these results
are consistent with a concave housing supply curve and limited mobility costs. In order to
formally test for the existence of an asymmetric response (and measure the magnitude of the
asymmetry when it exists), the next subsection reports results from quadratic speci…cations
and nonparametric speci…cation tests.


4.2     Reduced Form Results

This section reports estimates of equation (7) above to investigate the responsiveness of
wages, employment, and population to changes in local labor demand. The baseline reduced
form estimating equation is reproduced below:


                               xit =         ^it +        ( ^it )2 +   t   +   "i;t


      The baseline results are reported in Tables 2 through 4.                 Table 2 presents results for
overall population, employment, and wages.                Column (1) shows the results for the total
population between the ages of 18 and 64.22                The estimate of            is precise and strongly
statistically signi…cant (p < 0:001), which veri…es that the measure of predicted employ-
ment changes strongly predicts actual shifts in local population. The estimate of is also
economically and statistically signi…cant (^ = 28:010, s.e. 7:905). One way to interpret
the magnitude of this estimate is to calculate the marginal e¤ect at one standard deviation
greater than zero and one standard deviation less than zero; these estimates are                       0:152
and 3:757, respectively, and the di¤erence between these estimates is strongly statistically
signi…cant (p < 0:001).23       Additionally, a nonparametric speci…cation test strongly rejects

Fernandez-Val, and Galichon (2003). The rearranged estimates are more e¢ cient under the null hypothesis
that the true relationship is (weakly) monotonic. In general, the unconstrained nonparametric estimates
are very similar.
  22
     Results using the population between the ages of 25 and 54 are very similar.
  23
     Note that the p-value for the test of whether the marginal e¤ects are the same at one standard deviation
above and below zero is exactly the same as the p-value for the test of whether the quadratic term is



                                                     17
the null hypothesis that the relationship is linear in favor of a nonparametric alternative
(p < 0:001).24 In other words, the results in this column suggest that positive changes in
local labor demand increase population more than negative changes reduce population. The
results for employment in column (2) show evidence of a similar convex relationship. The
results in column (3) using the percentage point change in the employment-to-population
ratio show that not all of the reduction in local employment from an adverse shock comes
from net out-migration; there is also a decline in labor force participation.
    The remaining columns of Table 2 explore the consequences of local labor demand shifts
on wages. There are (at least) two di¢ culties in constructing an appropriate wage measure.
The …rst di¢ culty is that the labor demand shock may induce compositional changes in
the population, so that the change in the average wage will be confounded by composition
e¤ects. The second di¢ culty is that changes in labor force participation reduce income per
adult, but would be excluded using a measure of average wages based only on employed
workers.
    I approach these problems by …rst presenting two measures of changes in wage income
which should represent upper and lower bounds of the true change in income holding char-
acteristics of the workers …xed.          The …rst measure (following Bound and Holzer (2000))
is the total wage income per 18-64 adult. This measure will account for demand-induced
changes in labor force participation but will also include compositional changes. The results
are in column (4) and show a large e¤ect of local labor demand on wages ( ^ = 0:959, s.e.
0:137).    The second measure (following Shapiro (2003) and Albouy (2009a, 2009b)) uses
the individual-level census data and regresses log wages of employed workers on a large set
of controls and MSA …xed e¤ects (see Data Appendix for details). The MSA …xed e¤ect
estimated from this regression is a composition-adjusted measure of the wage premium which
I de…ne as the “residualized wage”.25            The results in column (5) using this measure show

statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from zero.
  24
     I use the nonparametric speci…cation test procedure suggested by Ellison and Ellison (2000), which
groups the data into “bins” and creates a test statistic that is asymptotically distributed as a standard
normal random variable. To my knowledge, there is a not a data-driven procedure to select the proper bin
width; therefore, I view the nonparametric speci…cation test as complementary to the quadratic speci…cation.
While the nonparametric speci…cation test does not rely on a speci…c parametric alternative, it is not possible
to ensure that I have the right size and power in constructing my statistical tests. In almost all of the results
that follow, inference based on the quadratic speci…cation and the nonparametric speci…cation test is similar.
  25
     This measure is similar to the local wage premiums calculated in Shapiro (2003) and Albouy (2009a,



                                                       18
a much smaller wage response ( ^ = 0:353, s.e. 0:086). However, this second measure does
not account for changes in labor force participation.               Assuming that at least some of the
observed change in labor force participation is involuntary, then this measure will understate
the total e¤ect of the demand shock. To address this concern, I take the residualized wage
measure and multiply it by the observed labor force participation rate.26 I call this the “ad-
justed wage” and use this as the preferred wage measure. This measure accounts for both
compositional changes in the labor force in response to the shock as well as changes in labor
force participation, and therefore essentially assumes that reservation wages are negligible.
Consequently, I expect this measure to provide an overestimate of mobility costs when I ulti-
mately estimate the full model via GMM. As a way of bounding the estimated magnitude of
mobility costs, I also report GMM estimates which use the residualized wage instead of the
adjusted wage. The residualized wage will give a lower bound on the estimated magnitude
of mobility costs, as it assumes reservation wages are approximately equal to accepted wages
for all employed workers.
   As expected, the magnitude of the e¤ect of local labor demand for adjusted wages lies
in between the other two wage measures ( ^ = 0:520, s.e. 0:109). Since the magnitude of
changes in labor force participation is modest, the estimates for adjusted wages are closer to
the estimates for residualized wages than the estimates using the per capita income measure.
Regardless of the measure of wages used, however, the important conclusion that emerges
from columns (4) through (6) is that there is no evidence of an asymmetric response of wages
to shifts in local labor demand in any of the wage measures. It is only population and local
employment which respond asymmetrically.
    Table 3 reports results on population, employment and wages separately for high-skill
and low-skill workers.        I de…ne low-skill workers as those without a college degree, and
high-skill workers as those with at least a college degree.                 The patterns in Table 2 are
reproduced when looking separately within each skill group: population and employment
respond asymmetrically, and there is no evidence of a similar asymmetric response for either

2009b). This measure does not control for unobservable changes in the composition of labor force. If
unobservable changes in composition of labor force move in the same direction as observable changes, then
the measured response of wages will be upward biased, and estimates of mobility costs will be conservative.
  26
     Note that when I present results by skill below, I use the labor force participation rate in the given skill
group to adjust the residualized wage measure.




                                                       19
high-skill or low-skill wages.       Furthermore, the magnitude of the wage e¤ects are similar
across high-skill and low-skill workers, consistent with the assumption that the labor demand
shifts are factor-neutral.27 Additionally, columns (5) and (6) show that the skill composition
of the adult population and labor force also responds asymmetrically.                      In other words,
negative shocks reduce college share of adult population more than positive shocks increase
college share.
    Next, Table 4 looks at three important non-labor outcomes: real estate rental prices,
housing values, and aggregate expenditures on public assistance programs. The measures
of average rental prices and housing values are purged of observable changes in the quality
of the housing stock following a similar procedure to the one used to create the residualized
wage measure (see Data Appendix for details). Column (1) in Table 4 reports results for
rental prices, which respond strongly to local labor demand. The results for housing values
in column (2) are similar in magnitude, though somewhat less precise. As with the wage
results, there is no evidence of an asymmetric response in either column; the estimates of
  are statistically insigni…cant and at most modest in magnitude, and the nonparametric
speci…cation tests fail to reject the parametric (linear) model in both columns.28 Appendix
Table A2 reports similar results using the unconditional average rental prices and average
housing values, as well as results using the repeated-sales housing price index (HPI) published
by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), formerly the O¢ ce of Federal Housing
Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). Consistent with the results in Table 4, there is no evidence
of an asymmetric response in any of these alternative speci…cations.
    Lastly, column (3) reports estimates using aggregate expenditures on Food Stamps and
Income Maintenance Programs.              The results show that expenditures on these programs
respond strongly to local labor market conditions. The estimated magnitude of the response
is large ( ^ = 2:367) and implies that a 1% decline in local labor demand increases aggregate
expenditures on these two programs by 2:4%.                Though the quadratic term is marginally
signi…cant (p = 0:074), the nonparametric test does not reject the linear model (p = 0:241),

  27
     Results from stacked regressions do reject that the average wage response for high-skill workers is the
same as the average wage response for low-skill workers (p = 0:523).
  28
     Additionally, results from stacked regressions reject that the quadratic terms are the same for population
and rental prices (p = 0:0004) and reject that the quadratic terms are the same for population and housing
values (p = 0:001).




                                                      20
suggesting that the nonlinear relationship estimated in the quadratic speci…cation is not
robust.29
         A setting in which population and employment respond asymmetrically to positive and
negative labor demand shocks while wages, rental prices, and housing values respond sym-
metrically is consistent with the model simulation where mobility costs are limited and the
housing supply curve is concave. Before moving beyond this qualitative conclusion to quan-
titative estimates of mobility costs and housing supply curve parameters, I next document
that these reduced form results are not driven by unobserved trends, outliers, sample selec-
tion, or heterogeneous industry-speci…c e¤ects. After that, I conclude by estimating the full
model above using a nonlinear GMM estimator.


5         Robustness

5.1        Industry Trends

The main results in Table 2 emphasize the importance of asymmetric employment and
population responses to local labor demand shocks, and the absence of a similar asymmetric
response for wages, housing prices, and transfer payments. The key identifying assumption
in interpreting these results is that equally-sized positive and negative predicted changes
in local employment represent shifts in local labor demand of plausibly equal magnitude.
Because the predicted changes are formed by interacting cross-sectional variation in industrial
composition with national changes in industry shares, an obvious concern is that qualitatively
di¤erent industries are declining and expanding. If these industries would not be expected
to have otherwise identical responses to shifts in local labor demand (perhaps because of
di¤erences in relative demand for high-skill labor, the amount of speci…c human capital in
the industry, or the ability of …rms in the industry to respond and adjust to shocks), then
this would cast doubt on the interpretation of the results as tracing out an asymmetric local
labor supply curve.
         To investigate this concern, I categorize industries based on their decadal changes in total

    29
    Appendix Table A3 reports estimates for various other transfer programs, including Medicare, Disability
Bene…ts, SSI, and Veterans Bene…ts, and the results are qualitatively similar. I focus on Food Stamps and
Income Maintenance income because these programs are explicitly designed to smooth consumption.




                                                    21
national employment. Industries are grouped into one of four categories:

   1. Persistently expanding/declining industries. Industries where employment either in-
         creased in every decade or decreased in every decade.

   2. Stable industries.       Industries where employment did not increase or decrease more
         than 20% in any of the decades.30

   3. Volatile industries. Industries that experienced employment growth of more than 20%
         and decreases of more than 20% during the sample period.

   4. Other industries. Industries not otherwise categorized.

       The top twenty industries according to average national employment share in each of
these categories are listed in Appendix Table A1. The industries in each of the categories
conform to expectations given the secular industry trends during this time period. Persis-
tently expanding industries are concentrated in services, health care, data processing, and
leisure goods, while persistently contracting industries are in apparel, publishing, manufac-
turing, and tobacco. Volatile industries include natural resource industries such as oil and
gas extraction as well as defense industries. I begin by constructing predicted employment
excluding variation in national employment shares for industries that are persistently ex-
panding or persistently declining.31 The resulting relative demand index is purged of any
variation caused by secular trends in health care, services, and manufacturing.                      Table 5
reports results from estimating equation (7) using this alternative measure of predicted em-
ployment as an instrumental variable for local labor demand. Panel A reports results with
the change in adult population as the dependent variable. Column (1) reproduces the results
from column (1) in Table 2 for comparison. Column (2) reports results using the predicted
employment measure that does not use any variation from industries which are persistently

  30
     If industries are classi…ed as both persistently expanding/declining and stable, I categorize the industry
as stable. This de…nition and the cuto¤ of 20% were chosen to give roughly equal-sized categories. Results
are similar with nearby cuto¤s.
  31
     Formally, predicted employment growth is computed by using only the subset of industries which pass
a given …lter:
                                           X                 i;k;t    i;k;t
                                    0
                                    i;t =        'i;k;t
                                                                  i;k;t
                                       k2K 0 K

where K is the set of all industries and K 0 is the set of industries which pass the …lter.



                                                      22
expanding or persistently declining. The point estimates in column (2) are fairly similar to
the baseline estimates reproduced in column (1). Columns (3) through (5) report results
excluding each of the other industry categories when constructing predicted employment,
and the results are also quite similar to the baseline results in column (1). I interpret these
results as suggesting that the estimated asymmetric population response is not primarily
caused by heterogeneous industry-speci…c e¤ects.
      A related concern is that because of the way that the IPUMS creates consistent industry
codes across time, there are “catch-all”industry codes that collect industries which are not
otherwise categorized. I label an industry code a catch-all industry code if it contains the
word “miscellaneous” or contains the su¢ x “not elsewhere categorized.” These catch-all
industry codes make up roughly 10% of the industry codes. These catch-all categories may
represent di¤erent collections of industries in di¤erent decades, which may bias the main
estimates. To investigate this concern, I create an alternative measure of predicted employ-
ment which does not use any variation in national employment shares of these industries.
The estimates using this predicted employment measure are reported in column (6) and are
similar to the results in column (1), suggesting that there is no signi…cant bias from including
these catch-all categories.
      Panels B and C of Table 5 report results which repeat this exercise using adjusted wages
and rental prices as the dependent variables, respectively.               Consistent with the baseline
results in Tables 2 and 4, none of the estimates in any of the columns show evidence of an
asymmetric relationship between adjusted wages or rental prices and labor demand.32


5.2     Alternative Speci…cations

I next turn to an investigation of the robustness of the main results by reporting alternative
speci…cations which vary the sample de…nition and the set of time-varying controls used.
The purpose of these speci…cations is primarily to investigate the possibility of sample se-
lection bias and the potential bias from unobserved trends that are correlated with shifts in
local labor demand.       As with Table 5, Table 6 reports results using population, adjusted

  32
     Interestingly, the magnitude of the (linear) response of adjusted wages and rental prices to local labor
demand varies somewhat depending on the industries used to generate predicted changes in employment,
suggesting that the strength of the proxy for local labor demand may vary depending on the set of industries
used to generate the proxy.



                                                     23
wages, and rental prices (respectively) as the dependent variables in each of the panels. All
columns report results from estimating variants of equation (7). In all panels, column (1)
reports the baseline results for comparison. Column (2) reports results from adding data on
the 2000-2007 changes.33 Column (3) creates “pseudo-MSAs”by grouping together all indi-
viduals in a state who are not in an MSA. Column (4) reports long-di¤erence results (using
the 1980-2000 change) rather than the stacked decadal changes as in the baseline speci…ca-
tion. Columns (5) and (6) report results including alternative sets of geographic and time
…xed e¤ects.      Column (5) includes region …xed e¤ects for each of the nine census regions
which control for region-speci…c linear time trends, while column (6) includes controls for
MSA-speci…c linear time trends. Column (7) reports results which test for the importance
of outliers. This column drops the 5% of the data with the largest magnitude changes in
local labor demand.       Finally, column (8) uses the County Business Patterns (CBP) data
set to construct the local labor demand instrument rather than using Census data (see Data
Appendix for details). The CBP data contain …ner industry categories, which in principle
could reduce measurement error, but there are two primary drawbacks: …rst, there is a high
rate of suppressed data at the county-by-industry level, and, second, the county-level data
must be aggregated.
       Panel A of Table 6 reports results using population as the dependent variable. Across all
of the columns, the point estimates are very similar to the baseline speci…cation in column (1).
The results in column (6) which include MSA-speci…c linear time trends show a substantial
loss of precision, but the point estimates remain stable. The results in column (7) show that
the estimated asymmetric response is robust to dropping outlying observations, suggesting
that the convex population response is not primarily driven by outliers.                  The results in
column (8) show the results are similar using CBP data to construct the labor demand
instrument.
       Panels B and C of Table 6 report results using adjusted wages and rental prices (respec-
tively) as the dependent variables. The estimates of             are never statistically signi…cant at
conventional levels, nor are even consistently the same sign across columns. In other words,
there is no consistent evidence of an asymmetric response of adjusted wages or rental prices

  33
    The 2000-2007 changes are translated into implied decadal changes by …rst calculating annual percentage
changes.



                                                    24
to local labor demand shocks.
    Lastly, Appendix Table A4 reports speci…cations which drop each one (of nine) census
regions. This table con…rms that the results do not appear to be driven by any particular
region.
    In summary, the reduced form patterns of a signi…cant asymmetric response of population
and employment to changes in local labor demand appear robust and contrast sharply with
a lack of similar asymmetric responses for wages, housing values, and rental prices.


6    GMM Estimates

The reduced form results presented above directly test for the existence of asymmetric re-
sponses of wages, population, employment, and housing prices to symmetric labor demand
shocks. While revealing, these results do not estimate any of the economic parameters in the
theoretical model and are therefore not quantitatively informative about the distribution of
mobility costs by skill and the actual incidence of labor demand shocks. This section reports
results from a joint estimation of the full model using a nonlinear, simultaneous equations
GMM estimator. The econometric setup follows from the theoretical model presented above
and imposes moment conditions which can be used to identify the parameters of interest.
In particular, the GMM estimator can recover ‡exible estimates of the housing supply curve
and mobility cost functions for high-skill and low-skill workers. These estimates can be used
to assess the relative importance of housing expenditures, transfer payments, and mobility
costs in generating the observed migration patterns in the data.     Additionally, because I
parameterize the model so that there are more moment conditions than (remaining) para-
meters to estimate, the GMM estimator admits a chi-squared overidenti…cation test of the
full model.
    To implement the GMM estimator, the following equations (derived from equations (1)




                                             25
through (6) in the model above) are used:


   ewH
    it =         witH      (      it   + ((    1) + (      )( )) Hit + (         )(1    ) Lit )

       ewL
        it =     witL      (      it   + ((    1) + (      )(1     )) Lit + (      )( ) Hit )

        etit =   tLit           witL

        ehit =   phit +        H s ( phit )   ( ( witH +    Hit ) + (1    )((1   sLt ) witL + sLt tLit +         Lit ))

       eH
        it =     witH      sH
                            h phit + cH ( Hit )

        eLit = (1       sLt ) witL + sLt tLit     sLh phit + cL ( Lit )


where i indexes cities, t indexes time, and                ejit represent error terms uncorrelated with shifts
in labor demand.34 These equations jointly solve the local general equilibrium problem of
how wages, employment, housing prices, and transfer payments respond to an exogenous
labor demand shift                 it .   The six endogenous variables are the following:      phit ,   witH ,      witL ,
  Hit ,     Lit , and          tLit . Note that the error terms are allowed to be freely correlated with
each other, which gives rise to simultaneity bias that the GMM estimator is intended to
address. The unknowns in the model are the following parameters and functions:

          Transfer income and housing expenditure shares (sLt , sLh , sH
                                                                       h )


          Aggregate share parameters ( , )

          Labor demand parameters ( , , , )

          Transfer payment elasticity ( )

          Mobility cost functions (cL ( ) and cH ( ))

          Housing supply function ( H s ( ))

  34
    Each of these equations can be derived formally by including error terms which proportionally shift
production, housing demand, housing supply, transfer payments, and indirect utility. For example, re-de…ne
                                                                                        L
the equilibrium condition for transfer payments as follows: tL      t
                                                              it = eit T
                                                                         L   L
                                                                            wit  , where etit is a random
variable which represents unobservable shocks to transfer payment expenditures (and E[et ] = 1). Totally
di¤erentiating this condition gives the following expression: tL
                                                               it =
                                                                     L     L
                                                                         wit + etit , which is the equation
used in the GMM estimation.




                                                             26
    In order to reduce the number of parameters to estimate, I …rst impose values of sLt , sLh ,
sH                                           L
 h based on external information. I compute st = 0:05 by dividing aggregate expenditures

on Food Stamps and Income Maintenance Programs by the sum of these expenditures and
aggregate low-skill wage income. For the housing expenditure shares, I use sLh = 0:34 for
non-college households and sH
                            h = 0:30 for college-educated households based on the data

presented in Section 2.35
    For the labor demand curve, I compute                  = 0:37 based on average wages for high-skill
and low-skill workers and average share of high-skill workers in the adult population.36                     I
compute      = 0:34 based on the average wages, the skill share, and the housing expenditure
shares from above.37 I choose         = 0:29 based on Katz and Murphy (1992).38 This leaves the
returns to scale parameter ( ) to be estimated. Although this parameter will be estimated
from functional form assumptions, it is still useful to include the two moments of the labor
demand curve to check the overall …t of the model.39 I also report results below which drop
the labor demand moments.40
    Finally, I choose the following functional forms for the mobility cost functions and housing

   35
      Average household income is $82,439 for high-skill households in the baseline sample and is $48,456
for low-skill households. Assuming sh = 0:30 for high-skill households and income elasticity of 0:8, then
sh = 0:34 for low-skill households.
   36
      I compute the wage premium ( ) as 1:75, which is the average wages of college-educated workers divided
by the average wages of non-college workers. I next compute the average share (over this time period) of
college-educated workers in the labor force ( ) as 0:25. Using the formula for in Section 2, this gives
   = 0:37.
   37
      The aggregate housing demand share parameter is computed using given by = sH     h =(  sH
                                                                                              h +(1    )sLh ).
   38
      Katz and Murphy (1992) estimate the elasticity of substitution between high-skill and low-skill labor
( H;L ) to be 1:4. This gives = 1 1= H;L = 0:29.
   39
      Since the instrumental variable shifts the labor demand curve, parameters of the labor demand curve
itself are identi…ed from functional form assumptions.
   40
      Because the labor demand instrument is measured with error, when using it in the GMM estimation, I
rescale it by regressing adjusted wages on the instrument and scale the instrument so that this regression
with the rescaled instrument would give a coe¢ cient of 1:0. A more rigorous alternative is to modify the
labor demand moments to include an additional parameter ( ) as follows:

                 ewH
                  it =
                            H
                           wit   (    it   + ((   1) + (      )( ))   Hit + (      )(1   ) Lit )
                 ewL
                  it   =    L
                           wit   (    it   + ((   1) + (      )(1     )) Lit + (     )( ) Hit )

  This procedure yields very similar results.




                                                       27
supply elasticity:

                                                           j
                                                               (exp( j x)              1)
                                         cj (x) =                          j                        j 2 fL; Hg
                                                           h               h
                                            s                  (exp(           x)          1)
                                        H (x) =                            h



         These functions are the exponential transformations suggested by Manly (1976), which
                                                                                                                                                       j
represent Box-Cox transformations of exponentiated variables and are de…ned so that if                                                                     =
                                                     j
0, then the functions simplify to                        x. These functions are ‡exible enough to accommodate
interesting curvature with only two parameters, and they are everywhere monotonic and have
continuous …rst derivatives, which greatly simpli…es the computation. Ultimately, there are
                                                                   h           h       L        L       H       H
eight remaining parameters to estimate f                               ,           ,       ,        ,       ,       ,     , g: two housing supply
                           h       h                                                                                        L        L
curve parameters (             ,       ), two low-skill mobility cost parameters (                                              ,        ), two high-skill
                                        H       H
mobility cost parameters (                  ,       ), the responsiveness of transfer payments to low-skill wages
( ), and the returns to scale parameter ( ).
         The resulting GMM estimator solves a nonlinear, simultaneous equations problem, so
in order to estimate the nonlinear parameters I need to take nonlinear functions of the
instrumental variable (                ) to achieve identi…cation.                                  I use           , (     )2 , (        )3 , (   )4 , and
(        )5 as instrumental variables.41 This results in 30 moment conditions (the …ve polynomial
functions of the instrument                     the six error terms).                           The full model is estimated using a
standard two-step GMM procedure (see Section A.5 of the Online Appendix for details of
this procedure).
         The GMM estimates are presented in Table 7.                                            The …rst row presents the preferred
speci…cation using the external estimates discussed above.                                                      Columns (1) and (2) report
estimates of the housing supply curve. The estimates suggest that the housing supply curve
                  h
is concave (          = 6:306, s.e. 1:774).                One way to interpret the housing supply coe¢ cients
is to compute the increase in housing supply when housing prices exogenously rise by 20%
(24:1%) and compare it to the decrease in housing supply when housing prices decline by
20% ( 6:8%). In other words, the magnitude of housing supply response is about four times
larger for an increase in housing prices than for an equal-sized decrease in housing prices.

    41
   Instead of using simple polynomial functions, I have experimented with various orthogonal polynomials
(Chebyshev polynomials, Legendre polynomials, and Hermite polynomials), and the results are very similar.



                                                                           28
       The estimates of the mobility cost function parameters (columns (3) through (6)) give
no evidence of an asymmetric mobility cost function for either high-skill or low-skill work-
ers; the estimates suggest that the mobility cost functions are approximately linear. The
                        L         H
point estimates for         and       are precisely estimated and statistically signi…cantly di¤erent
from zero, suggesting the existence of non-negligible mobility costs. To get a sense of the
magnitudes, the point estimates imply that the 10th percentile of mobility costs in a city
(i.e., the marginal migrant after 10% of the population has out-migrated following a neg-
ative shock) is roughly 17:4% of annual income for high-skill workers and 17:0% of annual
income for low-skill workers.42         In other words, despite the fact that low-skill workers are
disproportionately likely to remain in declining cities following negative shocks, the point
estimates imply that high-skill workers have very similar mobility costs as a fraction of in-
come (and therefore that low-skill workers have lower absolute mobility costs on average).
Column (8) reports the estimated transfer payment elasticity, which is quantitatively large
and precisely estimated; the coe¢ cient implies that a 1% decline in low-skill wages increases
transfer payment expenditures by 3:8% (s.e. 0:5%).             Column (9) reports estimates of the
returns to scale parameter ( = 1:038, s.e. 0:025), which suggests that returns to scale are
approximately constant; this is also consistent with the reduced form results, which found
no evidence of an asymmetric response of wages.43 Lastly, the results in column (10) show
that the overidenti…cation test does not reject the null hypothesis that the deviations of the
empirical moments from the model are due to chance (p = 0:515).
       The remainder of Table 7 reports estimates of the full model under alternative economic
assumptions.       The second row reports estimates assuming that both housing expenditure
share and public assistance expenditures do not di¤er by skill and are negligible (i.e., sH
                                                                                          h =

sLh = 10    6
                and sH    L      6
                     t = st = 10 ). These estimates verify that ignoring the welfare e¤ects

of housing price adjustments and changes in expenditures on public assistance programs
results in much larger estimates of mobility costs for both high-skill and low-skill workers.
In this scenario, the mobility cost estimates for low-skill workers are signi…cantly larger

  42
     I assume the marginal migrant has 25 years of working life remaining and thus must trade o¤ remaining
to face permanently lower wage and employment opportunities against paying the one-time mobility cost to
out-migrate and avoid the adverse wage and employment consequences.
  43
     Wages did not respond asymmetrically but population and employment did, which suggests constant
returns to scale. If there were decreasing returns to scale, then the asymmetric response of employment to
the local labor demand shock would imply an asymmetric wage response, as well.



                                                    29
                     L                           H
in magnitude (           =       0:201 versus        =    0:107).    Also, the di¤erence between these
coe¢ cients is highly signi…cant (p < 0:001).                 To compare to the baseline estimates, the
mobility costs are roughly three times larger for low-skill workers and two times larger for
high-skill workers when ignoring housing costs and transfer payments.44
       The third and fourth rows report model estimates when only housing and only transfers
are “shut down”, respectively. The estimated mobility cost functions from these rows and
the …rst two rows are graphed in Figure 6. Both the …gure and the model estimates (see
column (9)) suggest that transfer payments are responsible for a majority of the relative
di¤erence in mobility by skill. However, the magnitudes of mobility cost estimates are much
larger for both types of workers when housing expenditures are ignored. In other words, the
asymmetric population response for both high-skill and low-skill workers is primarily due to
the asymmetric housing supply curve, while the di¤erential response by skill is primarily due
to transfer payments.
       The …fth row assumes the demand for housing is homothetic so that the housing expen-
diture shares are the same across the two skill groups. I choose sLh = sH
                                                                        h = 0:33 to match

the average housing expenditure share across the entire population. The results are fairly
similar to the baseline results in the …rst row, implying that the non-homotheticity assumed
in the baseline model does not substantially account for the di¤erential out-migration rates
by skill.
       Rows 6 and 7 in Table 7 report estimates which impose alternative values of             H;L .   First,
I impose      H;L   = 20, which corresponds to the two types of labor being close to perfect
substitutes, and the results are fairly similar.              The next row imposes     H;L   = 0:1, which
corresponds to the two types being close to perfect complements, and the housing supply
curve estimates are much noisier.               Interestingly, the …t of the model is best when using
 H;L    = 1:4 (row 1) following Katz and Murphy (1992), as opposed using either of the two
extreme values of        H;L .

       The next row of Table 7 (row 8) uses an alternative measure of wages.                 As discussed
above, the preferred measure of wages (“adjusted wages”) assumes that most of the observed

  44
     The estimated mobility cost functions are also statistically signi…cantly convex, implying that the mo-
bility cost of the marginal out-migrant rises faster than the marginal in-migrant, although the magnitude of
the convexity is not large.




                                                         30
change in labor force participation is involuntary. This measure was chosen to provide an
upper bound of estimated mobility costs. As an alternative, row 7 reports results using the
“residualized wage”measure (see Section 4 for de…nition). Since residualized wages do not
account for changes in labor force participation, the estimated mobility cost parameters are
much lower. In fact, using this alternative wage measure, I cannot reject the null hypothesis
that mobility costs are zero for low-skill workers.             Overall, I conclude that these results
suggest that mobility costs for both high-skill and low-skill workers are at most modest.
Even under the extreme assumption that reservation wages are negligible, the estimated
mobility costs are still much lower than would be implied by focusing solely on wages.45
       One use of the GMM estimates is to construct out-of-sample counterfactual simulations
of alternative policies regarding social transfers.           Figure 7 reports results from one such
simulation.     In this simulation, the system of means-tested transfers (summarized by the
parameter      ) has been replaced by a system of mobility subsidies which reduces the mobility
costs of all workers by 50%.46         Each panel in the …gure shows the response of a di¤erent
endogenous variable. The …gure shows that the mobility subsidies increase magnitude of low-
skill out-migration following adverse shocks relative to the system of means-tested transfer
payments. Therefore, the high-skill population share is much less responsive to shifts in local
labor demand with mobility subsidies. One motivation for such a policy would be if there
exist strong negative externalities from increasing the concentration of low-skill workers in a
particular area; in this case, mobility subsidies appear to provide wage insurance to low-skill
workers without di¤erentially reducing their incentive to out-migrate.

  45
      The …nal row reports estimates which drop the labor demand curve moments. The reason why alter-
native assumptions on the elasticity of substitution did not substantially a¤ect the estimated mobility cost
functions is that the labor demand moments contribute to identi…cation only indirectly through the optimal
GMM weighting matrix estimated in the …rst step of the two-step procedure. Therefore, it is not surprising
that dropping the labor demand moments entirely does not signi…cantly a¤ect the estimates of the mobility
cost functions (Table 7, row 8).
   46
      Although this is an obviously stylized form of mobility subsidies, it is not an unrealistic approximation
if the policy took the form of a tax credit that was indexed to income. Recall that mobility costs in the
model are de…ned as a fraction of annual income.




                                                      31
7         Conclusion

Low-skill workers are comparatively immobile. When labor demand slumps in a city, college-
educated workers tend to relocate whereas non-college workers are disproportionately likely
to remain to face declining wages and employment. These facts may indicate that mobility is
disproportionately costly for low-skill workers. This paper proposes and tests an alternative
explanation, which is that the incidence of adverse labor demand shocks is borne in large
part by (falling) real estate rental prices and (rising) social transfers. The spatial equilib-
rium model developed in this paper illustrates how wages, employment, population, housing
prices, and transfer payments re-equilibrate after a local labor demand shock. Appropriately
parameterized, this model identi…es both the magnitude of unobserved mobility costs by skill
and the shape of the local housing supply curve.
         Using U.S. Census data, nonlinear reduced form estimates of the e¤ect of plausibly exoge-
nous labor demand shocks document that positive labor demand shocks increase population
more than negative shocks reduce population, that this asymmetry is larger for low-skill
workers, and that such an asymmetry is absent for wages, housing values, and rental prices.
         These facts are consistent with the presence of limited mobility costs for high-skill and
low-skill workers and a concave housing supply curve (most likely due to a durable hous-
ing stock).       Estimates of a full spatial equilibrium model using a nonlinear, simultaneous
equations GMM estimator are consistent with the reduced form evidence and suggest that
the primary explanation for the comparative immobility of low-skilled workers is not higher
mobility costs per se, but rather a lower incidence of adverse local demand shocks.
         The …nding that mobility costs are limited for both high-skill and low-skill workers is
a necessary condition to be able to properly interpret changes in housing values due to
changes in observed local amenities as a valid marginal willingness to pay for the amenity
(see, for example, Chay and Greenstone (2003)).              The results in this paper suggest that
the assumption of perfect mobility may be a valid approximation in some of these hedonic
studies, especially when evaluating changes in local amenities over decadal time horizons.47

    47
    It is worth stressing that even over decadal time horizons the assumption of perfect mobility is only an
approximation. The preferred GMM estimates in this paper imply non-negligible magnitudes of mobility
costs for both high-skill and low-skill workers following large negative shocks, suggesting that it may be
appropriate to also consider hedonic models which explicitly incorporate barriers to migration when the
underlying changes in local amenities are large. See Bayer et al. (2008) for work in this direction.



                                                    32
   One important area of future work is how the incidence of local labor market shocks is
shared between homeowners and renters.       On the one hand, homeowners’ “user cost” of
housing has declined following a negative labor demand shock; on the other hand, however,
declines in housing values have a negative wealth e¤ect which may a¤ect how responsive the
household is to local labor demand shocks. A full assessment of the incidence of local labor
market shocks thus awaits further study. Another important area of future work is looking
at individual transfer programs. For example, the federal disability insurance program rules
suggest that the take-up decision is generally a once-and-for-all choice, so that disability
insurance receipt is an absorbing state (Autor and Duggan, 2003). The econometric setup
in this paper could be used to test whether positive shifts in local labor demand decrease DI
takeup by less than negative shifts increase DI takeup.
   Lastly, the …nding that mobility costs are limited suggests that transfer payments may
be signi…cantly crowding out the individual migration decision for low-skill workers, which
is consistent with the results in the recent “welfare magnetism”literature (see, for example,
Gelbach (2004)). This implies that the social e¢ ciency of public insurance programs may
depend on the geographic breadth of an adverse labor demand shock, since when a shock is
geographically broad (as during a recession), the gains to relocation are small and there is
less scope for transfer payments to crowd out migration.




                                             33
References

   Abraham, Katherine and John C. Haltiwanger. 1995. “Real Wages and the Business
Cycle.”Journal of Economic Literature, 33(3): 1215-1264.
   Albouy, David. 2009a. “The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation.” Journal
of Political Economy, 117(4): 635-667.
   Albouy, David. 2009b. “What are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and
the Capitalization of Amenity Values.” NBER Working Paper #14981.
   Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. “Trade Shocks and Labor
Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 1008-
1045.
   Autor, David and David Dorn. 2009. “Inequality and Specialization: The Growth of
Low-Skill Service Jobs in the United States,”NBER Working Paper #15150.
   Autor, David and Mark Duggan. 2006. “The Rise in Disability Rolls and the Decline
in Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157-205.
   Bayer, Patrick, Nathanial Keohane, and Christopher Timmins. 2008. “Migration and
Hedonic Valuation: The Case of Air Quality.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 58(1): 1-14.
   Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. “Who Bene…ts From State and Local Economic Development
Policies.” W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research: Kalamazoo, Mich.
   Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Larry Katz.     1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1-75.
   Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer. 2000. “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and
Labor Market Outcomes during the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1): 20-54.
   Chaudhuri, Shubham and John McLaren. 2007. “Some Simple Analytics of Trade and
Labor Mobility.”NBER Working Paper #13464.
   Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2005.. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence
from the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 376-424.
   Chernozhukov, Victor, Ivan Fernandez-Val and Alfred Galichon.     2009.   “Improving
Estimators of Monotone Functions by Rearrangement.” Biometrika, 96(3): 559-575.
   Ellison, Glenn and Sara Fisher Ellison. 2000. “A simple framework for nonparametric



                                          34
speci…cation testing.”Journal of Econometrics, 96(1): 1-23.
   Gallin, Josh. 2004. “Net Migration and Labor Market Dynamics.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 22: 1-21.
   Gelbach, Jonah. 2004. “Migration, the Lifecycle, and State Bene…ts: How Low is the
Bottom?” Journal of Political Economy. 112(5), 1091-1130.
   Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. “Urban Decline and Durable Housing.”
Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): 345-375.
   Greene, William H. 2003.      Econometric Analysis.   Fifth Edition, Prentice Hall: New
Jersey.
   Gould, Eric, David B. Mustard, and Bruce Weinberg. 2002. “Crime Rates and Local
Labor Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979-1997.” Review of Economics and
Statistics. 84(1): 45-61.
   Hall, Peter.    1992. “E¤ect of Bias Estimation on Coverage Accuracy of Bootstrap
Con…dence Intervals for a Probability Density.” Annals of Statistics, 20(2): 675-694.
   Hansen, Lars.    1982. “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
Estimators.” Econometrica, 50: 1029-1054.
   Horowitz, Joel. 2001. “The Bootstrap.” Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5.
   Hoynes, Hillary. 1999. “The Employment, Earnings, and Income of Less-Skilled Workers
over the Business Cycle.” Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper, no. 1199-99.
   Jayachandran, Seema.       2006. “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity
Shocks in Developing Countries.” Journal of Political Economy, 114(3): 2006.
   Katz, Larry and Kevin M. Murphy.         1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(1): 35-78.
   Kennan, John and James R. Walker. 2011. “The E¤ect of Expected Income on Individ-
ual Migration Decisions,”Econometrica, 79(1): 211-251.
   Kennan, John and James R. Walker. 2010. “Wages, Welfare Bene…ts and Migration,”
Journal of Econometrics, 156(1): 229-238.
   Luttmer, Erzo.      2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 963-1002.
   Malamud, Ofer and Abigail Wozniak.        2008. “The Impact of College Graduation on
Geographic Mobility: Identifying Education Using Multiple Components of Vietnam Draft



                                             35
Risk.” NBER Working Paper #16463.
   Manly, B. F. J. 1976.          “Exponential data transformations.” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Series D (The Statistician). 25(1), 37-42.
   Meyer, Bruce, Wallace K. C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “The Under-Reporting
of Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences.” Harris School Working
Paper #09.03.
   Morretti, Enrico. 2004. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence
From Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data.”Journal of Econometrics. 121(1-2).
   Morretti, Enrico. 2011. “Real Wage Inequality”, mimeo.
   Polinsky, A. Mitchell and David T. Ellwood.       1979. “An Empirical Reconciliation of
Micro and Macro Grouped Estimates of the Demand for Housing.” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 61(2): 199-205.
   Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political
Economy, 90(6): 1257-1278.
   Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2004. Integrated Public Use Mi-
crodata Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota
Population Center [producer and distributor].
   Saiz, Albert.     2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 125(3): 1253-1296.
   Saks, Raven. 2005. “Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on Metropol-
itan Area Employment Growth.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-49. Wash-
ington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
   Shapiro, Jesse.    2006. “Quality of life, productivity, and the growth e¤ects of human
capital.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2): 324-335.
   Topel, Robert H. 1986. “Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3):
S111-S143.
   Wozniak, Abigail.     2010. “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor
Market Opportunities?” Journal of Human Resources, 45(4).




                                               36
                                                         Table 1
                                                     Summary Statistics
                                                              Standard                           Percentiles
                                            N       Mean        Dev.         5th        25th        50th         75th        95th

U.S. Census Data (IPUMS)
Adult population (in millions)             645      0.425       0.856       0.060       0.093       0.177        0.392       1.477
Employment (in millions)                   645      0.303       0.596       0.041       0.067       0.127        0.283       1.036
Employment-to-population ratio             645      0.711       0.051       0.625       0.680       0.714        0.748       0.786
Income per adult (in $000s)                645     14.979       3.167      10.516      12.871      14.664       16.674      20.079
Residualized wage ($)                      645     11.545       1.207       9.801      10.718      11.399       12.304      13.712
Residualized wage, LFP adjusted ($)        645      8.225       1.131       6.593       7.496       8.142       8.911       10.095
College share of adult population          645      0.190       0.063       0.105       0.143       0.181       0.226       0.305
College share of employment                645      0.221       0.065       0.131       0.173       0.213       0.257       0.341
Average housing value (in $000s)           645     97.449      45.450      58.005      71.527      84.774      107.212     196.809
Average gross rent (in $000s)              645     5.229       1.014       4.055       4.579       5.017        5.581       7.196

REIS Data
Food stamps + Income maintenance           645      0.652       0.325       0.247       0.429       0.594       0.792       1.286
(in $000s per non-college adult)

Notes: Baseline sample is a balanced panel of 215 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), and all observations are MSA-year.
IPUMS data are the 1980, 1990, and 2000. The REIS data are county-level and annual, but are aggregated to MSAs using the 1990
MSA definitions. All dollar values in this table are nominal, but all dollar-valued variables are converted to real dollars in the
analysis. All specifications in subsequent tables are in first differences, so the three decades in this data set become two 10-year
changes (thus, N = 430 in the regressions that follow).




                                                                 37
                                                                Table 2
                                              The Effects of Local Labor Demand Shocks
                                                         (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)         (6)
                                                                                                                                   Residualized
                                                                                                                                   Wage, LFP
                                                                                                        Income        Residualized   Adjusted
                                                                                      Emp-to-Pop       per 18-64        Average     ("Adjusted
Dependent Variable:                                 Population      Employment          Ratio            Adult        Local Wage      Wage")

% Change in predicted employment           (β )             1.802             2.056           0.089           0.959            0.353            0.520
                                                          (0.445)          (0.465)          (0.038)         (0.137)          (0.086)          (0.109)
                                                          [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.019]         [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )                   28.010           32.537            1.210           0.382           -0.756            1.458
                                                          (7.905)          (9.101)          (0.797)         (2.859)          (1.643)          (2.426)
                                                          [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.130]         [0.894]          [0.646]          [0.549]

Marginal effect at −σ (A)                                  -0.152           -0.214            0.005           0.932            0.405            0.419
 (i.e., β − 2δσ )                                         (0.847)          (0.898)          (0.055)         (0.205)          (0.156)          (0.174)
                                                          [0.858]          [0.812]          [0.930]         [0.000]          [0.010]          [0.017]
Marginal effect at +σ (B)                                   3.757            4.327            0.174           0.985            0.300            0.622
 (i.e., β + 2δσ )                                         (0.535)          (0.658)          (0.077)         (0.274)          (0.130)          (0.225)
                                                          [0.000]          [0.000]          [0.026]         [0.000]          [0.022]          [0.006]

p-value of test (A) = (B)                                   0.000             0.000           0.130           0.894            0.646            0.549
p-value of nonparametric specification test                 0.000             0.000           0.259           0.492            0.628            0.451

R2                                                          0.315             0.354           0.605           0.670            0.471            0.340
N                                                             430               430             430             430              430              430

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data come from IPUMS 1980, 1990, and 2000 census extracts. Final sample is
a balanced panel of 215 MSAs. Dependent variable is always the percentage change across periods, except for column (3) where it is the percentage
point change. The Residualized Wage in column (5) controls for observed compositional changes in the labor force between periods. The Adjusted
Wage in column (6) uses the Residualized Wage and additionally accounts for changes in labor force participation. The % Change in predicted
employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional differences in industrial composition with national changes in industry employment shares. The
nonparametric specification test tests the null hypothesis that a linear model is appropriate against a nonparametric alternative. See main text and
Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance
matrix for each metropolitan area over time, are in parenthesis and p-values are in brackets.




                                                                         38
                                                                                 Table 3
                                                                Effects of Labor Demand Shocks by Skill
                                                   (1)       (2)             (3)       (4)               (5)          (6)               (7)        (8)             (9)      (10)
                                                 Adult Population           Total Employed              College Share of …            Residualized Wage           Adjusted Wage
                                                            Non-                      Non-             … Adult     … Total                        Non-                      Non-
Dependent Variable:                             College   College          College   College          Population Employed             College    College         College   College
% Change in predicted empl.         (β )            1.925        1.609         2.196        1.860            0.051         0.039          0.296        0.346         0.467        0.514
                                                  (0.544)      (0.436)        (0.553)      (0.457)         (0.024)        (0.027)       (0.080)      (0.085)       (0.100)      (0.107)
                                                  [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]      [0.000]         [0.036]        [0.151]       [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
(% Change in predicted empl.)2 (δ )               35.204       28.057         36.980       32.896           -0.816         -1.022        -1.322       -0.829        -0.498        1.525
                                                 (10.363)      (7.692)      (10.993)       (8.834)         (0.349)        (0.376)       (1.399)      (1.628)       (2.011)      (2.372)
                                                  [0.001]      [0.000]       [0.001]       [0.000]         [0.020]        [0.007]       [0.346]      [0.611]       [0.805]      [0.521]

Marginal effect at −σ (A)                          -0.531       -0.349         -0.384       -0.436           0.108          0.110         0.389        0.404         0.502        0.408
                                                  (0.989)      (0.844)        (0.999)      (0.892)         (0.033)        (0.038)       (0.140)      (0.153)       (0.168)      (0.169)
                                                  [0.592]      [0.679]        [0.701]      [0.625]         [0.001]        [0.004]       [0.006]      [0.009]       [0.003]      [0.017]
Marginal effect at +σ (B)                           4.382        3.566          4.777        4.155          -0.006         -0.032         0.204        0.288         0.432        0.621
                                                  (0.812)      (0.494)        (0.889)      (0.619)         (0.035)        (0.038)       (0.110)      (0.129)       (0.176)      (0.222)
                                                  [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]      [0.000]         [0.862]        [0.397]       [0.066]      [0.027]       [0.015]      [0.006]

p-value of test (A) = (B)                           0.001        0.000         0.001        0.000            0.020         0.007          0.346        0.611         0.805        0.521
p-value of nonparam. specification test             0.000        0.000         0.000        0.000            0.134         0.073          0.621        0.612         0.605        0.428

R2                                                  0.558        0.240         0.569        0.262            0.772         0.751          0.432        0.659         0.472        0.210
N                                                     430          430           430          430              430           430            430          430           430          430

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data come from IPUMS 1980, 1990, and 2000 census extracts. Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs.
Dependent variable is always the percentage change across periods, except in columns (5) and (6) which report percentage point changes in the college share. The % Change in
predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional differences in industrial composition with national changes in industry employment shares. See Table 2, main text, and
Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area
over time, are in parenthesis and p-values are in brackets.




                                                                                           39
                                       Table 4
                 Effects of Labor Demand Shocks on Housing Market
                          and Public Assistance Expenditures
                                                           (1)                (2)                (3)
                                                                                            Food Stamps +
                                                      Residualized       Residualized          Income
                                                        Rental             Housing           Maintenance
Dependent Variable:                                      Prices            Values            Expenditures

% Change in predicted employment            (β )                 0.842              0.714          -2.367
                                                              (0.151)           (0.360)           (0.615)
                                                              [0.000]           [0.048]           [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )                       -0.999            -2.765           -21.779
                                                              (2.758)           (6.310)          (12.139)
                                                              [0.717]           [0.662]           [0.074]

Marginal effect at −σ (A)                                       0.912             0.907            -0.847
                                                              (0.243)           (0.580)           (1.030)
                                                              [0.000]           [0.119]           [0.412]
Marginal effect at +σ (B)                                       0.773             0.521            -3.887
                                                              (0.247)           (0.558)           (1.064)
                                                              [0.002]           [0.351]           [0.000]

p-value of test (A) = (B)                                        0.717              0.662           0.074
p-value of nonparametric specification test                      0.596              0.295           0.241

R2                                                               0.099              0.144           0.403
N                                                                  430                430             430

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data come from IPUMS 1980,
1990, and 2000 census extracts and the REIS database. The REIS database contains total county-level
expenditures on Food Stamps and Income Maintenance programs. These data are aggregated to MSAs
using 1990 MSA definition and adjusted per non-college capita using MSA population estimates from the
Census. Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs. Dependent variable is always the percentage
change across periods. The % Change in predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional
differences in industrial composition with national changes in industry employment shares. See Table 2,
main text, and Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard
errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area over time,
are in parenthesis and p-values are in brackets.




                                                    40
                                                 Table 5
                        Effects of Alternative Measures of Labor Demand Shocks
                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                  Industries Used to Construct Change in Predicted Employment
                                                    All       Drop      Drop       Drop       Drop      Drop
                                                 Industries Trending Volatile     Stable     Other Catch-All

                        Panel A: Dependent Variable is % Change in Population
% Change in predicted employment    (β )    1.802       3.768     2.170     1.855                     1.692    2.196
                                                    (0.445) (0.667) (0.538)             (0.455)     (0.578) (0.545)
                                                    [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]             [0.000]     [0.004] [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )             28.010   30.589   35.251            30.662      45.861   43.311
                                                    (7.905) (10.665) (13.351)           (8.727)    (12.455) (13.348)
                                                    [0.000] [0.005] [0.009]             [0.001]     [0.000] [0.001]
p-value of nonparametric specification test           0.000       0.012       0.002       0.013       0.000       0.000

                       Panel B: Dependent Variable is % Change in Adjusted Wage
% Change in predicted employment     (β )     0.520      1.180     0.388    0.532                     0.478       0.687
                                                    (0.109)     (0.208)     (0.131)     (0.102)     (0.134)     (0.126)
                                                    [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.003]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )              1.458       2.543      -0.689       1.909       3.325       0.944
                                                    (2.426)     (4.083)     (2.766)     (2.274)     (3.425)     (2.674)
                                                    [0.549]     [0.534]     [0.803]     [0.402]     [0.333]     [0.724]
p-value of nonparametric specification test           0.451       0.378       0.069       0.211       0.100       0.193

                       Panel C: Dependent Variable is % Change in Rental Prices
% Change in predicted employment    (β )    0.842       1.328     0.812      0.908                    0.727       0.994
                                                    (0.151)     (0.303)     (0.173)     (0.152)     (0.176)     (0.190)
                                                    [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )             -0.999      -6.889      -2.104       0.563       1.012      -4.079
                                                    (2.758)     (5.521)     (3.787)     (2.964)     (3.655)     (3.779)
                                                    [0.717]     [0.213]     [0.579]     [0.850]     [0.782]     [0.282]
p-value of nonparametric specification test           0.596       0.437       0.392       0.556       0.063       0.490

Notes: N = 430. All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data come from IPUMS 1980, 1990,
and 2000 census extracts. Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs. Dependent variable is always the percentage
change across periods. The % Change in predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional differences in
industrial composition with national changes in industry employment shares. Column (1) reproduces the baseline
specification; remaining columns construct predicted employment changes by excluding alternative sets of industries.
See Table 2, main text, Appendix Table A1, and Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year fixed
effects. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area over
time, are in parenthesis and p-values are in brackets.




                                                          41
                                                    Table 6
                          Alternative Sample Definitions and Alternative Specifications
                                                       (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)

                             Panel A: Dependent Variable is % Change in Population
% Change in predicted employment   (β )     1.802    1.351     1.821    2.517    1.342                      1.368      1.419     0.509
                                                     (0.445)    (0.309)   (0.414)    (0.511)   (0.547)    (0.947)    (0.674)   (0.360)
                                                     [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.015]    [0.150]    [0.036]   [0.158]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )              28.010     18.110    24.051     30.163    25.102     32.652     38.327    17.196
                                                     (7.905)    (3.823)   (7.528)    (6.297)   (7.842)   (20.344)   (22.388)   (6.200)
                                                     [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.002]    [0.000]   [0.002]    [0.110]    [0.088]   [0.006]
p-value of nonparametric specification test            0.000      0.001     0.000      0.002     0.007      0.007     0.015      0.003

                            Panel B: Dependent Variable is % Change in Adjusted Wage
% Change in predicted employment     (β )    0.520     1.224    0.432   0.242    0.590                      0.896      0.423     0.418
                                                     (0.109)    (0.542)   (0.096)    (0.101)   (0.102)    (0.245)    (0.115)   (0.091)
                                                     [0.000]    [0.025]   [0.000]    [0.017]   [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )               1.458      8.948     0.925      0.745     0.246      3.840      3.885     2.129
                                                     (2.426)    (6.080)   (2.229)    (1.240)   (2.256)    (4.521)    (3.259)   (1.316)
                                                     [0.549]    [0.143]   [0.678]    [0.548]   [0.913]    [0.397]    [0.235]   [0.107]
p-value of nonparametric specification test            0.451      0.475     0.299      0.217     0.584      0.153     0.293      0.363

                            Panel C: Dependent Variable is % Change in Rental Prices
% Change in predicted employment   (β )     0.842     0.663    0.804    0.791     0.728                     0.934      0.821     0.814
                                                     (0.151)    (0.367)   (0.135)    (0.134)   (0.145)    (0.364)    (0.173)   (0.126)
                                                     [0.000]    [0.073]   [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]    [0.011]    [0.000]   [0.000]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )              -0.999     -4.675     0.178     -3.422    -2.087      4.120      3.698     1.512
                                                     (2.758)    (5.530)   (2.645)    (1.652)   (2.546)    (5.974)    (5.080)   (1.948)
                                                     [0.717]    [0.399]   [0.946]    [0.040]   [0.413]    [0.491]    [0.467]   [0.438]
p-value of nonparametric specification test            0.596      0.162     0.412      0.136     0.591      0.240     0.317      0.184

Alternative Samples and Alternative Specifications
Baseline sample (N = 430)                         X                                               X          X         X          X
Add 2000-2007 change (N = 586)                                    X
Add in non-MSA regions of states (N = 528)                                   X
Long differences (N = 215)                                                             X
Region-specific linear time trends                                                                X
MSA-specific linear time trends                                                                              X
Drop outlying 5% shocks                                                                                                X
Predicted employment from CBP                                                                                                     X

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data come from IPUMS 1980, 1990, and 2000 census extracts.
Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs. Dependent variable is always the percentage change across periods. The % Change in
predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional differences in industrial composition with national changes in industry
employment shares. Column (1) reproduces the baseline specification; remaining columns construct predicted employment changes
using subsets of industries. See Table 2, main text, and Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year fixed effects.
Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area over time, are in parenthesis
and p-values are in brackets.



                                                                  42
                                                                                Table 7
                                                                       GMM Estimates of Full Model
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)      (8)       (9)                  (10)
                                                                                                                            Transfer
                                                 Housing Supply           High-Skill Mobility      Low-Skill Mobility       Payment Returns to    H0 :
                                                     Curve                  Cost Function            Cost Function          Elasticity Scale   σ = σH
                                                                                                                                                L
                                                                                                                                                                      χ 2 test
Row Model                                         σ   h
                                                               β   h
                                                                            σ   H
                                                                                         β   H
                                                                                                      σ   L
                                                                                                                   β   L
                                                                                                                                ψ            α        σ –σ
                                                                                                                                                       L      H
                                                                                                                                                                     statistic
 (1) Baseline Model                              1.201        6.306        -0.066      -1.044      -0.065       -0.861       -3.838        1.038       -0.001        21.088
                                                (0.407)      (1.774)       (0.016)     (0.766)     (0.019)      (0.738)      (0.447)      (0.025)      (0.015)       [0.515]
                                                [0.003]      [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.174]     [0.001]      [0.244]      [0.000]      [0.129]      [0.951]
 (2) No Housing; No Transfers                    1.009        6.472        -0.107      -0.495      -0.201       -0.900       -4.341        1.020        0.093        25.262
                                                (0.432)      (2.685)       (0.017)     (0.408)     (0.024)      (0.276)      (0.577)      (0.021)      (0.016)       [0.285]
                                                [0.020]      [0.016]       [0.000]     [0.226]     [0.000]      [0.001]      [0.000]      [0.336]      [0.000]
 (3) No Transfers                                0.872        5.604        -0.060      -1.060      -0.119       -0.938       -4.256        1.030        0.059        18.881
                                                (0.399)      (2.517)       (0.016)     (0.839)     (0.022)      (0.484)      (0.572)      (0.023)      (0.016)       [0.653]
                                                [0.030]      [0.027]       [0.000]     [0.207]     [0.000]      [0.053]      [0.000]      [0.192]      [0.000]
 (4) No Housing                                  1.060        6.436        -0.106      -0.504      -0.135       -0.775       -4.225        1.020        0.029        25.593
                                                (0.413)      (2.478)       (0.015)     (0.410)     (0.019)      (0.286)      (0.509)      (0.020)      (0.014)       [0.270]
                                                [0.011]      [0.010]       [0.000]     [0.220]     [0.000]      [0.007]      [0.000]      [0.316]      [0.042]
 (5) s H = s L = 0.33                            1.151        6.318        -0.059      -1.141      -0.067       -1.005       -3.889        1.035        0.007        20.406
                                                (0.413)      (1.875)       (0.016)     (0.875)     (0.019)      (0.739)      (0.450)      (0.024)      (0.015)       [0.558]
                                                [0.006]      [0.001]       [0.000]     [0.193]     [0.000]      [0.174]      [0.000]      [0.145]      [0.611]
 (6) σ H,L = 20                                  2.019        5.844         -0.033      0.847       -0.038       0.495       -3.626        0.994        0.005        25.320
                                                (0.654)      (1.539)       (0.013)     (0.443)     (0.015)      (0.541)      (0.455)      (0.030)      (0.005)       [0.282]
                                                [0.002]      [0.000]       [0.015]     [0.057]     [0.016]      [0.361]      [0.000]      [0.849]      [0.360]
 (7) σ H,L = 0.1                                 0.601       10.748        -0.065      -1.954      -0.066       -1.334       -3.695        1.236        0.001        38.345
                                                (0.221)      (2.128)       (0.013)     (0.810)     (0.016)      (0.667)      (0.410)      (0.020)      (0.014)       [0.017]
                                                [0.007]      [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.016]     [0.000]      [0.046]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.939]
 (8) Alternative Wage Measure                    0.662        8.611        -0.032      -3.011      -0.007       -10.391      -3.315        1.062       -0.025        26.389
      (Residualized Wages)                      (0.363)      (2.806)       (0.010)     (1.304)     (0.006)      (2.715)      (0.497)      (0.011)      (0.011)       [0.235]
                                                [0.069]      [0.002]       [0.003]     [0.021]     [0.286]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.026]
 (9) Drop Labor Demand Moments                   1.209        5.305        -0.085      -0.604      -0.079       -0.089       -4.270                    -0.006        11.892
                                                (0.700)      (3.291)       (0.022)     (0.692)     (0.023)      (0.626)      (0.448)        N/A        (0.015)       [0.537]
                                                [0.085]      [0.108]       [0.000]     [0.383]     [0.001]      [0.887]      [0.000]                   [0.677]

Notes: All rows report estimates of the full model using a nonlinear, simultaneous equations GMM estimator. Alternate specifications are presented in each row; parameter
estimates are listed in the columns. See Section 6 of main text and Section A.5 of the Online Appendix for more details. Asymptotic standard errors are in parenthesis and p-
values are in brackets. In column (8), the p-value reported is for the test of whether the point estimate is statistically significantly different from 1.

                                                                                      43
                    Figure 1: Constant Housing Supply Elasticity
       w                                                                      SL

                                                                               w+ = p+ sh

               +Δ
      DL                                                                       w0 = p0 sh
               −Δ
      c                                                                                    p−A sh
                                                                               w− =
                                                                                           p−B sh − c

                                                                                L
                            L−A LB−          L0              L+
Notes: This figure displays the equilibrium response when the housing supply elasticity is constant. The initial
equilibrium wages, labor supply, and housing prices are given by the dot in the center of the figure. An exogenous
increase in wages encourages in-migration until labor supply rises to L+ . At this point, housing prices have
risen to completely offset the increase in wages, restoring the no-arbitrage condition for workers. If there are
no mobility costs, then the equilibrium response of an equal-sized exogenous decrease in wages is symmetric,
as shown by LA − . If out-migration is costly, however, then following a negative shock, the marginal out-migrant
must be indifferent between staying and paying c to out-migrate. These mobility costs cause both population
and housing prices to respond asymmetrically: positive shocks increase population and housing prices more
than negative shocks reduce them.




                                                       44
                       Figure 2: Concave Housing Supply Curve
       w

                                                                          SL
                                                                                w+ = p+ sh

               +Δ
      DL                                                                        w0 = p0 sh
               −Δ
       c                                                                                    p−C sh
                                                                                w− =
                                                                                            p−D sh − c

                                                                                  L
                                   LC− LD− L0                           L+
Notes: This figure displays the equilibrium response when the housing supply curve is concave. As the main
text and Appendix describe in more detail, a concave housing supply curve is consistent with a durable housing
stock that is not destroyed once created. As in figure 1, the initial equilibrium wages, labor supply, and housing
prices are given by the dot in the center of the figure. An exogenous increase in wages encourages in-migration
until labor supply rises to L+ . At this point, housing prices have risen to completely offset the increase in
wages, restoring the no-arbitrage condition for workers. If there are no mobility costs, then housing prices still
respond symmetrically (pC − ). Intuitively, housing costs still must adjust to exactly offset the wage changes. Only
population responds asymmetrically (as shown by LC      − ). If workers have mobility costs, then the asymmetry of
the population response is even greater (see LD  − ), and  in this case housing prices also respond asymmetrically.




                                                        45
                                                               Figure 3: Model Simulations
                                                 High−Skill Population                                           Low−Skill Population
            1




                                                                                              1
            .5




                                                                                              .5
            0




                                                                                              0
            −.5




                                                                                              −.5
            −1




                                                                                              −1
                                    −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15              −.15   −.1       −.05        0        .05    .1   .15
                                                          delta theta                                                       delta theta


                                           High−Skill Population Share                                               Housing Prices
            .02




                                                                                              .4
            −.08 −.06 −.04 −.02 0




                                                                                              .2
                                                                                              0
                                                                                              −.2
                                                                                              −.4




                                    −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15              −.15   −.1       −.05        0        .05    .1   .15
                                                          delta theta                                                       delta theta


                                                  High−Skill Wages                                                 Low−Skill Wages
                                                                                              .2
            .05 .1




                                                                                              .1
            −.15 −.1 −.05 0




                                                                                              0
                                                                                              −.1
                                                                                              −.2




                                    −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15              −.15   −.1       −.05        0        .05    .1   .15
                                                          delta theta                                                       delta theta


                                                  Transfer Payments
            1




                                                                                                                 No mobility costs
            .5




                                                                                                                 Constant housing supply elasticity
                                                                                                                 No mobility costs
            0




                                                                                                                 Concave housing supply
            −.5




                                                                                                                 Heterogeneous mobility costs
                                                                                                                 Constant housing supply elasticity
            −1




                                    −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15
                                                          delta theta




Notes: This figure displays simulated data from the model described in Section 2. See the Appendix for more de-
tails on the simulation. The graphs clarify that an asymmetric response of population to the labor demand shock
(delta theta) indicates the existence of a concave housing supply curve and/or the existence of heterogeneous
mobility costs. The response of housing prices isolates the importance of mobility costs.




                                                                                         46
                                           Figure 4: Reduced Form Results
                                         Population                                                      Total Employment
              .6




                                                                                   .6
              .4




                                                                                   .4
        % Change




                                                                             % Change
              .2




                                                                                   .2
        0




                                                                             0
              −.2




                                                                                   −.2
              −.4




                                                                                   −.4
                          −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1                          −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1
                                % Change in predicted employment                                     % Change in predicted employment


                                Income per 18−64 Adult                                                  Residualized Wages

                                                                                   .15
              .15




                                                                                   .1
              .1




                                                                                         .05
                    .05
            % Change




                                                                                % Change
                                                                                   0
               0




                                                                             −.05
        −.05




                                                                                   −.1
              −.1
              −.15




                                                                                   −.15




                          −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1                          −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1
                                % Change in predicted employment                                     % Change in predicted employment


                                     Adjusted Wages
              .15
              .1    .05
           % Change




                                                                                                           Linear Estimate
              0




                                                                                                           Nonparametric Estimate
                                                                                                           95% Uniform CI
        −.05  −.1
              −.15




                          −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1
                                % Change in predicted employment




Notes: This figure reports nonparametric reduced form estimates using U.S. Census data and REIS data. See
Appendix for details on the data set. All graphs are nonparamaetric local linear regressions. All results
include year fixed effects in the nonparametric model. The estimates are constrained to be monotonic following
the rearrangement procedure of Chernozhukov, Fernandez-Val, and Galichon (2003). The 95 percent uniform
confidence intervals are computed using 10,000 bootstrap replications, resampling MSAs with replacement. In
each bootstrap step, an undersmoothed local linear bandwidth is chosen following Hall (1992).




                                                                        47
                                                         Figure 5: Reduced Form Results, Continued
                                                            Average Rental Prices                                                                     Average Housing Values
        −.25−.2−.15−.1−.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                                                       −.25−.2−.15−.1−.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                       % Change




                                                                                                                      % Change
                                                 −.1      −.05           0            .05    .1                                                 −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1
                                                          % Change in predicted employment                                                            % Change in predicted employment


                                                       College share of adult population                                                              College share of employed
                        .02




                                                                                                                       .02
                        .01




                                                                                                                       .01
        % Change




                                                                                                       % Change
           0




                                                                                                          0
                        −.01




                                                                                                                       −.01
                        −.02




                                                                                                                       −.02




                                                 −.1      −.05           0            .05    .1                                                 −.1   −.05           0            .05    .1
                                                          % Change in predicted employment                                                            % Change in predicted employment


                                                        Food Stamps + Income Maint.
                        .5
                        0
        % Change




                                                                                                                                                            Linear Estimate
                                                                                                                                                            Nonparametric Estimate
                                                                                                                                                            95% Uniform CI
                        −.5
                        −1




                                                 −.1      −.05           0            .05    .1
                                                          % Change in predicted employment




Notes: This figure reports nonparametric reduced form estimates using U.S. Census data and REIS data. See
Appendix for details on the data set. All graphs are nonparamaetric local linear regressions. All results
include year fixed effects in the nonparametric model. The estimates are constrained to be monotonic following
the rearrangement procedure of Chernozhukov, Fernandez-Val, and Galichon (2003). The 95 percent uniform
confidence intervals are computed using 10,000 bootstrap replications, resampling MSAs with replacement. In
each bootstrap step, an undersmoothed local linear bandwidth is chosen following Hall (1992).




                                                                                                  48
                                                                     Figure 6: GMM Estimates
                                                                               Estimated Housing Supply Curve




                                        .4
                                        .3            .2
                            % Change in Housing Price
                               −.1      0
                                        −.2
                                        −.3
                                        −.4   .1




                                                           −.2   0        .2         .4          .6        .8           1          1.2    1.4
                                                                                    % Change in Housing Quantity


                                                                               Estimated Mobility Cost Function
                                                                                         High−Skill Workers
                                        .08
                                        .04
                            Mobility Cost
                                 0      −.04
                                        −.08




                                                           −.2            −.1                    0                      .1                .2
                                                                                  % Change in High−Skill Population

                                                                      Preferred Specification                 Ignore Transfers
                                                                      Ignore Housing                          Ignore Housing, Transfers



                                                                               Estimated Mobility Cost Function
                                                                                         Low−Skill Workers
                                        .08
                                        .04
                            Mobility Cost
                                 0      −.04
                                        −.08




                                                           −.2            −.1                     0                     .1                .2
                                                                                   % Change in Low−Skill Population

                                                                      Preferred Specification                 Ignore Transfers
                                                                      Ignore Housing                          Ignore Housing, Transfers




Notes: This figure reports GMM estimates of the full model. The top figure presents the housing supply curve
that is estimated in the baseline model (Table 7, row 1). The middle and bottom figures report estimated
mobility functions under various assumptions about housing expenditure shares and transfer payments. See
Section 6 and the Appendix for more details on the GMM estimation.



                                                                                                49
                                                Figure 7: Counterfactual Simulation
                                           High−Skill Population                                           Low−Skill Population
         .6




                                                                                        .6
         .4




                                                                                        .4
         .2




                                                                                        .2
         0




                                                                                        0
         −.2




                                                                                        −.2
                              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05     .1     .15
                                                    delta theta                                                     delta theta


                                      High−Skill Population Share                                             Housing Prices
         .005 .01




                                                                                        .4
                                                                                        .2
         −.015 −.01 −.005 0




                                                                                        0
                                                                                        −.2
                                                                                        −.4




                              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05     .1     .15
                                                    delta theta                                                     delta theta


                                            High−Skill Wages                                                Low−Skill Wages
         .2




                                                                                        .2
         .1




                                                                                        .1
         0




                                                                                        0
         −.1




                                                                                        −.1
         −.2




                                                                                        −.2




                              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05     .1     .15
                                                    delta theta                                                     delta theta


                                            Transfer Payments
         1
         .5




                                                                                                      Existing Transfer Payment System
                                                                                                      (GMM Model Estimates)
         0




                                                                                                      No Transfer Payments, Mobility Subsidies
                                                                                                      (Counterfactual Simulation)
         −.5
         −1




                              −.15   −.1     −.05        0        .05   .1   .15
                                                    delta theta




Notes: This figure reports simulations based on GMM estimates of the full model. The GMM estimates are
used to run simulations similar to those presented in Figure 3. The graphs report results of two simulations:
(1) simulation based on estimates of the baseline GMM model using the existing transfer payment system and
(2) counterfactual simulation based on same estimates but transfer payment system is replaced with mobility
subsidies which reduce mobility costs by 50%.


                                                                                   50
                   Online Appendix for
      “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks”
                                          June 2011


A     Appendix
A.1   Data Appendix
   U.S. Census Data
    The sample of adults used in the analysis includes all individuals between the age of 18 and
64, were not in group quarters such as prisons and psychiatric institutions, and who lived in
a metropolitan area available in the Census IPUMS. All available MSAs are used in analysis
except for Biloxi-Gulfport, MS, Flint, MI, and Reno, NV. These MSAs are dropped because
of obvious mismeasurement of the labor demand shock. Speci…cally, in at least one of the
decades in the sample, these MSAs experienced a greater than one standard deviation labor
demand shock according to the predicted labor demand instrument but experienced a greater
than one standard deviation change in population and rental prices of the opposite magnitude.
All results including these cities are similar.
    Individuals are dropped if they report business income, farm income or work in farming
or agriculture. Individual labor supply is measured by multiplying weeks worked times usual
weekly hours worked. To be included in the sample of workers used to construct the predicted
employment measure, the worker must be in the labor force and have positive and non-missing
hours worked and annual income.
    Individual hourly wages are computed by dividing yearly wage and salary income by the
product of weeks worked and usual weekly hours worked. Topcoded yearly wage income values
are multiplied by 1.5 and (following Autor and Dorn (2009)) hourly wages are set not to exceed
this value divided by (50 weeks 35 hours). Local area wage statistics are computed based
on the sample of workers who work at least 35 weeks and at least 30 hours per week. Wages
are de‡ated using the CPI-U series.
    In order to construct an estimate of the local area wage premium, log wages of the sample
described above are regressed on MSA …xed e¤ects, a quadratic in potential experience (age
years of education 6), 14 industry dummy variables, 6 occupation category dummy variables,
and dummy variables for gender, veteran status, marital status, and race. This regression is
run each decade and in each decade is run separately for workers with and without a college
degree. In each case, the magnitude of the MSA …xed e¤ects corresponds to the local area
wage premium. All regressions and calculations of local area averages are computed using the
Census individual sampling weights.
    The rental price and housing value local area premiums are computed similarly to the wage
premiums; namely, I regress the log of these variables on a quadratic in the number of bedrooms
and the number of rooms and an interaction between number of bedrooms and number of rooms.
These regressions and calculations of (unconditional) average rental prices and housing values
use the Census household weights since the housing value and rental price data are reported at
the household level. Topcoded rental prices and housing values are multiplied by 1:5.


                                              A-1
    Regional Economic Information System (REIS)
    The REIS data come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.1 I aggregate the county-level
data into MSAs using the 1990 MSA de…nitions. When a county spans multiple MSAs I use
1990 population weights to assign fractions of the county totals across the various MSAs.
    County Business Patterns (CBP)
    The County Business Patterns data are available from the U.S. Census Bureau and the
ICPSR data repository.2 I used the 1979, 1989, and 1997 CBP data to match the 1980, 1990,
and 2000 Census data described above. The 1997 CBP data were chosen because the 1998
and 1999 CBP data use the NAICS industry codes, while the CBP data before 1997 used
SIC codes. I use 3-digit SIC industry codes to construct the alternative measure of predicted
employment. Roughly 35 percent of the county-by-industry employment cells are suppressed.
In these cases, I observe the number of establishments in each establishment size bin and a ‡ag
indicating the range of actual employment. To compute predicted employment for these cells,
I run a regression each year using the non-suppressed data and use this regression to compute
predicted employment for suppressed cells from the …tted values. I then compare total county
employment from the raw CBP data to the total county employment computed using the non-
suppressed cells and the predicted employment values. If these two values are not within 1%,
then I scale all of the predicted employment values by a scalar so as to make the two totals
equal, and I then check again that the predicted values lie within the ranges indicated by the
employment ‡ag and I continue to repeat this procedure until the two totals are within 1%.

A.2    Comparative Statics
This subsection derives comparative statics for the model described in Section 2 in the special
case when there are constant returns to scale (a = 1). The comparative statics are derived for
the following three scenarios:

      Case 1: No mobility costs; constant housing supply elasticity

      Case 2: No mobility costs; concave housing supply curve

      Case 3: Large mobility costs; constant housing supply elasticity

   Case 1: No mobility costs; constant housing supply elasticity
   This case corresponds to the following restrictions on the housing supply curve and the
mobility cost functions: cL ( Lit ) = 0, cH ( Hit ) = 0, and H S ( phit ) =     phit . With no
mobility costs and a constant housing supply elasticity, the model readily admits a closed-
form solution. Additionally, in this case all endogenous variables respond symmetrically –
meaning that equal-sized positive and negative exogenous labor demand shocks cause positive
and negative shifts of equal magnitude in all of the endogenous variables ( witH , witL , Hit ,

  1
    See this website for more information: http://www.bea.gov/regional/reis/default.cfm#step2.
  2
    I     downloaded     the     1989    and     1997   CBP      data     from     the   following URL:
http://www.census.gov/econ/cbp/historical.htm.      The 1979 CBP data were downloaded from ICPSR at
the following URL: http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/series/00022.



                                                 A-2
   Lit , phit , tit ). Mathematically, this means that changes in the endogenous variables are
linear functions of the exogenous labor demand shocks; i.e., xit = K x it where x is one of
the endogenous variables in the model. To derive these results, …rst note that with no mobility
costs, housing prices will respond symmetrically to both high-skill and low-skill wages:
                                  1
                           phit =   witH
                                 sH
                                  h
                           phit = (1 sLt ) + sLt                    L
                                                                          =sLh      witL             L
                                                                                                         =sLh    witL

   Next, note that with constant returns to scale, wages for high-skill and low-skill workers can
be written as follows:
                                    witH + (1    )   witL =    it

      Combining the three previous expressions gives the following:

                         witH = sH
                                 h
                                            L
                                                =     sH
                                                       h
                                                              L
                                                                   + (1          )sLh           it       K wH             it

                         witL   =   sLh =       sH
                                                 h
                                                   L
                                                     + (1                  )sLh            it        K   wL
                                                                                                                     it

                         phit   =     L
                                       =         H L
                                                sh   + (1                  )sLh            it        K   p
                                                                                                                it


    In other words, with no mobility costs for workers and …rms, wages and housing prices
respond symmetrically. Transfer payments will also respond symmetrically since transfer pay-
ments are a log-linear function of low-skill wages: i.e., tLit = L K wL       it   Kt     it .
    Finally, with a constant housing supply elasticity, the migration response is also symmetric,
since Hit and Lit can be written as linear functions of witH , witL , and phit . Simple algebra
gives the following two expressions:

                                                             Hit = K H             it
                                                                            L
                                                              Lit = K              it


where K H and K L are constants that can be written in terms of the primitive parameters of
the model ( , , , sH        L    L 3
                       h , sh , st ). In summary, the log-linearity of the housing supply curve
and the absence of mobility costs implies that all endogenous variables respond symmetrically
to the exogenous labor demand shock.
    Case 2: No mobility costs; concave housing supply curve
    Formally, this case can be written as follows: cL ( Lit ) = 0, cH ( Hit ) = 0, and H S ( phit )
is increasing in phit . As in the previous case (and following the same derivation), wages,
housing prices, and transfer payments all respond symmetrically, with the same constant terms

  3
      The constants K H and K L are de…ned as follows:
                                    (K wH           K wL )     (      1)(K wH + K wL                 K p (1 + ))
                         KH =
                                                                     2(    1)sH
                                                                              h
                          KL = KH           (K wH            K wL )=(        1)




                                                                     A-3
as above:

                  witH = K wH           it ;       witL = K wL        it ;      phit = K p         it ;    tLit = K t           it


   In case 2, however, population no longer responds symmetrically to the exogenous shock.
To see this, go back to the housing market equilibrium condition and substitute the expressions
above:

           Kp    it   +   H S (K p          it )   = (K wH + (1           sLt )K wL + sLt K t )                it   +       Hit +    Lit

    Since the elasticity of substitution between high-skill and low-skill labor is constant, we
know that witH        witL = (    1)( Hit     Lit ). Combining these two expressions gives the
following expressions for Hit and Lit :
                                                  1
                                            Hit = (         H
                                                                 it   +         H S (K1p      it ))
                                                  2
                                                  1
                                            Lit =           L
                                                                 it   +         H S (K1p      it )
                                                  2
    where H and L are constant terms.4 Since H S (x) is increasing in x, these expressions
imply that Hit and Lit are increasing in           it . In other words, because the housing supply
curve is concave, the responsiveness of high-skill and low-skill population to exogenous shocks
is convex –positive local labor demand shocks increase population more than negative shocks
reduce population. It is also possible to show that if sH       L
                                                          h < sh < 1 and
                                                                            L
                                                                              < 0, and sLt > 0, then
decreases in local labor demand will reduce the fraction high-skill workers in the population.5
    Case 3: Large mobility costs; constant housing supply elasticity
    Formally, this case can be de…ned as follows: cL ( Lit ) and cH ( Hit ) are declining and
convex functions and H S ( phit ) =         phit . In this case, the convexity of the mobility cost
functions imply that the mobility cost of the marginal migrant is greater in magnitude for
decreases in population than for equal-sized increases in population. As mentioned in the
introduction, one way this could arise is if the city is small relative to the rest of the world, so
that the mobility cost of the marginal in-migrant is negligible. In this case, cH ( Hit ) would
be de…ned such that cH ( H) = 0 for all Hit 0, but cH ( Hit ) is decreasing in Hit for all
  Hit < 0.
    In the case where high-skill and low-skill labor di¤er only in productivity (i.e., sH    L
                                                                                        t = st = st ,
sH      L
 h = sh = sh ,
                 H
                    = L = , and cL (x) = cH (x) 8x), it can be shown that wages still respond

  4                   H         L
      The constants       and       are de…ned as follows:
                                    H
                                        = K p + K wH + K wL + (K wH                     K wL )=(          1)
                                    L          H           wH        wL
                                        =            2(K         K        )=(      1)


  5
   To see this, note that H      L = K wH K wL =(          1)    . If sL     H
                                                                       h > sh ,
                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                            < 0, and sL
                                                                                                                                      t > 0, then
   wH     wL                                                       wH      wL
 K      K      < 0. Since    1 < 0 (since H;L > 0), this implies K       K     =(                                           1) > 0. Thus declines
in   will reduce H        L.



                                                                 A-4
symmetrically as in the previous two cases. By simplifying the problem to make high-skill and
low-skill workers identical except for their e¢ ciency units of labor, it is straightforward to show
that witH = witL =       it and that    Hit = Lit . These simpli…cations result in the following
expressions for housing market and labor supply conditions, respectively:

                                      phit (1 + )           2sh (   it   +        Hit ) = 0                 (1)
                                                c( Hit ) +          it       sh    phit   =0

where     = (1     st ) + st . Combining these expressions gives the following:

                             2sh Hit          (1 + )c( Hit ) = (1 +                  2sh )     it

                                                                                       6
    Since c( Hit ) is declining and convex, this implies that Hit is convex in     it .  Since Hit
                                             h
is convex in     it , then by equation (1), pit is convex in  it . In other words, unlike the other
cases, in this case housing prices respond asymmetrically, where positive shocks increase housing
prices more than negative shocks reduce housing prices. The intuition is that the convexity
of mobility cost function makes out-migration disproportionately costly (as compared to in-
migration). Because of these mobility costs, following negative shocks workers are willing to
pay more for housing than they would in the absence of mobility costs, which bids up the price
of housing following price declines.

A.3     Model Simulation Details
The data used to create Figure 3 are simulated from the model described in Section 2. The same
parameters used in the GMM estimation are used in the simulation; i.e., sLt = 0:05, sLh = 0:34,
sH
 h = 0:30,  = 0:29, = 0:37. The returns-to-scale parameter = 1 is used, and the transfer
payment elasticity used is L = 5:0. The mobility cost functions and housing supply function
are parameterized as they are in the GMM estimator: i.e., cL (x) = L (exp( L x) 1)= L ,
cH (x) = H (exp( H x) 1)= H , H s (x) = h (exp( h x) 1)= h . The values of these parameters
depend on the scenario as follows:
                 H       L            h             h
      Case 1:        =       = 0,          = 4:0,       =0
                 H       L            h             h
      Case 2:        =       = 0,          = 2:0,       = 4:0
                 H       L                  H       L               h                h
      Case 2:        =       =      0:2,        =       =    100,        = 4:0,           =0

A.4     A Simple Model of Durable Housing
This section outlines a model to provide simple microfoundations for a concave housing supply
curve (i.e., housing supply elasticity that is larger for increases in housing demand than for
decreases in housing demand). As in Section 2, the model here is a two period model, where a

   6
     Formally, a su¢ cient condition for this result to hold is that (1 st )+st > 0 and sh < ((1 st )+st )(1+ ).
In words, transfer payments provide partial wage insurance, and housing expenditure share cannot be so large
so that negative shocks would cause net in-migration of low-skill labor.


                                                              A-5
single city is shocked out of a large number of cities. The model includes a labor market and
a housing market. Production of a homogeneous tradable good is constant returns to scale
and uses only (homogeneous) labor as an input.         All workers have identical Cobb-Douglas
preferences for housing and the tradable good, so that expenditure share on housing (sh ) is
constant.
     Housing is supplied by absentee landlords who live in other cities. The housing supply
is homogeneous in terms of workers’ willingness-to-pay but there are heterogeneous costs to
supplying housing (arising, perhaps, from topographic features of the land). This is modeled
by assuming that the maximum housing supply is H S (where H S is assumed to be large enough
so that we are not close to a corner solution) and that the cost of supplying an in…nitesimal unit
                                                                                h       h
of housing is distributed according to the following density function: f (c) = c (c=c) 1 , where
c is drawn from the closed interval [0; c]. This results in an aggregate housing supply curve of
           R ph                          h
H s (ph ) = 0 H S f (c)dc = H S ph =c . Thus the initial housing market equilibrium is given
                                                                           h
by the following supply-demand equilibrium condition: H S phit =c          = H D sh wit nit =phit .
    Using a similar simplifying assumption as in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005), I assume that
housing is occasionally (and randomly) destroyed, and that the cost of rebuilding is the same
as the initial cost of building. Mathematically, I assume that just before the labor demand
shock, a random fraction of the initial housing supply collapses and needs to be re-built.
For increases in housing demand, all housing that collapsed is immediately rebuilt in between
periods, and housing supply further expands according to the elasticity of housing supply ( h ).
For decreases in housing demand, however, the “e¤ective”housing supply elasticity is now only
      h
        because some of the housing that was previously built does not collapse and cannot be
destroyed. Unless = 1 (i.e., housing is not durable at all and completely collapses between
periods), these assumptions imply that the housing supply curve is nonlinear, asymmetric, and
concave.
    The equilibrium changes in wages, population, and housing prices following an exogenous
labor demand shock ( it ) are as follows. The wage change in the city receiving the shock is
  wit =      it . Perfect mobility of workers implies that wit = sh phit . This implies that phit =
   it =sh . In other words, both wages and housing prices respond symmetrically. For positive
labor demand shocks, population increases by nit = (1+ h ) phit          wit = (1+ h sh )=sh        it .
                                                                                  h
For negative labor demand shocks, population decreases by nit = (1 +                    sh )=sh     it .
                        h
Assuming sh > 0,          > 0 and 0 < < 1, then positive shocks increase population more than
equal-sized negative shocks reduce population.
    The key di¤erence between this model and the model in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) is
that the marginal value and the average value of housing are equal in the simple model in this
section, while in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) housing units have heterogeneous, location-speci…c
amenities, which causes average housing prices to respond asymmetrically due to compositional
changes in the location-speci…c amenities in the housing stock. The empirical evidence in this
paper suggests that housing prices respond symmetrically to exogenous labor demand shocks,
which is more consistent with the model in this paper.




                                                  A-6
A.5     GMM Estimation
There are 30 empirical moments given by the following vector:

                                  m = (m1 ; m2 ; m3 ; m4 ; m5 )0

where                                              2                           3
                                                            eh ( )d
                                         6                 ewH ( )d            7
                                         6                                     7
                                         6                 ewL ( )d            7
                                      m =6
                                       d
                                         6
                                                                               7
                                                                               7
                                         6                  eH ( )d            7
                                         4                  eL ( )d            5
                                                            et ( )d
The orthogonality conditions are summarized as E[m] = 0. The parameters to estimate are
given by the following vector:
                                       h       h       H       H       L       L
                                 =(        ;       ;       ;       ;       ;       ; ; )0
                                                              0
The two-step GMM estimator is implemented by …rst estimating ^ as follows:

                                        ^ 0 = arg min m0 m

This estimate is then used to form the following:

                                         XN
                                  ^0 = 1           0         0
                                             mi ( ^ ) m0i ( ^ )
                                       N i=1

Next, ^ is re-estimated as follows:

                                 ^ GM M = arg min m0 ( ^ 0 ) 1 m

Inference is done by computing the following variance-covariance matrix:
                                           1 ^0 ^ 1 1 ^                            1
                                      V^ =   G( ) G
                                           N
                                  GM M             0
where ^ 1 is re-estimated using ^      instead of ^ , and                          ^ is given by the following:
                                                                                   G
                                              2                                     3
                                                 @m1i =@
                                           X6
                                            N        2
                                              6 @mi =@
                                                                                    7
                                   ^= 1
                                   G          6       ..
                                                                                    7
                                                                                    7
                                        N     4    i=1 .                            5
                                                               @m30
                                                                 i =@




                                                         A-7
Finally, the overidenti…cation statistic is given by:
                             GM M                         GM M
                    m0 ( ^          ) ( ^ 0)   1
                                                   m( ^          )!   2
                                                                          (row(m)   row( ))




                                                          A-8
                                           Appendix Table A1
                Industry Categories (Top 20 List By Average National Employment Share)
                                                                             Average
                                                                 Industry    National     National Employment Growth Rates
Industry Name                                                      Code     Empl. Share    Mean         Min        Max

Persistently Expanding Industries
Eating and drinking places                                         641        3.99%       14.17%       1.39%       32.78%
Offices and clinics of physicians                                  812        0.93%       25.41%       1.28%       42.59%
Legal services                                                     841        0.79%       32.33%       7.54%       63.76%
Computer and data processing services                              732        0.75%       75.71%      20.01%      139.09%
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services                     890        0.47%       15.62%       4.93%       34.52%
Services incidental to transportation                              432        0.45%       50.41%       1.48%       85.46%
Services to dwellings and other buildings                          722        0.43%       30.51%       4.10%       73.12%
Offices and clinics of dentists                                    820        0.43%       26.94%      13.17%       54.00%
Personnel supply services                                          731        0.39%       35.46%       0.80%       62.28%
Landscape and horticultural services                                20        0.34%       55.19%       5.36%      158.68%
Detective and protective services                                  740        0.30%       42.85%      17.52%      103.97%
Residential care facilities, without nursing                       870        0.27%       86.39%      33.35%      168.29%
Drugs                                                              181        0.27%       12.75%       3.79%       22.01%
Sporting goods, bicycles, and hobby stores                         651        0.23%       17.37%      11.76%       24.11%
Veterinary services                                                 12        0.16%       40.92%      26.99%       54.86%
Retail nurseries and garden stores                                 582        0.12%       61.71%      12.43%      152.46%
Museums, art galleries, and zoos                                   872        0.11%       56.61%      28.32%      110.27%
Offices and clinics of optometrists                                822        0.05%       25.20%      18.55%       37.94%
Offices and clinics of chiropractors                               821        0.05%       92.45%      14.21%      191.25%
Persistently Declining Industries
Apparel and accessories, except knit                               151        0.89%       -39.17%     -59.31%     -18.67%
Aircraft and parts                                                 352        0.65%       -26.94%     -40.51%     -10.53%
Blast furnaces, steelworks, rolling and finishing mills            270        0.51%       -26.75%     -52.32%     -10.65%
Radio, TV, and communication equipment                             341        0.48%       -35.55%     -42.74%     -27.94%
Railroads                                                          400        0.48%       -28.70%     -51.27%      -6.72%
Yarn, thread, and fabric mills                                     142        0.44%       -33.50%     -55.91%     -11.45%
Newspaper publishing and printing                                  171        0.44%       -15.78%     -20.69%     -13.19%
Laundry, cleaning, and garment services                            771        0.39%       -25.61%     -49.71%      -6.59%
Metalworking machinery                                             320        0.31%       -26.67%     -31.42%     -17.49%
Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills                                  160        0.31%       -18.36%     -32.41%      -2.25%
Motor vehicles and equipment                                       500        0.26%       -13.26%     -30.43%      -5.03%
Ship and boat building and repairing                               360        0.26%       -21.82%     -33.81%      -6.93%
Beverage industries                                                120        0.20%       -15.67%     -31.90%      -1.72%
Air force                                                          941        0.20%       -29.65%     -46.78%     -12.51%
Paperboard containers and boxes                                    162        0.18%       -21.47%     -33.70%      -7.28%
Variety stores                                                     592        0.18%       -47.74%     -48.42%     -47.07%
Canned, frozen, and preserved fruits and vegetables                102        0.18%       -17.75%     -26.05%      -8.16%
Other rubber products, and plastics footwear and belting           211        0.18%       -33.14%     -61.17%     -16.64%
Navy                                                               942        0.18%       -27.63%     -41.14%     -14.12%
Other primary metal industries                                     280        0.17%       -33.08%     -58.09%      -8.57%
Stable Industries
Elementary and secondary schools                                   842        6.53%         3.25%      -3.59%      7.45%
All construction                                                    60        5.94%         5.25%       1.61%      7.99%
Colleges and universities                                          850        2.21%         5.40%      -5.68%     16.30%
Grocery stores                                                     601        2.06%        -0.70%     -18.49%     19.74%
Insurance                                                          711        2.02%        -1.90%     -10.44%      2.60%
Department stores                                                  591        1.78%        -8.54%     -19.40%     11.30%
Trucking service                                                   410        1.54%         5.91%       1.36%     10.47%
Telephone communications                                           441        1.21%        -9.32%     -19.93%      3.16%
Motor vehicle dealers                                              612        0.95%        -1.76%      -8.87%      6.85%
Hotels and motels                                                  762        0.95%         6.60%      -9.80%     19.21%
Groceries and related products                                     550        0.74%        -9.67%     -12.00%     -6.04%
Religious organizations                                            880        0.65%        10.21%       1.45%     19.39%
Administration of economic programs                                931        0.50%       -11.06%     -15.69%     -4.20%
Beauty shops                                                       772        0.44%        -5.35%     -16.45%      6.59%
Furniture and home furnishings stores                              631        0.44%        -0.18%      -7.68%      5.36%
Sawmills, planing mills, and millwork                              231        0.42%         0.28%     -13.17%     10.24%
Bus service and urban transit                                      401        0.40%        -8.17%     -18.13%      0.34%
Agricultural production, livestock                                  11        0.39%        -4.56%     -13.70%     10.29%
Public finance, taxation, and monetary policy                      921        0.29%        -4.23%      -8.72%     -0.25%
Water supply and irrigation                                        470        0.18%        -1.98%      -4.71%      5.08%
                                                           A-9
Volatile Industries
Justice, public order, and safety                                           910         2.08%          -2.02%      -42.53%        26.30%
Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment                                  351         1.31%          -9.15%      -21.15%        24.42%
National security and international affairs                                 932         1.02%         -14.28%      -69.36%        50.12%
Automotive repair and related services                                      751         0.68%          14.32%      -23.44%        30.71%
Apparel and accessory stores, except shoe                                   623         0.64%          -5.43%      -28.42%        30.70%
Administration of human resources programs                                  922         0.58%          -0.25%      -38.36%        29.24%
Management and public relations services                                    892         0.49%          17.01%      -31.54%        54.16%
Radio, tv, and computer stores                                              633         0.38%          17.95%      -32.45%       102.77%
Oil and gas extraction                                                       42         0.38%           7.56%      -36.31%        55.97%
Computers and related equipment                                             322         0.37%          -5.86%      -39.46%        48.79%
Research, development, and testing services                                 891         0.36%          31.34%      -20.44%       106.12%
Guided missiles, space vehicles, and parts                                  362         0.27%          15.85%      -48.89%        62.69%
Iron and steel foundries                                                    271         0.23%         -22.67%      -56.79%        62.60%
Scientific and controlling instruments                                      371         0.22%           3.56%      -22.68%        34.13%
Savings institutions, including credit unions                               701         0.22%           8.96%      -32.44%        44.24%
Administration of environmental quality and housing programs                930         0.21%           1.66%      -50.06%        44.03%
Hardware, plumbing and heating supplies                                     521         0.20%          -2.08%      -45.76%        31.74%
Drugs, chemicals, and allied products                                       541         0.20%           0.38%      -26.71%        38.45%
Petroleum refining                                                          200         0.19%         -15.09%      -32.74%        25.77%
Catalog and mail order houses                                               663         0.16%          11.19%      -23.37%        71.12%
Other Industries
Hospitals                                                                   831         4.63%           5.56%       -8.14%        22.95%
Banking                                                                     700         1.76%           0.40%      -20.39%        18.42%
Real estate, including real estate-insurance offices                        712         1.26%          11.18%      -14.27%        33.53%
Nursing and personal care facilities                                        832         1.18%          21.88%       -8.46%        74.03%
Printing, publishing, and allied industries, except newspapers              172         1.07%         -10.11%      -20.00%        10.63%
U.S. postal service                                                         412         0.85%         -10.99%      -28.24%         1.17%
Agricultural production, crops                                               10         0.78%         -12.45%      -28.96%         9.86%
Engineering, architectural, and surveying services                          882         0.72%          29.53%       -6.11%        67.63%
Machinery, equipment, and supplies                                          530         0.66%         -12.22%      -47.76%        19.83%
Child day care services                                                     862         0.66%          39.53%       -6.98%        82.69%
Security, commodity brokerage, and investment companies                     710         0.63%          29.48%      -18.73%        59.34%
Electric light and power                                                    450         0.61%          -0.78%       -9.00%        21.04%
Air transportation                                                          421         0.59%          -8.72%      -22.35%        13.89%
Furniture and fixtures                                                      242         0.56%          -6.62%      -27.01%         4.43%
Drug stores                                                                 642         0.53%           4.73%      -13.18%        24.10%
Lumber and building material retailing                                      580         0.52%          15.50%       -4.47%        48.91%
Gasoline service stations                                                   621         0.48%         -14.80%      -28.20%         9.14%
Fabricated structural metal products                                        282         0.44%         -13.01%      -27.63%         3.77%
Meat products                                                               100         0.35%          -4.13%      -25.30%        16.68%
Radio and television broadcasting and cable                                 440         0.33%          21.23%       -5.68%        48.12%

Notes: All industry codes in the Census IPUMS data set are grouped into one of the five categories in this table based on employment
growth during 1970-1980, 1980-1990, 1990-2000 and 2000-2007. The industries within each cataegory are then sorted based on
average employment share of national population and the top 20 industries in each category are listed in this table. See Section 5 in
main text for more details on the industry categories. Industries that are coded as "catch-all" industry codes are excluded from this table.




                                                                  A-10
                                                            Appendix Table A2
                                          Alternative Measures of Housing Values and Rental Prices
                                                          (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)                 (5)             (6)           (7)
                                                                                                                                                        (FHFA)
                                                    Residualized Residualized          Average       Average           Residualized Residualized        Average
                                                      Rental       Housing              Rental       Housing             Rental       Housing           Housing
Dependent Variable:                                    Prices      Values               Prices       Values               Prices      Values             Values

% Change in predicted employment            (β )             0.842          0.714          0.808           0.633               0.943          1.155           1.142
                                                           (0.151)        (0.360)        (0.155)         (0.320)             (0.177)        (0.379)         (0.293)
                                                           [0.000]        [0.048]        [0.000]         [0.049]             [0.000]        [0.003]         [0.000]

(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )                    -0.999         -2.765         -0.742          -2.653              -2.496         -8.769           2.804
                                                           (2.758)        (6.310)        (2.889)         (5.647)             (3.593)        (7.043)         (4.944)
                                                           [0.717]        [0.662]        [0.797]         [0.639]             [0.488]        [0.215]         [0.571]

Marginal effect at −σ (A)                                    0.912          0.907          0.860           0.818               1.117          1.767           0.947
                                                           (0.243)        (0.580)        (0.254)         (0.511)             (0.304)        (0.563)         (0.390)
                                                           [0.000]        [0.119]        [0.001]         [0.111]             [0.000]        [0.002]         [0.016]

Marginal effect at +σ (B)                                    0.773          0.521          0.757           0.448               0.769          0.544           1.338
                                                           (0.247)        (0.558)        (0.255)         (0.504)             (0.309)        (0.673)         (0.507)
                                                           [0.002]        [0.351]        [0.003]         [0.376]             [0.014]        [0.420]         [0.009]

p-value of test (A) = (B)                                   0.717           0.662          0.797           0.639               0.488          0.215          0.571
p-value of nonparametric specification test                 0.596           0.295          0.545           0.271               0.486          0.346          0.300

R2                                                          0.099           0.144          0.182           0.201               0.121          0.172          0.777
N                                                             430             430            430             430                 364            364            364

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data come from IPUMS 1980, 1990, and 2000 census extracts and the OFHEO housing
price indexes. Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs in columns (1) through (4); in remaining columns the sample is a balanced panel of 182 MSAs
with non-missing data from FHFA (formerly OFHEO). Columns (5) and (6) reproduce columns (1) and (2) on the FHFA sub-sample. Dependent variable is
always the percentage change across periods. The % Change in predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional differences in industrial
composition with national changes in industry employment shares. See Table 2, main text, and Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year
fixed effects. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area over time, are in parenthesis and p-values
are in brackets.




                                                                                A-11
                                                                        Table A3
                                              Results for Various Measures of Public Assistance Expenditures
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)     (5)         (6)                  (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)
                                              Food                      Income                 Public   Retirement
                                            Stamps +                    Maint-                Medical      and                                UI                     Fraction of
                                             Income         Food        enance      Medicare Benefits Disability                SSI        Compen-      Veterans     Population
Dependent Variable:                           Maint.       Stamps      Programs     Benefits (Medicaid) Benefits              Benefits      sation      Benefits      Disabled

% Change in predicted empl.         (β )         -2.367       -1.966       -4.841        -1.738       -2.151        -1.140       -1.725        -0.379       -0.914        -0.099
                                               (0.615)       (0.613)      (0.863)      (0.631)       (1.130)       (0.428)      (0.639)      (0.739)       (0.344)       (0.023)
                                               [0.000]       [0.002]      [0.000]      [0.006]       [0.058]       [0.008]      [0.007]      [0.608]       [0.008]       [0.000]
(% Change in predicted empl.)2 (δ )            -21.779       -18.727      -41.397      -22.477       -14.332       -15.732       -3.267      -31.143         1.725         0.428
                                              (12.139)      (11.690)     (17.540)     (12.828)      (19.521)       (8.953)     (11.771)     (11.194)       (7.372)       (0.361)
                                               [0.074]       [0.111]      [0.019]      [0.081]       [0.464]       [0.080]      [0.782]      [0.006]       [0.815]       [0.237]

Marginal effect at −σ (A)                        -0.847       -0.659       -1.953        -0.169       -1.150        -0.042       -1.497         1.794       -1.034        -0.129
                                                (1.030)      (1.009)      (1.394)       (1.199)      (1.802)       (0.841)      (1.215)       (0.971)      (0.723)       (0.030)
                                                [0.412]      [0.514]      [0.163]       [0.888]      [0.524]       [0.960]      [0.219]       [0.066]      [0.155]       [0.000]
Marginal effect at +σ (B)                        -3.887       -3.273       -7.730        -3.306       -3.151        -2.237       -1.953        -2.552       -0.793        -0.069
                                                (1.064)      (1.031)      (1.595)       (0.980)      (1.737)       (0.664)      (0.831)       (1.170)      (0.492)       (0.039)
                                                [0.000]      [0.002]      [0.000]       [0.001]      [0.071]       [0.001]      [0.020]       [0.030]      [0.108]       [0.076]

p-value of test (A) = (B)                         0.074        0.111        0.019        0.081         0.464         0.080        0.782         0.006        0.815         0.237
p-value of nonparam. specification test           0.241        0.345        0.017        0.193         0.046         0.118        0.457         0.031        0.469         0.081

R2                                                0.403        0.438        0.273        0.797         0.697         0.557        0.534         0.017        0.340         0.045
N                                                   430          430          430          430           430           430          430           430          430           430

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Data for dependent variables come from the REIS, except for column (10) which uses Census data on
disability in the adult population. Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs. Dependent variable is always the percentage change across periods except for column (10)
which reports percentage point changes. The % Change in predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional differences in industrial composition with national
changes in industry employment shares. See Table 2, main text, and Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors, adjusted to
allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area over time, are in parenthesis and p-values are in brackets.




                                                                                     A-12
                                                                       Appendix Table A4
                                                                 Robustness Dropping Each Region
                                                            Dependent Variable: % Change in Population
                                                      (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)                           (8)          (9)         (10)
                                                                                              Drop                                             Drop
                                                              Drop      Drop        Drop      West      Drop     Drop                          West
                                                      All     New      Middle East North North          South East South                      South       Drop          Drop
                                                    Regions England Atlantic       Central   Central   Atlantic Central                       Central    Mountain      Pacific

% Change in predicted employment           (β )         1.802        1.659        2.142       1.654        1.743        1.706        1.847       1.797        1.870        1.764
                                                      (0.445)      (0.447)      (0.545)      (0.539)     (0.475)      (0.380)      (0.451)     (0.467)      (0.455)      (0.504)
                                                      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.002]     [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.001]
(% Change in predicted employment)2 (δ )              28.010       27.839       22.645       29.303      29.633       20.857       27.388      28.840       31.122       30.672
                                                      (7.905)      (7.982)      (8.989)      (9.266)     (8.377)      (7.491)      (8.019)     (8.168)      (8.562)      (8.188)
                                                      [0.000]      [0.001]      [0.013]      [0.002]     [0.001]      [0.006]      [0.001]     [0.001]      [0.000]      [0.000]

Marginal effect at −σ (A)                              -0.152       -0.284        0.562       -0.390      -0.325        0.251       -0.065      -0.216       -0.301       -0.376
                                                      (0.847)      (0.879)      (1.044)      (1.033)     (0.915)      (0.664)      (0.864)     (0.884)      (0.875)      (0.892)
                                                      [0.858]      [0.747]      [0.591]      [0.706]     [0.723]      [0.706]      [0.940]     [0.807]      [0.731]      [0.674]
Marginal effect at +σ (B)                               3.757        3.602        3.722        3.699       3.811        3.162        3.758       3.809        4.042        3.904
                                                      (0.535)      (0.498)      (0.539)      (0.591)     (0.546)      (0.628)      (0.535)     (0.553)      (0.602)      (0.604)
                                                      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]

p-value of test (A) = (B)                               0.000        0.001        0.013       0.002        0.001        0.006        0.001       0.001        0.000        0.000
p-value of nonparametric specification test             0.000        0.001        0.004       0.002        0.000        0.149        0.001       0.000        0.000        0.000

R2                                                      0.315        0.324        0.334       0.333        0.322        0.288        0.316       0.323        0.297        0.303
N                                                         430          408          382         342          402          360          404         372          404          366

Notes: All columns report OLS results from estimating equation (7). Final sample is a balanced panel of 215 MSAs. Columns report results from dropping one of the nine Census
regions. Dependent variable is always the percentage change in population across periods. The % Change in predicted employment is formed by interacting cross-sectional
differences in industrial composition with national changes in industry employment shares. See Table 2, main text, and Data Appendix for more details. All specifications include
year fixed effects. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each metropolitan area over time, are in parenthesis and p-values are in
brackets.




                                                                                     A-13
