                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  A "SECOND OPINION" ON THE ECONOMIC HEALTH OF THE AMERICAN MIDDLE
                                CLASS

                                      Richard V. Burkhauser
                                          Jeff Larrimore
                                         Kosali I. Simon

                                       Working Paper 17164
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17164


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2011




We thank Jennifer Tennant and Abigail Kelly-Smith for their helpful comments and suggestions and
Sean Lyons for research assistance with some of the data used in this paper. The views in this paper
are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation,
any Member of Congress, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Richard V. Burkhauser, Jeff Larrimore, and Kosali I. Simon. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A "Second Opinion" on the Economic Health of the American Middle Class
Richard V. Burkhauser, Jeff Larrimore, and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 17164
June 2011
JEL No. H2,H24,I18,J3

                                              ABSTRACT

Researchers considering levels and trends in the resources available to the middle class traditionally
measure the pre-tax cash income of either tax units or households. In this paper, we demonstrate that
this choice carries significant implications for assessing income trends. Focusing on tax units rather
than households greatly reduces measured growth in middle class income. Furthermore, excluding
the effect of taxes and the value of in-kind benefits further reduces observed improvements in the resources
of the middle class. Finally, we show how these distinctions change the observed distribution of benefits
from the tax exclusion of employer provided health insurance.


Richard V. Burkhauser                                Kosali I. Simon
Cornell University                                   School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Department of Policy Analysis & Management           Indiana University
125 MVR Hall                                         Rm 359
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401                                1315 East Tenth Street
and NBER                                             Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
rvb1@cornell.edu                                     and Cornell University
                                                     and also NBER
Jeff Larrimore                                       simonkos@indiana.edu
Joint Committee on Taxation
1625 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20515
jeff.larrimore@mail.house.gov
I. INTRODUCTION

       The most basic measure of the economic resources available to the average American—

median household income—has been consistently tracked by the US Census Bureau since 1967

using yearly data from the March Current Population Survey (CPS). While median income has

fallen during economic downturns and risen with recovery within all business cycles, yearly

gains have historically more than offset yearly losses so that it has risen from peak-to-peak over

each business cycle. That is, the real, inflation-adjusted income of middle class households as

measured by median household income has consistently grown over time controlling for short-

term market conditions. However, this was not the case over the peak years (2000-2007) of the

first business cycle of the 21st Century (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Smith 2008, Table 1).

       This highly visible measure of the decline in the real economic resources available to

middle class Americans is often discussed alongside research using IRS administrative records

by Piketty and Saez (2003) and Saez (2009) showing that the fraction of market income going to

the top 10 percent of tax units is at its highest level since at least 1917. Together, these findings

suggest that the middle class is not sharing proportionately in the fruits of American economic

growth. Such concerns have manifested into the popular press (see, e.g. Johnson 2007, Piketty

and Saez 2007, Goldman 2008, Lahart and Evans 2008, Leonhardt 2008), and have led to calls

for policies that would increase the share of income growth going to the middle of the income

distribution. For instance, when forming the White House Task Force on Middle Class Working

Families in 2009, President Obama stated that “middle class Americans have been working

harder, yet not enjoying their fair share of the fruits of a growing economy” (Obama, 2009).

       In this paper, we offer a second opinion on the extent to which middle class Americans

have failed to benefit from economic growth over the past three business cycles (1979-2007).



                                                  2
Using cross-sectional data to capture the economic resources available to individuals at the same

point in the distribution over time, we find that the evidence of a middle class decline is far from

clear, and that such results are highly sensitive to how available resources are measured.1 Thus,

we will argue that the apparent failure of the median American to benefit from economic growth

can largely be explained by the use of an income measure for this purpose which does not fully

capture what is actually happening to the resources available to middle class individuals.

        Researchers considering long term income trends have traditionally based their analyses

on one of two data sources. The first, used by Piketty and Saez (2003) and others, is IRS tax

record data. These IRS tax records contain information on the pre-tax, pre-transfer cash income

of tax units - the group of individuals who file a tax return together and their child dependents.

These data, occasionally supplemented with income estimates for non-filing tax units, provide an

excellent measure of the distribution of market income among tax units.

        The second data source, reported each year by the Census Bureau (DeNavas-Walt,

Proctor, and Smith 2008), comes from the annual March CPS. These data contain information on

the pre-tax, post-transfer cash income of households excluding capital gains. In addition to the

taxable income reported on tax records, this CPS-based measure also includes the value of all

public transfers (including welfare, Social Security, and other government provided cash

assistance) received by the household, much of which is not taxable. Thus, the CPS-based

income definition is intended to capture resources coming from cash income regularly received

by the household, regardless of whether it comes from market-based activities. It excludes,

however, some irregularly received income such as capital gains from investments or home


1
 An alternative measure of how middle class Americans have fared over time is to use panel data that
actually follows the same individuals over time. Such longitudinal analyses are not possible with the
March CPS data. For an example of this type of analysis see Auten and Gee (2009).


                                                   3
sales, non-cash government transfers, and employer provided in-kind compensation.

       The distinctions between tax units and households as sharing units or between the

resources counted within them as income are somewhat abstract and may appear to be trivial. As

a result, literatures that differ in their income measurement or sharing units are often viewed

interchangeably. Indeed, it is often the case that an individual’s tax unit and household unit are

exactly the same. A tax unit typically consists of an adult, his or her spouse, and any dependent

children. Such a tax unit would include all members of “traditional family arrangement”

households. However, there are increasingly exceptions to such traditional households. For

example, cohabiters, roommates who share expenses, children who move back in with their

parents or older parents who live with their adult children will contain more than one tax unit.

       If measures of the level and trend in the shared resources of middle class individuals were

insensitive to the choice of sharing unit, then these differences would be immaterial. However,

we will show that the choice of sharing unit and which of its resources are counted will make a

substantive difference in measures of the resources available to middle class Americans, as will

controlling for the number of people in the sharing unit. Furthermore, the inclusion of taxes and

transfers, in addition to the value of employer provided health insurance benefits, Medicare and

Medicaid further impacts the observed trend in resources available to the middle class.

       Several earlier papers have recognized the importance of income definitions in evaluating

economic resources. For example, Karoly (1994) shows how family income inequality is

impacted by her choices of taxes and income transfers included. Similarly, Meyer and Sullivan

(2009b) show how pre-tax and post-tax income definitions impact measures of poverty in their

argument that consumption based measures would more precisely capture poverty trends.

Additionally, both the European Union and the OECD use a post-tax post-transfer based poverty



                                                 4
measure rather than a pre-tax post-transfer measure because the former more closely mirrors

personal consumption (d'Ercole and Förster Forthcoming).

       Others have recognized the importance of including the value of in-kind compensation in

measures of market income, since cash compensation alone does not provide a complete measure

of payment for work. For example, Pierce (2001, 2007) used the Employment Cost Index (ECI)

data to consider how levels and trends in labor compensation change when employer

contributions to fringe benefits (including health insurance) are included. Chung (2003) extends

this insight by merging data from the ECI into the CPS. Additionally, previous research by

Burkhauser et al. (Forthcoming, a) demonstrates how choices of income definitions impact

measures of income inequality at the top of the income distribution, and Meyer and Sullivan

(2009a) consider similar questions for income inequality measured using 90/10 ratios.

       Here, we expand on this previous research by using March CPS data to report the median

resources of Americans as well as the growth in those resources by quintile over the last three

business cycles (1979-1989, 1989-2000, and 2000-2007) using different assumptions regarding

the sharing unit, tax treatment of income, and the various sources of income included in our

resource measure. When we analyze median income in the CPS data using tax units, we find that

the pre-tax pre-transfer income (the market income) of the median tax unit decreased over the

2000-2007 business cycle. This is the case whether we focus solely on those tax units who file a

return or all tax units regardless of whether they file a return. Potentially more disturbing, the

median pre-tax pre-transfer income of all tax units (filers and non-filers) only increased by 3.2

percent in real terms over the entire period between 1979 and 2007. These results are consistent

with the view that the typical American has not gained much from economic growth over the last

30 years.



                                                  5
       But when we broaden the sharing unit to the household, account for economies of scale in

household consumption, and recognize that the payment of taxes or the receipt of tax credits as

well as government transfer income and in-kind benefits all impact the economic resources

available to individuals, we find the story changes. Specifically, when using our broadest

measure of available resources—post-tax, post-transfer size-adjusted household income

including the ex-ante value of in-kind health insurance benefits—median income growth of

individual Americans improves to 36.7 percent over the period from 1979 and 2007, and by 4.8

percent between 2000 and 2007. Similarly, these choices impact the observed distribution of

income and the extent to which incomes at the top of the distribution are growing faster than

those of the middle and lower classes.

       Once illustrating the extent to which these differences impact income trends, we continue

by providing an example of why such a broader measure of available economic resources is of

value in considering the distributional impacts of public policy. We do so by showing how the

distribution of benefits from the tax exclusion of employer provided health insurance differs

when they are measured across the not-size-adjusted income of tax units and the size-adjusted

household income of individuals—two common approaches to capturing such policy effects.

Using our broader measure of household-based income we show that the value to the middle

class of the tax exclusion of employer provided health insurance benefits is greater than that

observed when focusing on tax units-based income. We conclude that researchers would be well-

served by using this broader measure of income and sharing unit when considering the

distributional impacts of public policy proposals.

II. DATA

       To explore the trend in the available resources of middle class Americans over the past



                                                 6
30 years, we use the public use March CPS data set supplemented with cell-means to overcome

topcoding of high incomes in the March CPS (Larrimore et al. 2008 provides details on the cell-

mean series). One limitation of the CPS data that remains even with cell-means to overcome

topcoding is a change in survey methods between 1992 and 1993 that limits comparability across

these years (See Ryscavage 1995 and Jones and Weinberg 2000 for details on this redesign).

Thus, in all series the changes in income between 1992 and 1993 are suppressed and assumed to

be zero given the trend-break resulting from redesign. The approach used in this analysis to

overcome this break in the CPS data is similar to that used by Burkhauser et al. (Forthcoming, a)

and Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011). Since incomes are being compared across years, all

income is adjusted for inflation to 2008 dollars using the CPI-U-RS (Stewart and Reed 1999).2

        While the March CPS is commonly used for measuring levels and trends in income and

its distribution in the United States, it does not directly inquire about tax credits, tax liabilities, or

about the value of in-kind compensation such as employer or government provided health

insurance. To overcome these limitations, we impute this information for each individual to

supplement the income data in the March CPS.

        To impute tax credits and liabilities, marital status, state of residence, age, number of

dependents, detailed income information, and other factors for each tax unit is entered into

NBER TaxSim 9.0 (Feenberg and Coutts 1993), which uses these data to estimate federal and

state income tax liabilities including Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes. Since the March

CPS samples households, they are divided into tax units prior to imputing tax liabilities. This

division is performed using the procedure described in Burkhauser et al. (Forthcoming, a) which

mirrors the Piketty and Saez (2003) definition of potential tax units. All single individuals age 20
2
 A more detailed discussion of this issue as it relates to this paper is contained in a data appendix
available upon request from the authors.


                                                      7
and over, married couples, and divorced or widowed individuals are considered independent tax

units.3 Never-married children under the age of 20 are considered dependents and are assigned to

the tax unit of their parent or guardian.4

        Along with tax credits and liabilities, we also consider the ex-ante value of in-kind health

insurance benefits. While the March CPS does not capture the premiums paid for health

insurance coverage, it does ask respondents whether they are insured and the source of that

coverage. Using the type of coverage and information about the individual’s employer, we

impute the ex-ante value of employer contributions to health insurance and the value of public

health insurance from outside sources. The value of employer contributions for health insurance

comes from the cell means of employer contributions from the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey Insurance Component (MEPSIC). This includes the employer contribution for single and

family plans separately, by state, year and firm size.5 Medicaid or Medicare insurance is valued

at the average cost reported per person from administrative data. Note that employer insurance,

Medicare and Medicaid is consistently valued at its ex-ante insurance value and not its ex-post

fungible insurance value. (See Burkhauser and Simon 2010 for a more complete description of

the procedures for determining the ex-ante value of health insurance).

III. METHODS

        Using the March CPS data supplemented with the health insurance and tax data described


3
  Given that many students are dependents even if they file their own tax return, we replicated our
analysis assuming that students aged 20-24 were part of their parents’ tax unit rather than independent tax
units. These results, which are largely unchanged, are contained, along with a more detailed discussion of
our methods for calculating them , in a data appendix available upon request from the authors.
4
  In the small number of cases where never-married individuals under age 20 live in a household without
a parent or guardian, we assigned them to the tax unit of the household’s primary family or the oldest
adult in the household when there is no primary family. Only if the household has no adults over age 20
are they considered their own tax unit.
5
  Available at http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/survey_comp/Insurance.jsp


                                                     8
above, we calculate income distributional statistics for sixteen series, which are based on four

different income definitions, two sharing unit definitions, and two methods of size-adjusting

income for different size tax units and households. The income definitions, sharing unit

definitions, and size-adjustment methods are as follows:

       Pre-tax, pre-transfer (market) income. This income series considers total market income

of the sharing unit excluding realized and unrealized capital gains. Specifically, it includes

income from wages and salaries, self-employment, farm income, interest, dividends, rents, trusts,

and retirement pension income but excludes public transfers which are not included in market

income. These CPS-based income sources closely match the taxable income sources Piketty and

Saez (2003) include in their analysis of IRS tax return data.

       Pre-tax, post-transfer income. This is the income measure the Census Bureau uses in its

household income series. It adds cash transfers to the income measure used in the previous

series. This includes income from welfare transfer programs such as AFDC/TANF as well as

from social insurance programs such as Social Security and Workers’ Compensation. It excludes,

however, transfers directly tied to the tax system such as the Earned Income Tax Credit. It also

excludes any in-kind government transfers, such as the value of Medicare or Medicaid insurance.

       Post-tax, post-transfer income. This income measure further broadens the income

definition by incorporating tax credits and liabilities. The tax credits and liabilities are imputed

using NBER TaxSim 9.0 and the procedure described in the previous section.

       Post-tax, post-transfer income plus health insurance. This income measure partially

accounts for the fact that not all resources come in the form of cash compensation. While the cost

of employer or government provision of in-kind benefits may be less than their value to the

recipients, they have positive value and should be considered in a fuller measure of available



                                                  9
economic resources. The most important employer provided non-cash compensation is the ex-

ante value of employer contributions to employee health insurance premiums. Since we consider

post-transfer income, in addition to including the ex-ante value of employer provided health

insurance we also include the ex-ante value of government provided health insurance via

Medicaid and Medicare. If these health insurance policies were not provided and individuals

opted to purchase coverage on the open market, the cost would be higher now than it was 30

years ago. Thus, it is appropriate to view the value of these benefits as increasing over time

(Cutler, 2004) even if some individuals would prefer to receive additional cash compensation or

transfers rather than receiving increasingly expensive health insurance benefits. It is for this

reason that we include the ex-ante value of these non-cash benefits in this final income series.

       Tax unit sharing unit. For each series with the tax unit as the sharing unit, individuals

living in a tax unit are assumed to only share their economic resources with other members of

that tax unit and with no one else living in their household. The procedures discussed previously,

which mirror those used by Piketty and Saez to determine the number of potential tax units, are

used here to impute tax units.

       Not all Americans file a tax return.6 This is an important issue that Piketty and Saez

(2003) address in the literature using IRS data to examine the distribution of the market income

of tax units. While Auten and Gee’s (2009) finding that 91 percent of adults age 25-64 file a tax

return illustrates that this problem may be less significant than some believe, focusing only on

filers is likely to impact median income levels and trends. Thus, to more closely approximate the

entire US population, we consider both filing and non-filing tax units. Because the CPS is a

6
 This is a common problem for researchers using IRS administrative tax records which Auten and Gee
(2009) overcome to a large degree by directly accessing IRS tax records and supplementing them with
Social Security administrative records data. But, even they must make some assumptions about the
population not captured in either data set.


                                                 10
random sample of the entire population, it naturally includes both filers and non-filers.

        Nevertheless, given the uncertain importance of non-filers in tax return based research,

we will briefly discuss a series that excludes non-filers. The filers-only series uses the Census

Bureau imputation of filing status to restrict the sample to tax units where at least one member is

expected to file a tax return. However, since the Census Bureau did not impute filing status until

after 1993, this series is only discussed for the most recent business cycle which is the only one

for which filing status imputations are available for the entire period.

        Household sharing unit. For each series with the household as the sharing unit, all

individuals living in the same household are assumed to share economic resources. Thus, rather

than aggregating income to the tax unit it acknowledges sharing of resources within a household

and aggregates income up to the household level. That is, the private income of all tax units

within a household are combined.7 Similar to the tax unit income series for filers and non-filers,

it includes all households regardless of the filing status of the individuals in the household.

        Non-size-adjusted income of sharing units. Income series that are not specified as size-

adjusted measure income at the sharing-unit level and treat sharing-units of all sizes equally. For

example, a single-individual in a household making $50,000 per year is considered as having the

same resources as individuals in a four-person household where household income is the same

$50,000 per year. These non-size-adjusted income series match the approaches used by Piketty

and Saez (2003) for tax units and the Census Bureau’s household income series for households

(DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Smith 2008).

        Size-adjusted income of persons. This measure moves from the sharing unit to the


7
  For an example of shifting from the tax unit to the household as the sharing unit to measure the impact
of tax changes on economic well-being, see Elmendorf, Furman, Gale, and Harris (2009). This procedure
is embedded in the Urban Institute/Brookings Institution Tax Simulation Model.


                                                   11
individual as the unit of analysis. In doing so, it acknowledges that the resources available to any

person in a sharing unit, given some level of income, vary with the number of persons sharing

that income. That is, a household with a single individual making $50,000 per year will have

access to more resources and can maintain a higher standard of living than a person in a

household with the same $50,000 of income but more people.

       Following the customary procedure in the income inequality literature, sharing unit

income is deflated using an equivalence scale to account for economies of scale by person by

dividing sharing unit income by the square-root of the sharing unit’s size (see e.g. Atkinson and

Brandolini 2001; Gottschalk and Danziger 2005; Smeeding, Rainwater, and Burtless 2006; and

Burkhauser et al. Forthcoming, b).8 This size-adjusted income series is commonly used by CPS

based inequality researchers in the international literature. Auten and Gee (2009) also recognize

the importance of using the individual as the unit of analysis in their work using IRS tax record

data but use the tax unit rather than the household as the sharing unit.

       Using each combination of income definition, sharing unit definition, and size-adjustment

method described above, we first track the growth in the economic well-being of middle class

Americans over the past 30 years by measuring changes in the median income of the entire

population. We then narrow our focus to six series which encompass some of the most widely

used of these definitions to look in more detail at income trends over each peak-to-peak business




8
  Dividing by the square-root of the household size is the most commonly used case of the economies of
scale size-adjustments proposed by Buhmann, et al. (1988) where size-adjusted income = total income /
sizeα, with α=1 implying no economies of scale (per capita income) and α=0 implying infinite economies
of scale (the implicit assumption of those who do not adjust for size). Dividing by the square root of
household size (α=0.5) closely matches the adjustments for household size implied by official Census
Bureau poverty thresholds (Ruggles 1990).


                                                  12
cycle since 1979.9 By comparing peak-year to peak-year of each business cycle, we are able to

focus on long-term trends in income devoid of cyclical economic conditions.

        There are, of course, numerous factors such as increases in education, the aging of the

population, and the influx of immigrants which will impact income trends in the cross-sectional

data we observe. While it is important to know which of these factors account for these income

trends, our focus is on the sensitivity of measured income trends to alternative choices of sharing

unit and income definition rather than the underlying causes of these trends.10

IV. RESULTS

        Median Income. The first measure we consider of the trend in the economic resources of

the middle class is the median income of all Americans. Table 1 provides a matrix of the 29 year

(1979-2007) median income growth using each possible combination of income definition,

sharing unit definition, and size-adjustment method described above.

        In the upper-left corner of the matrix is the pre-tax, pre-transfer (market) income of tax

units, which most closely matches the definitions used by Piketty and Saez (2003). When using

this definition, we observe a total increase in median income of just 3.2 percent in real terms

over the 29 year period. Going down the first column, the income definition broadens but the

sharing unit remains the tax unit and there are no adjustments for the number of people in the tax

unit. Here, the observed median income growth improves to 6.0 percent for pre-tax, post-transfer

income, 9.5 percent for post-tax post-transfer income, and 18.2 percent for post-tax post-transfer


9
  Peak years of business cycles are defined here based on peaks in median income, which generally lag
macroeconomic growth. However, results are not sensitive to reasonable adjustments to the choice of
peak years used in the analysis.
10
   Burkhauser and Larrimore (2011) analyze the factors accounting for declines in median pre-tax, post-
transfer size-adjusted household income over the first years of the last four recessions. To our knowledge
no researchers have considered how the observed impact of such factors differs across income definitions,
sharing units, or size-adjustments, which may be a valuable area for future research.


                                                   13
income including the ex-ante value of health insurance (all in inflation-adjusted terms). Thus,

just broadening the income definition to recognize the growth of transfer income, decline in

taxes and increase in tax credits, and the fact that an increasing portion of middle class

compensation comes in the form of non-cash benefits increases median tax unit income growth

by over 5.5 times from 3.2 percent to 18.2 percent.

       Moving from Column 1 (non-size-adjusted tax unit income) to Column 2 (non-size-

adjusted household income), we see that using the tax unit as the sharing unit also limited

measured income growth. For each income series, household median income growth is between

9 and 11 percentage points greater than for tax units. For instance, simply shifting from a tax unit

to a household sharing unit almost quadruples market income growth from 3.2 to 12.5 percent.

Results using the market income of tax units are largely the basis for the view that those at the

top of the income distribution have become wealthier while the income of middle class

Americans has stagnated since 1979. However, the perspective portrayed in Column 1 of Table 1

is much gloomier than the one in Column 2 where the sharing unit is shifted to the household.

       Panels A and B of Table 2 provide an explanation for these differences. Over the past

three business cycles, the proportion of households with only one tax unit households declined

from 80.3 to 76.2 while the proportion with three or more tax units increased from 3.9 to 5.6

percent. Two major factors precipitated this shift in the number of tax units living in the same

household: (a) an increase in the number of cohabiters and other unrelated individuals living in

separate tax units but sharing the same dwelling, and (b) an increase in related individuals living

in separate tax units but in the same dwelling, such as adult children living with their parents.

The 4.1 percentage point drop in one tax unit households (Panel A of Table 2) is analogous to the

4.2 percentage point drop in households containing only one unrelated tax unit (Panel B of Table



                                                 14
2). However, the growth in three or more tax unit households originated largely from increases in

related tax units—as evidenced by the much smaller increase in three or more unrelated tax unit

households. Because the number of multiple tax unit households increased for both these

reasons, measures of median income based on the tax unit will report smaller income growth

than measures of median income at the household level that recognize that shared resources

occur beyond the tax unit.

       A criticism of each series discussed so far is that they make no adjustment for the fact

that the number of persons per household (and tax unit) has declined over the past three business

cycles (Panels C and D of Table 2). This results in household resources being shared over fewer

people so holding sharing unit income constant increases the available resources per person.

       The third and fourth columns of Table 1 account for the change in sharing unit size over

the period of our analysis by making the individual the unit of analysis and scaling available

income based on the size of the tax unit and household respectively. When doing so, median tax

unit income growth increases between 11 and 15 percentage points (comparing Column 1 to

Column 3) and median household income growth increases between 8 and 10 percentage points

(comparing Column 2 to Column 4). With the most inclusive income definition, recognizing the

sharing of resources between all individuals in a household, and recognizing the economies of

scale in household consumption, median income growth was 36.7 percent (Row 4 of Column 4)

over the past 3 business cycles. This figure is over 10 times the 3.2 percent growth (Row 1 of

Column 1) observed in the initial series considering only the market income of tax units without

adjusting for tax unit size. In summary, broadening the income definition; capturing households

rather than tax units; and adjusting for the household and tax unit size each broadly increase

measured median income growth over the past three business cycles.



                                                15
        We now turn to the trend over each separate business cycle and focus on just six income

series which encompass some of the most commonly used income and sharing unit definitions,

as well as two of our broader measures. The importance of each intermediate change should not

be viewed as absolute since the stacking-order matters for the importance of each. For example,

as demonstrated in Table 1, size-adjusting has a larger impact if performed on tax unit income

rather than the household income. Rather, these measures are chosen for additional emphasis

given their widespread use in the IRS- and CPS-based income distribution literatures and thus

provide valuable information for comparing results based on these popular methods.

        The first series, which is not shown in Table 3 since it only became available in 1993, is

the pre-tax, pre-transfer (market) income of tax units that file a return. In this series we observe

that median income fell by 2.7 percent in the 2000-2007 business cycle. Column 1 of Table 3

adds non-filers to the sample and reports their pre-tax, pre-transfer (market) income. This series

most closely matches Piketty and Saez (2003) tax unit sample, As can be seen from Panel A of

Table 3 which presents this information as the total median income change over each business

cycle, the median pre-tax pre-transfer tax unit income of the entire population of tax units

declined even more (5.5 percent) in the 2000-2007 business cycle.

        Column 2 of Table 3 adds cash transfer income to the income definition and allows

income to be shared across all members of a household rather than only within a tax unit. This

series approximates the one the Census Bureau reports in their annual P-60 reports (DeNavas-

Walt, Proctor, and Smith 2008).11 When doing so, the real median income decline in the most

recent business cycle shrinks from 5.5 percent (Column 1) to 1.2 percent and the total growth

11
  Our results do not exactly match the Census P-60 reports because the Census Bureau implements
certain smoothing techniques (not included in the publicly provided data) to the CPS data prior to
producing their report. Additionally, the Census P-60 report does not account for the 1992-93 CPS trend
break, since the report is designed as an annual snapshot rather than as a source of long-term trends.


                                                   16
over the past three business cycles quadruples from 3.2 percent (Column 1) to 15.2 percent.

       Column 3 of Table 3 presents the most common income definition in the CPS-based

inequality literature. This series, household size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer income of the

median person, rose by 23.6 percent over the three business cycles—well above the 3.2 percent

increase for the median market income of tax units—and fell by only 0.1 percent in the 2000-

2007 business cycle.

       Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3 provide our series with broader income definitions than have

traditionally been used in the literature. In Column 4, it is evident that including taxes and

measuring post-tax post-transfer size-adjusted household cash income results in even faster

median income growth. The gains in median net of tax income are most significant over the

1980s business cycle but occurred over all three periods. Median income now rises by 29.3

percent over the entire period and by 1 percent between 2000 and 2007. Declines in tax rates

over the past 30 years together combined with the rise of numerous credits have substantially

positively impacted the median person’s net of tax income.

       Finally, Column 5 of Table 3 adds the ex-ante value of employer and government

provided health insurance to the post-tax post-transfer size adjusted household income of people.

Because this data is only available for the last two business cycles, we conservatively assume the

ex-ante value of employer and government provided health insurance increased at the same rate

as all other post-tax, post-transfer household income over the 1979-1989 business cycle.

However, in both the 1989-2000 and 2000-2007 business cycles, accounting for health insurance

payments further increased median income growth. While the 2.2 percent increase in median

income growth from the increased value of health insurance was dwarfed by the overall 16.6

percent growth in income in the 1990s, accounting for the increased fraction of middle class



                                                 17
compensation received in the form of health insurance in the 2000s results in median income

growth increasing from 1 to 4.8 percent from 2000 to 2007. Hence at least part of the recent

decline in the economic resources of the median American observed previously is the result of a

shift in the way compensation and government transfers have been provided over the last two

decades as more compensation and transfers have come in the form of in-kind benefits.

       Panel B of Table 3 reports the annualized median income growth in each business cycle

to account for the different lengths of each business cycle. However, the patterns discussed

above with respect to Panel A of Table 3 are the same. For instance, an anemic growth rate of

0.12 percent (Row 4, Column 1) in the market income of tax units over the entire period

increases by 10 times to 1.31 percent (Row 4, Column 5) for the post-tax post-transfer household

size-adjusted income including the ex-ante value of health insurance of persons. Likewise, an

annual drop of 0.75 percent over the 2000-2007 business cycle in the market income of tax units

(Column 1) is transformed into an annual increase of 0.68 percent in Column 5.

       Quintile incomes. While median income is a straightforward measure of how the average

American is faring, it is also valuable to use a measure of the middle class that allows one to

compare growth in the middle of the distribution to growth in the two tails.12 We do so below by

comparing income trends for each quintile of the population.

       Table 4 shows the growth in mean income within each quintile of the distribution for

each of our primary income series, holding the boundaries of the middle quintiles constant in real

terms over each of the last three business cycles. We also provide the mean income of the top 10

and the top 5 percent of the distribution as well as the Gini coefficient for the entire distribution.

12
   An alternate approach for evaluating the extent to which economic gains are captured by the middle
class is to compare median income growth in the CPS to GDP growth, productivity growth for non-farm
businesses, or mean per-capita income growth from the National Income and Products Accounts. For a
flavor of this approach, and a discussion of some of its challenges, see Gordon (2009).


                                                  18
        During the 1980s business cycle (Panel A), the relative income growth across the five

quintiles of the distribution follows almost the same pattern in each income series. In each series

income growth is more rapid for the third and fourth quintiles than for the first two quintiles; and

the top quintile of the distribution showed the fastest growth. Income growth in the top 5 percent

of the distribution is the greatest of all. This result is consistent with earlier findings that income

inequality rose rapidly during the 1980s and that inequality growth occurred throughout the

distribution (Piketty and Saez 2003, Burkhauser et al. Forthcoming, b).

        Ostensibly the first income series, which only considers market income, is an outlier

across the five measures. That is, using this first series, it appears that over the 1980s the poorest

two quintiles actually become poorer—i.e. they experienced negative growth. However, when

in-cash government transfers and taxes are included and adjustments are made for household size

(Column 4), these negative values become positive, albeit at very low levels. Unlike that seen for

the first column considering only market income, the broader measures of income used in the

other columns suggest that while income growth was highest in the top quintile, it was

substantial in the third and fourth quintiles and at least positive in the bottom two quintiles.

        To show how the different growth pattern in Panel A translates into overall changes in

inequality, in the bottom two rows we report the Gini coefficients for 1979 and 1989. Not

surprisingly, the absolute values of the Gini coefficients for Column 1 are the highest since this

measure only includes market income and uses the tax unit as its sharing unit. Expanding the

sharing unit to the household and including government transfers (Column 2) reduces inequality,

as does accounting for household size (Column 3), taking account of taxation (Column 4) and

including the ex-ante value of employer and government provided health insurance (Column 5).

        These patterns changed dramatically during the 1990s business cycle. Growth occurred in



                                                  19
mean income in all quintiles across all five measures. It was higher in the bottom quintile than

the other quintiles across all measures and even greater than in the top 5 percent in all but one

measure. But like the 1980s business cycle, the middle quintiles made the most significant gains

in terms of mean income growth when shifting to measures that better capture sharing units,

household size, government taxes and transfers, and health insurance. Comparing Column 1 with

Column 5 shows that economic growth is higher in all five quintiles, but the two lowest quintiles

actually experienced the greatest growth over this period with the top three quintiles growing at

about the same rate. Additionally, while income inequality (measured by the Gini coefficient)

continued to grow in the private sector as shown in Column 1, during the 1990s business cycle

income inequality actually fell overall in Columns 4 and 5 when government tax and transfer

programs are considered and the value of health insurance is included.

       A similar picture emerges for the most recent business cycle. When only considering

private income at the tax unit level, the top quintile of the distribution saw the smallest decline in

their incomes (-1.6 percent for the top quintile, compared to -4.9 percent for the middle quintile

and -43 percent for the bottom quintile). However, adjusting for household size and including

transfers, taxes, and health insurance compensation changes, results in income growth instead of

declines in all quintiles. This growth is balanced across the distribution with the middle three

quintiles (e.g. 4.9 percent for the middle quintile) displaying more rapid growth than either the

top (3.1 percent) or bottom (2.2 percent) quintiles. This more complete income measure also

shows a slight decline in inequality of 0.002 Gini points rather than the 0.010 increase observed

using tax unit market income. Hence, even during the weak growth years of the 2000-2007

business cycle, when this fuller measure of economic resources is used the middle class did not

fall behind. They experienced similar increases in real income as the top quintile, but mostly in



                                                 20
the form of the increased value of their employer health insurance.

       Finally, Panel D illustrates the change in income for each quintile over the entire 29 year

period. Due to the previously observed rapid growth in top incomes in the 1980s, under all five

income series the top quintile had greater income growth than the other four quintiles and the top

5 percent had the greatest income growth. Hence income inequality rose as measured by the Gini

coefficient across all income series. But importantly, in contrast to tax unit market income

measures of income where the bottom two quintiles get poorer and only the top quintile gets

noticeably richer, each of the other series shows income growth throughout the distribution.

Once taxes and health insurance are taken into account, each of the quintiles of the distribution

are shown to have sizable growth over the 29 year period—with the slowest growth being a 26.4

percent increase in mean incomes for the bottom quintile of the distribution. Growth in the

middle quintile is 36.9 percent, dramatically greater than their 2.2 percent growth in private

market income when measured at the tax unit level.

       Hence these more inclusive measures of access to economic resources suggest that

income inequality increased in the United States not because the rich got richer, the poor got

poorer and the middle class stagnated, but because the rich got richer at a faster rate than the

middle and poorer quintiles and this mostly occurred in the 1980s. Growth was substantial in all

quintiles once the influence of government tax and transfer policy as well as the shift in

compensation from wages to health insurance provided by employers and the shift to increased

in-kind health insurance by government is more full recognized.

V. IMPACT ON PUBLIC POLICY DEBATES

       Thus far, we have focused on how sensitive income measures are to changes in sharing

unit and income definitions. However, these choices are also important when considering the



                                                 21
impact of policy changes. The importance of income definitions for understanding policy debates

should be self-evident. Taxes and transfers have a real impact on the well-being of individuals

paying the taxes and receiving the transfers, which is why proposed changes to them are often

controversial. Since these incomes and expenses impact Americans’ available resources, we

should include their effects in the statistics used to evaluate the success of public policies. By

considering post-tax, post-transfer income including the value of health insurance, we can better

capture the effect of program changes on people’s economic resources.13

        Less obvious, but similarly important, is how the sharing unit influences the observed

distribution of benefits of a given policy change. Although the distinction is often overlooked,

this choice and the choice of whether to adjust for the size of the sharing unit can have profound

effects on where individuals fall in the income distribution and consequently on the distribution

of benefits of policy changes. While an individual’s location in the income distribution is

positively correlated across sharing unit measures, this correlation is not perfect. Some low-

income individuals in one distribution will be reported as having high-income in the other

depending on which sharing unit measure is employed.

        Table 5 illustrates the extent to which the distributions of “not size-adjusted tax unit

income” and “size-adjusted household income” differ—even when the income definition (post-

tax, post-cash transfer including the ex-ante value of health insurance) is the same. If individuals

in each of the quintiles in the tax unit distribution fell in the same quintiles of the household unit

distribution, they would all lie on the diagonal of Table 5. This is not the case. Just 57 percent of

individuals in the bottom quintile of the tax unit income distribution are also in the bottom

13
  A fuller measure of resources would also include irregularly received income such as capital gains from
investments or home sales as well as other non-cash government transfer income and employer provided
non-wage compensation not available in the CPS data analyzed here. For this reason, it may be beneficial
for the Census to more rigorously attempt to capture these income sources.


                                                   22
quintile of the household income distribution (11.5 percent of the 20 percent of individuals in

this quintile). The other 43 percent live in households with income above the bottom quintile.

Overall, only 46 percent of all individuals are in the same quintiles of both distributions.

           The different alignments of the distribution based on the sharing unit subsequently

influence the perceived economic progressivity of public policies. To illustrate this general

statement, we provide the example of who currently gains from the tax exemption for employer

provided health insurance. A similar analysis could be performed for any policy including

restructuring Social Security benefits, changing tax rates, or scaling back tax deductions and

credits.

           Table 6 provides the relative mean benefit from the tax exemption of employer provided

health insurance by quintile across both the not-size-adjusted tax unit income distribution and the

size-adjusted household income distribution respectively. In both cases, we normalize the mean

benefit of the entire population to 100 to focus on the relative benefits across the distribution.

When we focus on the tax unit, it appears that the value of the health insurance tax exemption is

largely concentrated among the top of the distribution while the bottom of the distribution

received little benefit—the average individuals in the top quintile received 94.2 percent above

the mean benefit in the population while the average individual in the bottom quintile received

just 1.2 percent of the mean benefit in the population. Thus, the average individual in the top

quintile receives 166 times the benefit of the average individual in the bottom quintile.

           Although the relative size of the mean benefit is still highest near the top of the

distribution when we consider size-adjusted household income, the spread is less extreme. Using

this income series, the top quintile of the distribution receives 40.9 percent above the mean

benefit and those in the bottom quintile receive 18.1 percent. Thus, using this series, the mean



                                                    23
benefit going to the top quintile is less than 8 times that going to the bottom quintile. More

generally, the values of the mean benefit in the 2nd and the 3rd quintile also rise substantially

and the size of the benefit in the 4th quintile is now greater than the benefit in the highest quintile.

        Table 7 provides insight into why the spread of benefits differ across these series. In this

table, individuals are divided into cells based on their location in the joint distribution of not-

size-adjusted tax unit income and size-adjusted household income. Each cell contains the mean

benefit from the health insurance tax exemption relative to both the population mean when using

not-size-adjusted tax unit income and size-adjusted household income.

        Among individuals along the diagonal where the quintile of both income distributions is

the same, the ratio of mean quintile benefit to mean population benefit is similar for both series.

This is not the case for individuals in quintiles off the diagonal (i.e. those who switch quintiles

depending on which unit of measurement is employed). Individuals below the diagonal are in a

higher quintile for household income than they are for tax unit income. This can occur, for

instance, when low-income grown children live with their higher income parents. For these

individuals, the relative mean benefits from tax-deductible employer provided health insurance

observed for household units exceeds that observed for tax units. This is particularly evident

among individuals in the bottom quintile of tax units, where almost no benefits are observed at

the tax unit level but substantial benefits may be observed at the household level. Thus, by

missing the benefits for these individuals, using tax units augments the perceived disparity in the

tax advantage of exempting employer provided health insurance across the distribution. In

contrast, above the diagonal there is less of a distinction between the two series as even

individuals in the bottom quintiles of the household income distribution are still receiving

benefits from the income exclusion. Therefore, an exclusive focus on the tax unit obscures the



                                                  24
fact that within low income quintiles there is a range of benefits and some households at the

bottom of the distribution do, in fact, receive substantial benefits from this policy.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

       Much of the previous research on income and its distribution is based on the types of

income captured in the data and the sharing unit over which it was summed, without fully

considering the implications of those choices. In this paper, we demonstrated that such choices

can substantially change the view of how the average American has fared over the past three

business cycles (1979-2007) and who benefits from public policy choices going forward. When

using the most restrictive income definition – pre-tax, pre-transfer tax unit cash (market)

income—the resources available to the middle class have stagnated over the past three business

cycles. In contrast, once broadening the income definition to post-tax, post-transfer size-adjusted

household cash income, middle class Americans are found to have made substantial gains, and

these increases are even larger when including non-cash income such as the ex-ante value of

health insurance. Additionally, as we demonstrated using the example of the benefits of the tax

exclusion of employer provided health insurance, these measurement decisions impact the extent

to which we view policy benefits as skewed towards the top or bottom of the income distribution

or view them as distributed more widely to individuals of all incomes.

       So which income series is superior? This depends on the research inquiry. For researchers

interested in how middle class Americans are compensated for their time in the labor market, for

example, it is more appropriate to use pre-tax, pre-transfer (market) income, although even here

researchers who ignore the dramatic increase in the ex-ante value of employer health insurance

will understate the returns to work in the United States and disproportionately do so for workers

in middle class households. However, for those interested in the overall economic resources



                                                 25
available to individuals, it is more appropriate to consider income as broadly as possible.

       In most cases, it is more important to know how a given policy impacts people arrayed by

available resources within their sharing unit than how that policy impacts their market income. In

such cases, researchers should broaden the definition of income to include taxes and non-cash

benefits. This will more accurately reflect the total financial resources available to individuals.

Additionally, they should do so across households rather than tax units and adjust for the number

of people in those households. As we have demonstrated, doing so provides a markedly different

picture of how middle class Americans have fared over the past several decades.




                                                 26
References

Atkinson, Anthony B., and Andrea Brandolini, 2001. “Promises and Pitfalls in the Use of
    Secondary Data Sets: Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study,” Journal of
    Economic Literature 39(3), 771–799.

Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez, 2011. “Top Incomes in the Long
    Run of History.” Journal of Economic Literature 49(1), 3-73.

Auten, Gerald and Geoffrey Gee. 2009. “Income Mobility in the United States: New Evidence
    from Income Tax Data.” National Tax Journal 62(2), 301-328

Buhmann, Brigitte, Lee Rainwater, Guenther Schmaus, and Timothy M. Smeeding, 1988.
     “Equivalence scales, well-being, inequality, and poverty: sensitivity estimates across ten
     countries using the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) database.” Review of Income and
     Wealth 34: 115-142

Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore, Forthcoming,
    a. “Recent Trends in Top Income Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from March
    CPS and IRS Tax Return Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore, Forthcoming,
    b. “Trends in United States Income Inequality Using the March Current Population Survey:
    The Importance of Controlling for Censoring.” Journal of Economic Inequality.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Jeff Larrimore, 2011. “How Changes in Employment, Earnings, and
    Public Transfers Make the First Two Years of the Great Recession (2007-2009) Different
    from Previous Recessions and Why It Matters for Longer Term Trends." Russell Sage
    Foundation US2010 Project Research Brief. Available at:
    http://www.s4.brown.edu/us2010/Data/Report/report3.pdf

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Kosali Simon, 2010. “The Importance of Health Insurance in
    Measuring Levels and Trends in United States Income Inequality.” NBER Working Paper
    No. w15811. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Chung, Wankyo, 2003. “Fringe Benefits and Inequality in the Labor Market” Economic Inquiry
   41(3), 517-529.

Cutler, David M. 2004.Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Healthcare System.
     Oxford University Press.

DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette D. Proctor, and Jessica C. Smith, U.S. Census Bureau, 2008.
     Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2007. (August),
     Current Population Reports P60-235. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.




                                                27
d'Ercole, Marco Mira and Michael Förster, Forthcoming. “The OECD approach to measuring
     income distribution and poverty: Strengths, limits and statistical issues.” In Douglas J.
     Besharov and Kenneth A. Couch (eds.), European Measures of Income and Poverty:
     Lessons for the U.S. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Elmendorf, Douglas W., Jason Furman, William G. Gale, and Benjamin H. Harris, 2008.
      “Distributional Effects of the 2001 and 2003 Tax Cuts: How do Financing and
      Behavioral Responses Matter?” National Tax Journal 61(3), 365-380.

Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts, 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model", Journal
    of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1), 189-94, http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/

Goldman, David, 2008. “Work harder, take home less.” CNN.com, August 28, 2008.

Gordon, Robert, 2009. “Misperception about the magnitude and timing of changes in American
      income inequality.” NBER Working Paper w15351.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Sheldon Danziger, 2005. “Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and Family
       Income in the United States, 1975–2002,” Review of Income and Wealth 51(2), 231–254.

Johnson, David Cay, 2007. “Income Gap is Widening Data Shows.” The New York Times, March
      29.

Jones, Arthur F., Jr., and Weinberg, Daniel H., 2000. “The Changing Shape of the Nation’s
       Income Distribution.” U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-204.
       Washington, DC: GPO.

Karoly, Lynn A., 1994. “Trends in Income Inequality: The Impact of, and Implications for, Tax
       Policy.” In Joel B. Slemrod, ed., Tax Progressivity, New York: Cambridge University
       Press, pp. 95-129.

Karoly, Lynn A. and Gary Burtless, 1995. “Demographic Change, Rising Earnings Inequality,
       and the Distribution of Personal Well-being, 1959-1989.” Demography 32(3), 379-405

Lahart, Justin, and Kelly Evans, 2008. “Trapped in the Middle.” The Wall Street Journal, April
    19.

Leonhardt, David, 2008. “For Many a Boom That Wasn’t.” The New York Times, April 9.

Meyer, Bruce D., and James X. Sullivan, 2009a. “Consumption and Income Inequality in the
   U.S.:1960-2008.” Draft available at
   http://www.iza.org/conference_files/EcCrRiUnEm2010/Meyer-Inequality1.4.pdf

Meyer, Bruce D., and James X. Sullivan, 2009b. “Five Decades of Consumption and Income
   Poverty.” NBER Working Paper No. w14827. National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Cambridge, MA.

                                               28
Obama, Barack, 2009. Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
   White House Task Force on Middle class Working Families.
   Available at:
   http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/memorandum_for_the_heads_of_executive_de
   partments_and_agencies/

Pierce, Brooks, 2001. “Compensation Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116,
     2001(4), 1493-1525.

Pierce, Brooks, 2007. “Recent Trends in Compensation Inequality.” Draft available at
     https://nber15.nber.org/c/2007/CRIWf07/pierce.pdf

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez, 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–
    1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 1–39.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez, 2007. “How the Income Share of Top 1% of Families has
    Increased Dramatically.” The Wall Street Journal, January 11.

Ruggles, Patricia, 1990. Drawing the Line: Alternative Poverty Measures and Their Implication
      for Public Policy. Urban Institute Press, Washington, DC.

Ryscavage Paul, 1995. “A Surge in Growing Income Inequality?” Monthly Labor Review 118(8),
      51–61.

Saez, Emmanuel, 2009. “Striking it Richer: The Evolution of Top Incomes in the United States”.
    Draft available at http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~saez/saez-UStopincomes-2007.pdf

Smeeding, Timothy, Lee Rainwater, and Gary Burtless, 2001. “United States Poverty in a Cross-
      National Context.” Focus 21(Spring), 50-54

Stewart, Kenneth J. and Stephen B. Reed, 1999. “CPI research series using current methods,
       1978-98”. Monthly Labor Review 122(6), 29-38.




                                              29
Table 1: Comparing the total growth from 1979-2007 using each sharing unit, size-
adjustment, and income series combination.
                                                                   Size-         Size-
                                                                 Adjusted      Adjusted
                                            Tax Unit Household Tax Unit Household
 Pre-tax, pre-transfer                        3.2%    12.5%       14.5%         20.6%
 Pre-tax, post-transfer                      6.0%     15.2%       17.0%         23.6%
 Post-tax, post-transfer                     9.5%     20.2%       25.0%         29.3%
 Post-tax, post-transfer + Health Insurance  18.2%    27.3%       33.0%         36.7%

Source: Public Use March CPS data.
Note: Changes in income between 1992 and 1993 are suppressed and assumed to be zero given
the trend-break resulting from the CPS redesign in those years. See main text for details.
1
  Health insurance information not available prior to 1988. The rate of growth in the value of
health insurance from 1979-1989 is assumed to match that of post-tax, post-transfer income.




                                              30
Table 2: Trends in the size of tax units and households.

                            Panel A: Tax Units per Household
                                          Mean Tax         Percent of Households with
          Tax Units       Households      Units per        one, two, or more Tax Units
         (Thousands)     (Thousands)      Household          One        Two    ൒Three
 1979       98,958          79,399           1.25            80.3       15.8     3.9
 1989      119,705          93,626           1.28            78.4       16.8     4.8
 2000      137,810         106,512           1.29            77.1       18.0     4.9
 2007      153,322         116,881           1.31            76.2       18.2     5.6

                     Panel B: Unrelated Tax Units per Household
                                          Mean           Percent of Households with
          Unrelated                   Unrelated Tax      one, two, or more Unrelated
          Tax Units    Households        Units per                Tax Units
         (Thousands)  (Thousands)       Household          One        Two    ൒Three
 1979       83,690       79,399            1.05            95.3       4.2      0.5
 1989      100,606       93,626            1.07            93.4       6.0      0.6
 2000      117,146      106,512            1.10            91.2       7.9      0.9
 2007      128,751      116,881            1.10            91.1       8.0      0.9

                            Panel C: Individuals per Tax Unit
                                            Mean              Percent of Tax Units with
          Individuals     Tax Units       Individuals      one, two, or more Individuals
         (Thousands)     (Thousands)     per Tax Unit         One        Two     ൒Three
 1979       217,965         98,958           2.20             36.3       28.6      35.2
 1989       243,886        119,705           2.04             41.7       27.7      30.6
 2000       271,359        137,810           1.97             45.0       26.9      28.1
 2007       292,895        153,322           1.91             47.2       26.7      26.0

                           Panel D: Individuals per Household
                                            Mean           Percent of Households with
          Individuals     Households      Individuals     one, two, or more Individuals
         (Thousands)     (Thousands)    per Household        One       Two     ൒Three
 1979       217,965         79,399           2.75            22.7      31.2      46.1
 1989       243,886         93,626           2.60            24.8      32.2      43.0
 2000       271,359        106,512           2.55            26.2      33.2      40.6
 2007       292,895        116,881           2.51            27.6      33.2      39.3

Source: See Table 1.




                                             31
Table 3: Growth in median incomes using alternative income series

                Panel A: Total median income growth in each business cycle
                                                                   Household
             Tax unit Household Household          Household        Size-adj.
             Pre-tax      Pre-tax     Size-adj.     Size-adj.       Post-tax
               Pre-        Post-       Pre-tax      Post-tax       Post-trans.
             transfer    transfer   Post-transfer Post-transfer   + Health Ins.
1979-1989      0.2%        6.6%         9.2%         12.0%           12.0%1
1989-2000      9.1%        9.3%        13.4%         14.4%           16.6%
2000-2007     -5.5%       -1.2%        -0.1%          1.0%            4.8%

1979-2007      3.2%      15.2%         23.6%         29.3%           36.7%1

            Panel B: Annualized median income growth in each business cycle
                                                                 Household
            Tax unit Household     Household      Household       Size-adj.
             Pre-tax    Pre-tax     Size-adj.      Size-adj.      Post-tax
               Pre-       Post-      Pre-tax       Post-tax      Post-trans.
             transfer   transfer  Post-transfer  Post-transfer  + Health Ins.
1979-1989     0.02%      0.66%       0.92%          1.20%          1.20%1
1989-2000     0.82%      0.85%       1.22%          1.31%          1.51%
2000-2007    -0.79%     -0.17%       -0.02%         0.14%          0.68%

1979-2007     0.12%      0.54%         0.84%          1.05%           1.31%1

Source: See Table 1.




                                           32
Table 4: Quintile income growth by business cycle using each income series

             Panel A: 1979-1989 business cycle income growth, by income quintile
                                                                                Household
                                                    Household     Household      Size-adj.
                      Tax unit     Household         Size-adj.     Size-adj.      Post-tax
                       Pre-tax       Pre-tax          Pre-tax      Post-tax      Post-trans
                    Pre-transfer  Post-transfer    Post-transfer Post-transfer + Health Ins.1
Bottom quintile        -0.2%          5.0%             0.0%          0.4%           0.4%
2nd quintile           -5.0%          0.2%            -0.7%          1.0%           1.0%
Middle quintile         0.0%          6.3%             9.1%         11.7%          11.7%
4th quintile            4.0%          9.6%            12.9%         15.6%          15.6%
Top quintile           17.6%         19.7%            23.4%         28.1%          28.1%

Top 10%              21.8%           23.0%           19.7%          27.4%          33.7%
Top 5%               25.6%           26.3%           27.2%          32.0%          39.5%

1979 Gini             0.515           0.424           0.384         0.349          0.330
1989 Gini             0.547           0.451           0.423         0.394          0.372

             Panel B: 1989-2000 business cycle income growth, by income quintile
                                                                                Household
                                                    Household     Household      Size-adj.
                      Tax unit      Household        Size-adj.     Size-adj.     Post-tax
                       Pre-tax       Pre-tax          Pre-tax      Post-tax     Post-trans
                    Pre-transfer  Post-transfer    Post-transfer Post-transfer + Health Ins.
Bottom quintile        17.8%         10.6%            17.2%         20.4%         23.2%
2nd quintile           10.8%          8.3%            12.6%         15.2%         18.2%
Middle quintile         7.5%         10.7%            13.1%         14.5%         16.8%
4th quintile           10.7%         12.3%            13.3%         13.8%         15.5%
Top quintile           14.7%         14.0%            16.2%         14.8%         15.5%

Top 10%              15.0%           14.3%           14.0%          17.0%          15.2%
Top 5%               14.4%           13.8%           13.9%          16.6%          15.1%

1989 Gini             0.547           0.451           0.423         0.394          0.372
2000 Gini             0.556           0.459           0.427         0.390          0.364




                                              33
Table 4 (continued):

             Panel C: 2000-2007 business cycle income growth, by income quintile
                                                                                Household
                                                    Household     Household      Size-adj.
                      Tax unit      Household        Size-adj.     Size-adj.     Post-tax
                       Pre-tax       Pre-tax          Pre-tax      Post-tax     Post-trans
                    Pre-transfer   Post-transfer   Post-transfer Post-transfer + Health Ins.
Bottom quintile        -43.0%         -5.8%           -6.2%         -4.8%          2.2%
2nd quintile           -10.2%         -3.9%           -2.9%         -1.2%          4.7%
Middle quintile         -4.9%         -2.0%           -0.4%          1.2%          4.9%
4th quintile            -2.5%         -0.1%            1.0%          2.3%          5.2%
Top quintile            -1.6%         -1.4%           -1.0%          1.5%          3.1%

Top 10%                -2.4%            -2.4%           -1.4%          -2.0%            1.3%
Top 5%                 -4.0%            -4.0%           -4.0%          -3.4%            1.5%

2000 Gini              0.556            0.459           0.427           0.390          0.364
2007 Gini              0.566            0.462           0.430           0.396          0.362

                   Panel D: 1979-2007 income growth, by income quintile
                                                                                     Household
                                                      Household     Household         Size-adj.
                     Tax unit        Household         Size-adj.     Size-adj.        Post-tax
                      Pre-tax         Pre-tax           Pre-tax      Post-tax        Post-trans
                    Pre-transfer    Post-transfer    Post-transfer Post-transfer    + Health Ins.
Bottom quintile       -33.0%           9.5%              9.9%         15.0%            26.4%
2nd quintile           -5.5%            4.3%             8.6%         15.0%            25.0%
Middle quintile         2.2%           15.3%            22.8%         29.5%            36.9%
4th quintile           12.3%           23.0%            29.2%         34.6%            40.4%
Top quintile           32.7%           34.6%            42.0%         49.4%            52.6%

Top 10%                36.7%           37.3%            34.6%          46.1%           56.0%
Top 5%                 37.9%           38.0%            39.1%          48.7%           63.0%

1979 Gini              0.515            0.424           0.384           0.349          0.330
2007 Gini              0.566            0.462           0.430           0.396          0.362

Source and Notes: See Table 1.
1
 Health insurance information not available prior to 1988. The rate of growth in the value of
health insurance from 1979-1989 is assumed to match that of post-tax, post-transfer income.




                                                34
Table 5: Comparing the quintile distributions of the size-adjusted household income
distribution and not size-adjusted tax unit income distribution (2007).

                              Quintile of not-size-adjusted Tax Unit income
                             Bottom 2nd Middle 4th             Top      Total
                    Bottom    11.5     7.1      1.4     0.0    0.0        20
Quintile of size-
adj. Household




                    2nd        3.5     6.8      7.9     1.9     0.0       20
    income




                    Middle    2.2      3.3      6.5     7.4     0.6       20
                    4th       1.7      1.7      3.1     7.7     5.8       20
                    Top        1.2     1.1      1.2     3.1    13.5       20
                    Total      20       20       20      20     20       100

Source: See Table 1.

Note: In both series the unit of analysis is the individual so each quintile contains 20 percent of
individuals in the population and income is measured using post-tax, post-transfer income
including the ex-ante value of health insurance benefits.




                                                       35
Table 6: Relative benefit of health insurance tax exclusion by quintile of the distribution in
each income series in 2007 (Population mean benefit normed to 100 in each series)

                           relative Health                                 relative Health
                            Insurance Tax                                   Insurance Tax
                                 exclusion                                       exclusion
                                    benefit                                         benefit




                                              Quintile of size-
                  Bottom              1.17                        Bottom             18.08




                                              adj. Household
Quintile of not
 size-adj. Tax
 Unit income




                  2nd                25.55                        2nd                79.27




                                                  income
                  Middle            101.95                        Middle            116.93
                  4th               177.12                        4th               144.85
                  Top               194.22                        Top               140.88

Source: See Table 1.

Note: In both series the unit of analysis is the individual so each quintile contains 20 percent of
individuals in the population and income is measured using post-tax, post-transfer income
including the ex-ante value of health insurance benefits.




                                                           36
Table 7: Comparing relative benefits of health insurance tax exclusion by the joint quintile
of the size-adjusted household income and not size-adjusted tax unit income distributions
in 2007 (Population mean benefit normed to 100 in each series)

                                              Quintile of (not size-adjusted) Tax Unit income
                                    Bottom    2nd         Middle       4th         Top          All
                                    HH: 3.2   HH: 31.1 HH: 76          HH: N/A HH: N/A          HH: 18.1
                             Bottom
                                    TU: 1     TU: 35.7 TU: 104.1 TU: N/A           TU: N/A      TU: 20.3
 Quintile of size-adjusted




                                    HH: 25.5 HH: 31.7 HH: 124.5 HH: 162            HH: 119.8    HH: 79.3
                             2nd
   Household income




                                    TU: 1.3   TU: 28.4 TU: 145.6 TU: 226.4 TU: 225.9            TU: 88.3
                                    HH: 63.1 HH: 21.7 HH: 107.4 HH: 181.5 HH: 154.8             HH: 116.9
                             Middle
                                    TU: 1.6   TU: 10.4 TU: 98.8        TU: 220.7 TU: 222.2      TU: 122
                                    HH: 108.9 HH: 61.4 HH: 36.7 HH: 175.7 HH: 195.4             HH: 144.9
                             4th
                                    TU: 1.6   TU: 11.8 TU: 28.7        TU: 170.1 TU: 239.9      TU: 141.4
                                    HH: 128.7 HH: 84.1 HH: 53.1 HH: 74.1 HH: 169                HH: 140.9
                             Top
                                    TU: 0.8   TU: 8.9     TU: 16.8     TU: 60.5    TU: 173.3    TU: 128
                                    HH: 27.1 HH: 62.2 HH: 113.2 HH: 144.6 HH: 153
                             All
                                    TU: 1.2   TU: 25.6 TU: 101.9 TU: 177.1 TU: 194.2

Source: See Table 1.

Note: HH is the ratio of the mean benefit to size-adjusted household income in the joint quintile
to the mean benefit to size-adjusted household income for the population. TU is the ratio of the
mean benefit to not-size-adjusted tax unit income in the joint quintile to the mean benefit to not-
size-adjusted tax unit income for the population. In both series the unit of analysis is the
individual so each quintile contains 20 percent of individuals in the population.




                                                               37
Data Appendix

       March CPS data discontinuity in 1992-1993. After the 1993 March CPS (covering

income year 1992), the Census Bureau implemented a series of changes to their data collection

procedures. The most significant of these changes was a shift from paper to computerized data

collection (See Ryscavage, 1995 and Jones and Weinberg, 2000 for details on the data collection

changes that occurred during this year.) After the data collection redesign, the Census Bureau’s

collection procedures were believed to be superior to the earlier procedures, but the transition

resulted in a blip in the income distribution trends. While this blip is particularly evident in the

top 1 percent of the distribution (Burkhauser et al. Forthcoming, a), since the data collection

changes were not unique to the upper tail of the distribution it cannot be ruled out that incomes

lower in the distribution were effected as well.

       To remove the impact of this blip on the results, median and quintile incomes prior to this

year were scaled in all series. For example, median pre-tax, pre-transfer tax unit (market) income

increased between 1992 and 1993 by 0.86 percent so the pre-tax, pre-transfer tax unit income

was increased for all years prior to 1993 by 0.86 percent to eliminate this blip. Of course, this

procedure cannot distinguish between the real income changes that occurred between 1992 and

1993, and those due to the data collection change—and it suppresses both types of changes. In all

cases except for the bottom quintile income using the pre-tax, pre-transfer tax unit definition, the

suppressed change was positive. Thus, to the extent that real changes are suppressed along with

those due to the data collection change the income changes in the 1990s should be an

underestimate of the true increases observed in the business cycle. This procedure matches that

used by Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011) to suppress this blip when considering long-term

trends in top incomes in the CPS data.



                                                   38
       Treatment of young-adult students in forming tax units. For the main text of the paper, we

follow the procedures laid out in Piketty and Saez (2003) for predicting who will file a separate

tax return, which assumes that all individuals age 20 and over represent their own tax unit.

However, many individuals in their early 20s are students and therefore may be receiving income

support from their parents to fit the definition of a dependent. Thus, in Appendix Table A1 we

present median income growth using an alternate treatment of these individuals. In this approach,

any single student age 20-24 is considered part of their parents’ tax unit rather than as an

independent tax unit. Prior to 1986, the Census Bureau did not ask if an individual was a student

and simply asked whether the primary activity of that person in the previous week was attending

school. As a result of this question change, there was an increase in the number of individuals

considered students in 1986, which decreases the number of 20-24 year olds considered

independent filers and increases median income growth between 1985 and 1986. Even with this

potential upward bias, the median income growth using this alternate definition of a tax unit is

only 1.2 percent above those from our primary tax unit definition for the 32 year period. Thus,

our results do not appear to be overly sensitive to our treatment of students.

       Size-adjusting tax units rather than households. Following the inequality literature, we

focus on size-adjusted household income. However, it is also possible to keep the sharing unit as

the tax unit and size-adjust the tax unit instead. This is done in detail in Appendix Table A1 for

each business cycle to complement the size-adjustments of tax units for the entire 32 year period

in Table 3. While using this approach results in slower median income growth than that using the

household because it does not pick up trends in cohabitation and other shifts in the tax

unit/household relationship discussed in the main text, it still finds much faster median income

growth than that for non size-adjusted tax unit income. This is because the number of individuals



                                                 39
per tax unit has fallen over the past three business cycles (see Table 2 of the main text) so the

same tax unit income will produce a higher standard of living now with the smaller tax units than

it did 30 years ago. A third common definition is to size-adjust family income, with the family

defined either as a nuclear family or as individuals related by blood or marriage (see, e.g. Karoly

and Burtless 1995). This definition is a more inclusive sharing unit than the tax unit but is less

inclusive than the household. As a result, it will produce income trends between those seen for

the other two sharing units discussed.




                                                 40
Appendix Table A1: Growth in median incomes using an alternate tax unit definition
where unmarried students, aged 20-24, are assumed to be in their parents tax unit rather
than an independent tax unit.

Option 1 (growth in median incomes by business cycle)
              Panel A: Total median income growth in each business cycle
                                                                                  Household
                                                      Household     Household      Post-tax
              Tax unit   Household Household           Size-adj.     Size-adj.       Post-
              Pre-tax     Pre-tax   Pre-tax             Pre-tax      Post-tax      transfer
                Pre-        Pre-      Post-              Post-         Post-       + Health
              transfer    transfer  transfer           transfer      transfer     Insurance
 1979-1989      0.8%        4.5%      6.6%               9.2%         11.9%         11.9%1
 1989-2000      9.6%       10.0%      9.3%              13.4%         14.4%         16.5%
 2000-2007     -5.5%       -2.2%     -1.2%              -0.1%          1.0%          4.8%
 1979-2007      4.4%        12.5%        15.2%          23.6%         29.4%         36.7%1

          Panel B: Annualized median income growth in each business cycle
                                                                        Household
                                             Household    Household       Post-tax
            Tax unit Household Household      Size-adj.    Size-adj.        Post-
             Pre-tax   Pre-tax     Pre-tax     Pre-tax      Post-tax      transfer
              Pre-       Pre-        Post-       Post-        Post-       + Health
            transfer   transfer    transfer    transfer     transfer     Insurance
 1979-1989 0.08%        0.45%       0.66%       0.92%        1.19%         1.19%1
 1989-2000 0.88%        0.91%       0.85%       1.22%        1.31%         1.50%
 2000-2007 -0.79%      -0.31%      -0.17%      -0.02%        0.15%         0.68%

 1979-2007     0.16%        0.45%        0.54%          0.84%         1.05%         1.31%1

Source: Public Use March CPS data.
Note: Changes in income between 1992 and 1993 are suppressed and assumed to be zero given
the trend-break resulting from the CPS redesign in those years. See data appendix for details.
1
  Health insurance information is not available prior to 1988. The rate of growth in the value of
health insurance from 1979-1989 is assumed to match that of post-tax, post-transfer income.




                                                 41
Appendix Table A2: Growth in Median Incomes using size-adjusted tax unit income rather
than size-adjusted household income.

                                          Size-Adj.     Size-Adj.    Size-Adj. Tax unit
               Tax unit      Tax unit      Tax unit      Tax unit         Post-tax
                Pre-tax      Pre-tax       Pre-tax       Post-tax        Post-trans
              Pre-transfer Post-transfer Post-transfer Post-transfer    + Health Ins
    1979-1989     0.2%        2.7%          6.8%          9.7%             9.7%1
    1989-2000     9.1%        7.5%          12.0%         13.7%            16.8%
    2000-2007    -5.5%        -4.0%         -2.2%          0.2%             3.8%

    1979-2007     3.2%          6.0%          17.0%          25.0%             33.0%1

Source and Notes: See Table 1
1
 Health insurance information is not available prior to 1988. The rate of growth in the value of
health insurance from 1979-1989 is assumed to match that of post-tax, post-transfer income.




                                               42
