NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POUNDS THAT KILL:
THE EXTERNAL COSTS OF VEHICLE WEIGHT
Michael Anderson
Maximilian Auffhammer
Working Paper 17170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17170

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the University
of California Energy Institute. We thank Larry Goulder, Ryan Kellogg, Ian Parry and Ken Small for
valuable feedback. Seminar participants at CESIfo Munchen, Duke University, UC Berkeley, the
UC Energy Institute, UC Irvine, University of Michigan, Cornell University, RAND, NBER, and the
Occasional Workshop on Environmental and Resource Economics have provided helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Michael Anderson and Maximilian Auffhammer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Pounds that Kill: The External Costs of Vehicle Weight
Michael Anderson and Maximilian Auffhammer
NBER Working Paper No. 17170
June 2011
JEL No. H23,I18,Q48,Q58,R41
ABSTRACT
Heavier vehicles are safer for their own occupants but more hazardous for the occupants of other vehicles.
In this paper we estimate the increased probability of fatalities from being hit by a heavier vehicle
in a collision. We show that, controlling for own-vehicle weight, being hit by a vehicle that is 1,000
pounds heavier results in a 47% increase in the baseline fatality probability. Estimation results further
suggest that the fatality risk is even higher if the striking vehicle is a light truck (SUV, pickup truck,
or minivan). We calculate that the value of the external risk generated by the gain in fleet weight since
1989 is approximately 27 cents per gallon of gasoline. We further calculate that the total fatality externality
is roughly equivalent to a gas tax of $1.08 per gallon. We consider two policy options for internalizing
this external cost: a gas tax and an optimal weight varying mileage tax. Comparing these options, we
find that the cost is similar for most vehicles.

Michael Anderson
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
207 Giannini Hall, MC 3310
University of California
Berkeley CA 94720-3310
mlanderson@berkeley.edu
Maximilian Auffhammer
Agricultural and Resource Economics Department
University of California, Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
auffhammer@berkeley.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
The average weight of light vehicles sold in the United States has fluctuated
substantially over the past 35 years. From 1975 to 1980, average weight dropped almost
1,000 pounds (from 4,060 pounds to 3,228 pounds), likely in response to rising gasoline
prices and the passage of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency (CAFE) standard. As
gasoline prices fell in the late-1980s, however, average vehicle weight began to rise, and by
2005 it had attained 1975 levels (US EPA 2009). A rich body of research examines the
effects of CAFE and gasoline prices on consumers’ vehicle choices (Goldberg 1998; Portney
et al. 2003; Kleit 2004; Austin and Dinan 2005; Klier and Linn 2008; Bento, Goulder,
Jacobsen, and von Haefen, 2009; Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer 2009; Li, Timmins, and
Von Haefen 2009).
One question that remains unresolved is how traffic fatalities are affected by the
choices consumers make in response to gasoline prices and fuel economy standards. Traffic
accidents are the leading cause of death for persons under the age of 40, and they are a major
source of life-years lost.1 Intuitively, heavier cars are safer than lighter cars, and previous
research has argued that a heavier vehicle fleet is a safer vehicle fleet (Crandall and Graham
1989). Much of the subsequent transportation safety literature has focused on the effects of
average vehicle weight on safety, reaching varying conclusions.2 Jacobsen (2010) extends this
literature by exploring the traffic safety implications of different fuel economy regulatory
schemes across ten vehicle classes. The paper uses data on fatal accidents and concludes that
tightening fuel economy standards will not increase fatalities as long as the standards are
“footprint based” or unified across cars and trucks.3

Lung cancer, a disease that is generally the result of smoking, kills approximately four times as many
Americans each year as traffic accidents. However, the average lung cancer decedent is 71 years old while the
average traffic accident decedent is only 39 years old. The number of life-years lost to traffic accidents is thus
similar in magnitude to the number of life-years lost to lung cancer.
2 Most of the transportation safety literature is based on time series correlations between average vehicle weight
and aggregate fatality rates (Robertson 1991; Khazzoom 1994; Noland 2004, 2005; Ahmad and Greene 2005).
Two exceptions are Kahane (2003) and Van Auken and Zellner (2005), which use micro data concerning fatal
accidents only. They supplement the fatal accident data with data on police-reported accidents from several
states to estimate the rate at which different types of vehicles enter into collisions. These studies come to
varying conclusions regarding the sign of the relationship between average vehicle weight and overall fatality
rates, but all conclude that the magnitude of the relationship is relatively modest.
3 If the current separation between cars and trucks is maintained and standards are not footprint based,
Jacobsen estimates that raising CAFE standards by one mile per gallon could increase traffic fatalities by 149
1

2

From an economic standpoint, however, an unregulated vehicle fleet must be
inefficiently heavy. A heavier vehicle is safer for its own occupants but more hazardous for
the occupants of other vehicles. The safety benefits of vehicle weight are therefore internal,
while the safety costs of vehicle weight are external. Consumers’ vehicle choices thus have
the important features of an “arms race.” To date no detailed attempt has been made to
quantify the external costs of vehicle weight. This figure is essential for determining the
socially optimal weight of the vehicle fleet, and it cannot be inferred from the net effects of
average vehicle weight or fuel economy regulations on traffic safety.
We quantify the external costs of vehicle weight using a large micro data set on
police-reported crashes for a set of 8 heterogeneous states. Unlike the data sets employed in
the previous transportation literature or Jacobsen (2010), our data set includes both fatal and
nonfatal accidents. Using unique vehicle identifiers (VINs), we determine the curb weight of
each vehicle involved in an accident, thereby minimizing concerns about attenuation bias
induced by measurement error. The rich set of vehicle, person, and accident observables in
the data set allow us to minimize concerns about omitted variables bias. Using these data, we
estimate the external effects of vehicle weight on fatalities and serious injuries conditional on
a collision occurring.
Two key results emerge from our estimates. First, we show that vehicle weight is a
critical determinant of fatalities in other vehicles in the event of a multivehicle collision; our
preferred estimate implies that a 1,000 pound increase in striking vehicle weight raises the
probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle by 47%. When we translate this higher
probability of a fatality into external costs (relative to a small baseline vehicle), the total
external costs of vehicle weight from fatalities alone are estimated at $93 billion per year.
Second, by separately controlling for vehicle weight and whether the striking vehicle is a light
truck (i.e., a pickup truck, sport utility vehicle, or minivan), we show that light trucks
significantly raise the probability of a fatality in the struck car – in addition to the effect of
their already higher vehicle weight.
Our unique data set allows us to condition on a collision occurring and thus ensures
that our results cannot be generated by differences in collision rates between drivers of
lighter and heavier vehicles. Nevertheless, driver selection could bias our results if drivers of
deaths per year. Jacobsen does not attempt to estimate the causal effect of vehicle weight on fatalities in other
vehicles, which is the focus of this paper.

3

heavy vehicles have a tendency towards severe accidents. We rule out this possibility through
three tests. First, we show that vehicle weight does not predict fatalities when two vehicles of
equal weight collide. This suggests that drivers of heavy vehicles are not predisposed towards
severe accidents. Second, we show that our estimates persist even when controlling for
specific vehicle type via make and model fixed effects. Finally, we instrument for striking
vehicle weight using the number of occupants in the striking vehicle and find estimates that
are close to our least squares estimates. All three tests suggest that we successfully identify
the causal effect of vehicle weight on the probability of fatalities in two-car collisions.
One way to internalize the externality that we identify is through a weight varying
mileage tax. However, such a tax could be logistically difficult to implement. We apply our
estimates to consider whether a simple gasoline tax could be an alternative to internalize
most of the external costs and conclude that it could. Our calculations suggest that the level
of the optimal gasoline tax is substantially higher than previously estimated (e.g. Parry and
Small 2005) and that the external traffic fatality costs of vehicle weight eclipse any other
vehicle-related externality (Portney, Parry, Gruenspecht and Harrington, 2003).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the analytic and empirical
framework and discusses the previous literature. Section 3 details the data, and Section 4
presents the main results. Section 5 presents falsification tests and alternative sources of
identification to check whether selection bias contaminates our results. Section 6 links the
results to energy policy implications, focusing in particular on the gasoline tax. Section 7
concludes.
2. ANALYTIC AND EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK
Consumers’ vehicle choices represent a classic example of an externality driven
“arms race.” Purchasing a heavier vehicle enhances safety for each individual, but also makes
other roadway users less safe. The net benefit of vehicle weight on traffic fatalities is thus
smaller than the private benefit of vehicle weight on traffic fatalities, and consumers are
incentivized to purchase heavier vehicles than is socially optimal.
Figure 1 presents a stylized plot of the marginal private and social costs per mile of
driving a heavier vehicle against the marginal private benefit per mile of driving a heavier
vehicle. The marginal private cost of a heavier vehicle is positive due to the higher use of

4

inputs to produce heavier vehicles (e.g. more steel, bigger tires, etc.) and the lower fuel
efficiency of heavier vehicles. The marginal private benefit of a heavier vehicle is positive but
decreasing in vehicle weight – heavier vehicles provide increased protection in a collision and
more cargo capacity, but as size increases the vehicle becomes increasingly difficult to park
and handle.4 The consumer equates marginal private cost and marginal private benefit and
buys a vehicle weighing W* pounds. The private operating cost per mile is P*. However, a
heavier vehicle may impose a cost on other roadway users in the form of increased risk of
fatalities in a collision with this vehicle, and the driver does not bear this external cost. If
external costs increase linearly in vehicle weight, as we show is approximately the case, the
social marginal cost curve lies above the private marginal cost curve by a fixed amount equal
to the external per mile cost. To maximize social welfare, our stylized consumer should
purchase a car weighing W** pounds, where W** < W*. The necessary per-mile tax to
induce this behavior is the marginal external cost of vehicle weight, t*. If the consumer
chooses a vehicle of weight W*, the external cost from this choice over the socially optimal
choice of a vehicle weighing W** would be t*·(W**–W*). We calculate this individual cost in
Section 6 and aggregate it across all individuals to arrive at the total external costs.
It is important to note that the primary costs of this “arms race” accrue not in the
form of traffic fatalities – which on net may change little with a reduction in fleet weight –
but rather in the form of purchases of larger vehicles that are more expensive to construct
and operate. In this sense it is similar to a conventional arms race, which need not increase
the probability of conflict even as both countries spend large amounts on new weapons.5
In principle, liability rules and insurance regulations could internalize many of the
external costs due to vehicle weight. If drivers of heavy vehicles know that they will be held
liable for deaths in other vehicles, then they should take these risks into account when
purchasing their own vehicles. If insurance companies understand that heavier vehicles pose
more danger to other roadway users, then they should charge higher liability premiums to
drivers of heavy vehicles. In practice, however, liability rules and insurance regulations fail to
internalize the fatality risks generated by heavy vehicles.

At some point the marginal private benefits of weight become negative. For example, few drivers would want
a 30 foot stretch limousine as their primary vehicle, even if it were luxuriously appointed and heavily
subsidized.
5 Another example is the decision of a stadium spectator to sit or stand. If everyone stands, the average view is
no better or worse than if everyone sits, but all spectators are less comfortable.
4

5

Tort liability rules are inadequate to internalize fatality risks for two reasons. First,
liability only applies in cases in which a driver behaves in a negligent manner (White 2004).
This implies that the driver of any given vehicle will not always be liable in the event of a
multivehicle accident. Second, even if found liable, few drivers possess assets that are
sufficient to cover the cost of a fatality. The value of a statistical life (VSL) used by the
United States Department of Transportation in cost-benefit analyses is $5.8 million (2008
dollars), but only 7% of families in the United States had a net worth exceeding $1 million in
2001 (Kennickell 2003).
Though few drivers can cover the cost of a fatality, liability insurance regulations
could force most drivers to pay the expected liability costs of operating their vehicles. Again,
however, the mandated levels of liability insurance are inadequate to cover the costs of a
fatality. Two states (Florida and New Hampshire) do not require drivers to carry any liability
coverage at all for injuries, and 44 states require drivers to carry $25,000 or less in liability
coverage for each person injured. Only five states require more than $25,000 of liability
coverage for each person injured (Insurance Information Institute 2010).6 Many drivers
remain uninsured despite the regulations, and even drivers who carry more than the
mandated minimums rarely have policies that exceed several hundred thousand dollars of
coverage.
While liability rules and insurance regulations cannot internalize the majority of
fatality costs, they may internalize a significant fraction of incapacitating injury costs.
Estimates of the value of an incapacitating injury are far lower than the value of a statistical
life, and it is plausible that insurance policies carried by many drivers could cover the costs
of an incapacitating injury.7 For this reason, our policy analysis focuses on external fatality
costs and ignores external incapacitating injury costs. Accounting for injury costs would
increase the magnitude of our results, but we cannot accurately estimate what fraction of
injury costs are already internalized.8
Minnesota and North Carolina each require $30,000 of liability coverage for each person injured, and Alaska,
Maine, and Wisconsin each require $50,000 of liability coverage for each person injured. None of these states
are in our data set.
7 The National Safety Council, for example, estimates the comprehensive cost of an incapacitating injury at
$214,000 (2008 dollars). In comparison, the council estimates the comprehensive cost of a fatality at $4.2
million.
8 The serious injury externality may be further mitigated by the fact that health insurers and the government pay
for a portion of injury treatment costs. Drivers of heavy vehicles thus accrue a positive externality with respect
to injuries that partially offsets the negative injury externality that they impose upon others.
6

6

Previous work on the “arms race” on American roads has focused on the internal
and external risks posed by the largest vehicles – pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles
(SUVs) – relative to the typical passenger car. White (2004), Gayer (2004), Anderson (2008),
and Li (forthcoming) all conclude that light trucks (pickups and SUVs) impose significant
risks relative to passenger cars. This study expands upon that literature by considering the
fundamental role that vehicle weight plays in determining external risk. We recognize that
any vehicle that is heavier than the smallest feasible vehicle poses some external risk to other
roadway users. We quantify that risk and find that the total external costs of vehicle weight
substantially exceed the external costs that accrue only from light trucks. Our comprehensive
results span the entire range of the vehicle fleet and allow us to consider the broader
implications of vehicle weight for energy policy.
To measure the effect of vehicle weight on external fatalities under ideal conditions,
we would randomly assign vehicles of differing weights to drivers and observe external
fatality rates by vehicle type. Such an experiment is infeasible in practice, and even an
analogous study using observational data is impractical due to substantial measurement error
in vehicle stocks and model-level vehicle miles traveled in most states. Instead, we focus on
the risk of a fatality conditional on a collision occurring. A key assumption when we
interpret our estimates in a policy context is that vehicle weight has no causal effect on the
probability of a collision. We discuss this assumption below and conclude that, if it is
violated, then the effect of vehicle weight on the probability of a collision is likely positive.
Our estimates thus represent a lower bound on the effect of weight on external fatalities.
Consider the expected external fatalities for a vehicle of type i during time interval t.
For simplicity, assume that t is short enough that the probability of multiple collisions during
t is effectively zero.
E [ fatalitiesit ] = E !" E [ fatalitiesit | collision it ]#$ = E [ fatalitiesit | collision it ] % P ( collision it = 1)

(1)

Equation (1) must hold via the law of iterated expectations. It implies that if weight
has no causal effect on the probability of a collision, then the total effect of weight on
external fatalities is proportional to the effect of weight on external fatalities conditional on a
collision occurring. Weight may affect the probability of a collision in two ways, however.
First, from an engineering perspective, heavier vehicles are less maneuverable and have
longer braking distances. Even if driver behavior is unchanged, heavier vehicles may

7

therefore get into more accidents. Second, heavier vehicles may also affect driver behavior.
On the margin, drivers may respond to the internal safety benefits of heavy vehicles by
increasing their optimal collision rate (Peltzman 1975). Both the physical characteristics of
heavier vehicles and the potential driver response to heavier vehicles could therefore
generate a positive effect of vehicle weight on collision rates.9
Empirical evidence also suggests that, if anything, heavier vehicles have higher
collision rates than lighter vehicles. Evans (1984) examines the relationship between accident
rates and vehicle weight using accident data and vehicle registration data from North
Carolina, New York, and Michigan. He finds that, after conditioning on driver age, 4,000
pound vehicles have accident rates that are 39% higher than 2,000 pound vehicles. More
recently, White (2004) and Anderson (2008) estimate that light trucks are 13% to 45% more
likely to experience multivehicle collisions than passenger cars. Of course, some of the
observed differences in crash rates may be due to driver selection; careless drivers may
choose heavier vehicles. Nevertheless, both theory and empirical evidence suggest that
weight may directly increase the probability of experiencing a collision. We thus interpret our
estimates – which are conditional on a collision occurring – as lower bounds on the causal
effect of weight on external fatalities.10
3. DATA
The data set consists of the population of police-reported accidents for eight states:
Florida, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Ohio, Washington and Wyoming. These
data come from the State Data System, maintained by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA). We obtained permission from the head of each state’s police
force to use the data. The SDS data include information on injuries and fatalities, geographic

To the best of our knowledge, the only factor that might reduce the probability of a collision for heavier
vehicles is visibility. Larger vehicles provide their drivers with a better view of the road ahead, which may
decrease the probability of an accident. However, they also make it more difficult for drivers behind them to
see ahead, which may increase the probability of an accident. The net impact of these two effects is unclear, but
the resulting dynamic is again an example of an arms race – the visibility benefits are internal while the visibility
costs are external. Visibility would thus be another reason to tax larger vehicles more than smaller vehicles.
10 Note that the concern here is whether weight has a causal effect on collision probabilities. This concern arises
because we consider the policy implications of inducing some drivers to switch to lighter vehicles via a tax. This
exogenous manipulation of vehicle choice will affect collision probabilities only if vehicle weight has a causal
effect on collision probabilities. Weight may also be correlated with the type of driver, which could generate
selection bias in our regressions. We consider this issue separately in Section 5.
9

8

location, weather conditions, use of safety equipment, and driver and occupant
characteristics. We selected these eight states out of the 32 states currently participating in
the SDS as they report the vehicle identification number (VIN) for the majority of vehicles
in the data set. We purchased data tables from DataOne Software to match the first 9 digits
of the VIN to curb weight data for each vehicle. We therefore observe curbside vehicle
weight for approximately 64% of the vehicles in our data set (we confirm in Section 4 that
the missing weight data do not appear to bias our estimates). For analytic purposes, we
decompose the data set into three sub-samples, two-vehicle crashes, three-vehicle crashes,
and single-vehicle crashes. The two-vehicle crash data set is the focus of most of our
analyses. It contains 4.8 million vehicles in collisions in which both vehicles have complete
curbside weight data.11
One important feature of the SDS data is that accidents only appear in the data set if
the police take an accident report. According to NHTSA documentation, various estimates
suggest that only half of all motor vehicle accidents are police reported. While many of the
unreported accidents are single vehicle accidents, some no doubt involve two vehicles as
well. This sampling frame could affect our estimates if vehicle weight affects the probability
of a police report, all other factors held constant. Serious multivehicle accidents are always
reported to the police regardless of vehicle weight, but vehicle weight could affect the
probability that a minor accident is reported to the police. Unlike the probability of a
collision, there is no a priori reason to believe that vehicle weight must have a positive effect
on the probability of a police report. On the one hand, collisions involving heavier vehicles
cause more property damage, all other factors held constant, because more kinetic energy
must be dissipated through deformation of materials. On the other hand, some heavier
vehicles, such as pickup trucks, are more likely to be involved in rugged work. These trucks
may have accumulated more dents, reducing the likelihood that the owners will report
property damage from a minor accident.
If vehicle weight positively affects the reporting probability of minor accidents, then
our estimates will represent a lower bound on the effect of weight on external fatalities. If
vehicle weight negatively affects the reporting probability of minor accidents, however, then

11

The data set contains the population of police reported accidents for Florida (1989-2005), Kansas (20012005), Kentucky (1998-2005), Maryland (1989-1999), Missouri (1989-2005), Ohio (1991-2005), Washington
(2002-2005), and Wyoming (1998-2005).

9

our estimates of the effect of weight on external fatalities could be upwardly biased. To test
whether the “ruggedness” hypothesis affects our results, we estimate our regressions while
limiting the sample to collisions that do not involve any light trucks. This sample restriction
does not reduce the coefficient estimates.12 We also conduct a series of falsification tests in
Section 5 that imply that the sampling frame does not bias our results.
Table 1 presents summary statistics from our two-vehicle collision data set. This data
set contains all collisions involving two light vehicles built after 1980. We define a light
vehicle as any car, pickup truck, SUV, or minivan that weighs between 1,500 and 6,000
pounds. We exclude collisions involving heavy trucks. The first two columns report statistics
for the entire two-vehicle collision data set. The mean vehicle weight in this data set is 3,076
pounds, and approximately 24.5% of vehicles are light trucks (pickups, SUVs, or minivans).
The average model year is 1992, and the average number of occupants per vehicle is 1.41.
The probability of a fatality in each vehicle is 0.19% (i.e., 0.0019), and the probability of a
serious injury in each vehicle is 2.7%. Alcohol is involved in 8.3% of collisions.
The last two columns of Table 1 report summary statistics for the estimation sample
with complete covariates. This sample is smaller than the overall two-vehicle collision
sample because we drop collisions in which any of the covariates from our preferred
specification are missing. This restriction reduces the sample from 4.8 million observations
to 2.8 million observations. Nevertheless, the two samples appear similar along most
observable measures.
4. SPECIFICATION AND RESULTS
Consider a collision involving two vehicles, Vehicle 1 and Vehicle 2. Suppose that we
label Vehicle 1 as the “struck vehicle” and Vehicle 2 as the “striking vehicle.” These labels
are for expositional purposes only – they do not signify which vehicle may be at fault in the
collision.13 The external effects of vehicle weight are given by the effect of striking vehicle
weight on the probability of fatalities in the struck vehicle. The internal effects of vehicle

In the sample that excludes all collisions involving light trucks, the estimated effects are of similar magnitude
to the analogous estimates from the main sample, reported in Table 2. This implies that the “ruggedness”
hypothesis is not upwardly biasing our main results (see online Appendix Table A1).
13 The labels are symmetric in that each vehicle enters our data set twice, once as the striking vehicle and once
as the struck vehicle.
12

10

weight are given by the effect of struck vehicle weight on the probability of fatalities in the
struck vehicle. The former is the quantity of policy interest, but we report results for the
latter as well for comparison purposes.
We estimate the conditional expectation of a fatality in the struck vehicle as a
function of striking vehicle weight, struck vehicle weight, and a rich set of covariates. We
estimate the conditional expectation function (CEF) using either a linear probability model
(LPM) or a probit.14 For robustness, we report estimates for both models.
We specify the linear probability model as follows:
E [ struck veh fatality i | striking veh weight i , struck veh weight i , X1i , X 2i , Wi ]

(2)

= !1striking veh weight i + ! 2 struck veh weight i + X1i"1 + X 2i" 2 + Wi" 3

In equation (2), !1 represents the coefficient of interest, X1i represents a set of
characteristics pertaining to the striking vehicle in collision i, X2i represents a set of
characteristics pertaining to the struck vehicle in collision i, and Wi represents a set of
characteristics common to both vehicles in collision i. The probit model modifies equation
(2) as follows:
E [ struck veh fatality i | striking veh weight i , struck veh weight i , X1i , X 2i , Wi ]

(3)

= ! ("1striking veh weight i + " 2struck veh weight i + X1i# 1 + X 2i# 2 + Wi# 3 )

In equation (3), the link function ! is the normal CDF. Therefore, the marginal
effect of striking vehicle weight varies with striking vehicle weight. For comparability with
the LPM results, for each probit regression we report the average marginal effect across all
observations included in that regression.15

The LPM cannot literally be true. Nevertheless, it provides the minimum mean squared error linear
approximation to the true CEF, and in our case the LPM coefficients are always close to the corresponding
average marginal effects from the probit models.
15 Some of our probit regressions include fixed effects, raising the possibility of inconsistency due to the
incidental parameters problem. However, in most cases we have many observations for each fixed effect, and
as shown in Fernandez-Val (2009), the incidental parameters problem generates a trivial degree of bias in the
probit model when estimating marginal effects (which are our quantities of interest).
14

11

Table 2 presents results from estimating equations (2) and (3) on the two-vehicle
collision data set. The sample includes all accidents for which there is complete vehicle
weight data for both vehicles; analyses restricted to states with low rates of missing weight
data suggest that this constraint does not bias our results.16 Each vehicle appears in the twovehicle collision data set twice, once as the struck vehicle and once as the striking vehicle.
We therefore cluster the standard errors at the collision level to account for correlation
between observations that pertain to the same collision.
The first and second columns in Table 2 include the following covariates: vehicle
weight, light truck indicators, and year fixed effects. A striking vehicle and struck vehicle
version of each of the first two variables is included. The first column implies that a 1,000
pound increase in weight in the striking vehicle is associated with a statistically significant
0.09 percentage point increase in the probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle (t = 22.0).
This coefficient represents a 46% increase over the average probability of a fatality in a
struck vehicle in this sample (0.19%). In comparison, a 1,000 pound increase in weight in the
struck vehicle is associated with a smaller 0.05 percentage point decrease in the probability of
a fatality in the struck vehicle (t = –11.8). Light trucks increase the probability of a fatality in
the struck vehicle by 0.12 percentage points (62% of the sample mean), even after
controlling for striking vehicle weight (t = 19.5). The results from the probit model in
column (2) display z-statistics that are similar to the t-statistics in column (1), and the average
marginal effect generated by the probit model is of similar magnitude to the LPM coefficient
(0.08 percentage points versus 0.09 percentage points).
Subsequent columns in Table 2 add additional covariates to the regressions. Columns
(3) and (4) add controls for rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend), interstate
highway, a quadratic in model year for each vehicle, and year, hour, and county fixed effects.
The estimated effect of striking vehicle weight changes little in both the LPM and probit
models. Columns (5) and (6) add controls for any seat belt usage, a quadratic in driver age,
indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, and indicators for male drivers or young male
16

Weight data are missing for vehicles for which we do not have VINs. The percentage of vehicles with
missing weight data ranges from 17.4% (Ohio) to 54.5% (Maryland). When estimating our main statistical
models on the four states with the lowest rates of missing weight data (Kentucky, Ohio, Washington, and
Wyoming), we find that an additional 1,000 pounds of striking vehicle weight increases the probability of a
fatality in the struck vehicle by 46% to 51%. When estimating the same models on the four states with highest
rates of missing weight data (Florida, Kansas, Maryland, and Missouri), we find that an additional 1,000 pounds
of striking vehicle weight increases the probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle by 44%. The rate of missing
weight data thus appears to have little impact on our estimates (see online Appendix Table A2).

12

drivers. A striking vehicle and struck vehicle version of each of these variables is included.
The inclusion of these driver characteristics has minimal impact on the primary coefficient
of interest (striking vehicle weight). They do, however, increase the magnitude of the struck
vehicle weight coefficient to –0.10 percentage points (t = –20.2).
Column (7) of Table 2 adds city fixed effects and is our preferred specification. City
fixed effects should absorb any geographic heterogeneity in fatality rates that could be
correlated with average vehicle weight. This issue would arise if, for example, heavy vehicles
clustered in rural areas and these areas had deadlier accidents due to a prevalence of
undivided highways or a sparseness of hospitals. At this point there are too many regressors
to reliably estimate a probit model, and for many cities the city fixed effect perfectly predicts
the fatality indicator, forcing the city to be dropped. We thus estimate only linear probability
models in columns (7) through (9) of Table 2. The addition of city fixed effects has little
impact on the coefficient on striking vehicle weight, changing it from 0.10 percentage points
to 0.11 percentage points (t = 18.3). This coefficient represents a 47% increase over the
average probability of a fatality in a struck vehicle in this sample. Column (8) estimates the
same specification as column (7) but limits the sample to observations for which we have
data on the number of occupants per vehicle and the seat belt usage of each occupant (two
controls we add in the next column). This restriction shrinks the sample in half and reduces
the coefficient on striking vehicle weight to 0.07 percentage points (t = 10.8). However, the
ratio of the coefficient to the average fatality rate in the sample remains stable (49%). The
change in the coefficient simply reflects the fact that the restricted sample contains states
with a lower threshold for reporting accidents, and thus a lower fatality rate per reported
accident. Column (9) adds controls for the number of occupants per vehicle and seat belt
usage rate of these occupants. The coefficient on striking vehicle weight is unchanged from
column (8).
The results in Table 2 suggest that selection bias has little impact on the striking
vehicle weight coefficient but may affect the struck vehicle weight coefficient. In particular,
the addition of driver characteristic controls in columns (5) and (6) has a notable impact on
the struck vehicle weight coefficient but almost no impact on the striking vehicle weight
coefficient. When adding covariates one at a time, we find that virtually all of the change in
the struck vehicle weight coefficient between columns (4) and (6) can be attributed to the
addition of the controls for driver age. The patterns strongly suggest that older drivers tend

13

to drive heavier vehicles and that older drivers are more susceptible to dying in crashes.
Since there is little correlation between the age of the struck vehicle’s driver and the weight
of the striking vehicle, however, the addition of driver age controls has no impact on the
striking vehicle weight coefficient. Stated simply, heavy vehicles do not “seek out” elderly
drivers to crash into.
The results in Table 2 also suggest that the external risk posed by light trucks is not
due solely to their heavy weight. The coefficient on the indicator for whether the striking
vehicle is a light truck is positive and statistically significant in every column. In our
preferred specification, column (7), the coefficient implies that being struck by a light truck
increases the probability of a fatality by 0.09 percentage points (t = 10.3), even after
conditioning on striking vehicle weight. This represents a 40% increase over the average
fatality rate in the sample. In comparison, if we do not control for vehicle weight, then the
light truck coefficient doubles to 0.18 percentage points (i.e., 0.0018).17 The additional risk
posed by light trucks may be due to the stiffness of their frames or their height
incompatibility with other vehicles (Hakim 2003). However, the robustness tests that we
perform in Section 5 for the vehicle weight coefficient do not apply to the light truck
coefficient. Thus we cannot rule out the possibility that a portion of the light truck
coefficient may represent driver selection effects – i.e., consumers that purchase light trucks
may drive in an aggressive manner that generates particularly severe collisions. For this
reason we do not incorporate the light truck coefficient when calculating the total externality
across all vehicles in Section 6. If we were to incorporate the light truck coefficient, the total
externality would be even larger. In the context of CAFE standards, however, we do
consider the potential risks that light trucks pose
Table 3 presents results from estimating versions of equations (2) and (3) in which
the dependent variable is the presence of serious injuries in the struck vehicle. The
regressions are analogous to those in Table 2, but the dependent variable has changed from
any fatalities to any serious injuries. The striking vehicle weight coefficients (or marginal
effects, in the case of probit regressions) in Table 3 are approximately 6 times larger than the
corresponding coefficients in Table 2. This difference arises because the probability of a
The 0.18 percentage point coefficient represents 77% of the average fatality rate in the sample. This effect is
roughly similar in magnitude to the external effects of light trucks in two-vehicle collisions that White (2004)
and Anderson (2008) estimate. Anderson (2008), for example, estimates that light trucks increase the
probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle by approximately 60% of the sample average fatality rate.
17

14

serious injury in this sample is approximately 15 times higher than the probability of a
fatality. In the preferred specification, column (7), a 1,000 pound increase in striking vehicle
weight raises the probability of serious injuries in the struck vehicle by 0.7 percentage points
(t = 32.7). This figure represents 20% of the average probability of a serious injury in this
sample.
Overall, the pattern of coefficients in Table 3 is similar to the pattern of coefficients
in Table 2, with one exception. When the dependent variable is the presence of serious
injuries (Table 3), the magnitude of the struck vehicle weight coefficient is larger than the
magnitude of the striking vehicle weight coefficient. For example, in the preferred
specification the striking vehicle weight coefficient is 0.7 percentage points, while the struck
vehicle weight coefficient is –0.9 percentage points. This contrasts with Table 2, in which the
magnitude of the struck vehicle weight coefficient is generally smaller than the magnitude of
the striking vehicle weight coefficient. Since the proportion of serious injuries that represent
external costs is ambiguous, we focus on fatalities for the remainder of the paper.
Table 4 presents results testing for heterogeneity in the effect of striking vehicle
weight on fatalities. In column (1), we add a quadratic term in striking vehicle weight. The
coefficient on the quadratic term is zero, suggesting that the relationship between striking
vehicle weight and fatalities is approximately linear. Column (2) adds an interaction between
striking vehicle weight and struck vehicle weight. The average effect of striking vehicle
weight (calculated across all observations) is unchanged, but the interaction term is negative
and statistically significant, suggesting that striking vehicle weight has a smaller absolute
impact (but similar percentage impact) when the struck vehicle is heavier.18 Nevertheless,
Figure 2 demonstrates that the marginal effect of weight remains constant across the range
of striking vehicle weights. Figure 2 plots the estimated marginal effects of striking vehicle
weight for six models: linear OLS, quadratic OLS, quadratic OLS with an interaction term,
linear probit, quadratic probit, and quadratic probit with an interaction term.19 The marginal
effects of all three OLS models – linear OLS, quadratic OLS, and quadratic OLS with an
interaction term – are virtually identical across the range of striking vehicle weights. Given
18

Struck vehicle weight is normalized to have a mean of zero in the interaction term. The interaction effect is
thus equal to zero when the struck vehicle is of average weight.
19 The “linear probit” is a model in which there are no higher order terms of striking vehicle weight. It is not
literally a linear model. The “quadratic probit” is a model in which both striking vehicle weight and the square
of striking vehicle weight appear on the right-hand side, and the “quadratic probit with an interaction” adds the
interaction between striking vehicle weight and struck vehicle weight.

15

the significant interaction term in Table 4, this trend suggests that the weight of the struck
vehicle is not strongly correlated with the weight of the striking vehicle.
Columns (3) and (4) replicate columns (1) and (2) but are estimated using the probit
model instead of the LPM. When using the probit model, the quadratic weight term is highly
significant, suggesting non-linear effects from striking vehicle weight. In fact, the opposite is
true. The probit is an inherently non-linear model that forces the marginal effect of vehicle
weight to increase in accidents that involve heavier striking vehicles.20 Including the
quadratic weight term allows the regression to offset this increase, and the resulting function
is much closer to a linear function. Figure 2 demonstrates this fact. The marginal effects of
the quadratic probit, the quadratic probit with an interaction term, and all of the OLS
models are roughly similar, particularly between 2,400 to 4,500 pounds of vehicle weight (a
range which includes over 80% of the vehicles in our sample). In contrast, the marginal
effects of the linear probit model diverge substantially from the marginal effects of the other
five models. Since both the flexible OLS and flexible probit models suggest that the true
CEF is approximately linear in striking vehicle weight, and because the probit cannot
accommodate city level fixed effects, we focus on linear probability models in much of the
remaining analysis.21
Though 90% of multivehicle collisions involve two vehicles, nine percent involve
three vehicles, and one percent involve four or more vehicles. Adding 1,000 pounds to a
vehicle in a three-vehicle collision should increase the risk of a fatality in the other two
vehicles by less than 47% each (our preferred estimate from the two-vehicle collision data
set). This attenuation occurs because the extra mass of the first vehicle is now distributed
across two other vehicles rather than one other vehicle. We estimate the relationship
between vehicle weight and fatalities in three-vehicle collisions in Table 5. For expositional
purposes, assume that Vehicle 1 is the struck vehicle and that Vehicles 2 and 3 are the
striking vehicles. In Table 5, the striking vehicle weight coefficient represents the average

20

The probit marginal effect equals ! (X " )! ", where ! (!) represents the standard normal density function.

Since the probability of a fatality is less than 50%, ! (X " ) is increasing in X ! . The marginal effect of striking
vehicle weight thus increases in striking vehicle weight. The rate of increase is substantial since the effect of
striking vehicle weight is large.
21 For simplicity, we assume a linear effect of striking vehicle weight when comparing a gasoline tax to a weight
varying mileage tax in Section 6. This assumption is conservative in that the fit between the gasoline tax and the
weight varying mileage tax improves if the true marginal effects decrease for vehicles below 2,400 lbs and
above 4,500 lbs, as suggested by the quadratic probit or the quadratic probit with an interaction term.

16

effect of a 1,000 pound increase in the weight of either Vehicle 2 or 3 (but not both) on the
probability of a fatality in Vehicle 1. The striking vehicle weight coefficient is positive and
statistically significant in all specifications, and the magnitude of the coefficient ranges from
28% to 42% of the average probability of a fatality. Our preferred estimate, column (7),
implies that a 1,000 pound increase in one vehicle raises the probability of a fatality in either
of the other two vehicles by 35%.
5. FALSIFICATION TESTS AND ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF IDENTIFICATION
The results in Section 4 demonstrate a strong relationship between striking vehicle
weight and struck vehicle fatalities. The robustness of this relationship to the inclusion of a
rich set of accident and driver characteristics, as well as very fine geographic fixed effects,
suggests that the striking vehicle weight coefficients represent causal effects of weight on
fatality risk. However, two potential sources of upward bias seem particularly plausible. First,
driver selection may bias the coefficient estimates if heavier vehicles attract aggressive drivers
who get into deadlier accidents. Note, however, that only selection of drivers who get into
deadlier accidents, rather than drivers who get into more accidents, could bias our
estimates.22 Second, the sampling frame might bias the coefficient estimates if minor
collisions involving heavier vehicles are less likely to be reported to the police, all other
factors held constant.23 To test whether either of these factors could bias our results, we
conduct three exercises. First, we implement a series of falsification tests that we benchmark
against engineering safety estimates. Second, we estimate the effect of striking vehicle weight
on fatalities using within-model changes in vehicle weight that occur when models are
refreshed. Finally, we estimate the effect of striking vehicle weight on fatalities using striking
vehicle occupants as an instrument for weight.
Because our estimates are conditional on a collision occurring, only specific types of driver selection can
generate bias. Selection of “careless” drivers who simply get into more accidents of the same expected severity
would not bias our results. It would increase the number of times we observe these drivers in the sample, but it
would not increase the probability that someone dies in a collision conditional on the collision occurring.
Selection of “aggressive” drivers who get into more severe accidents could bias our results, however. These
drivers could increase the probability that someone dies in a collision conditional on the collision occurring.
23 Note that, unlike the struck vehicle weight coefficients, striking vehicle weight coefficients are unlikely to be
biased by any correlation between vehicle weight and vehicle safety features. It is plausible that heavier vehicles
may be more or less likely to have safety features such as airbags, side impact protection beams, and unibody
construction. However, these safety features are much more helpful to the striking vehicle’s own occupants
than they are to the occupants of other vehicles that the striking vehicle hits.
22

17

5.1 FALSIFICATION TESTS
Suppose that heavier vehicles pose no additional risk to other vehicles than lighter
vehicles do, and that the estimates reported in Section 4 simply reflect the possibility that
drivers of heavier vehicles are more aggressive (regardless of vehicle weight) or that heavier
vehicles are less likely to generate police reports. In that case, there should be a strong
positive correlation between vehicle weight and fatalities or injuries when analyzing twovehicle collisions between vehicles of the same weight. These accidents therefore provide an
opportunity to test whether driver selection bias or sampling frame bias are generating our
results.
It is possible, however, that heavier vehicles are safer than lighter vehicles. In that
case, a positive driver selection effect might be mitigated by a negative weight effect. Put
simply, even if drivers of heavier vehicles drive aggressively, our falsification test might
generate a small coefficient because the heavier vehicles are fundamentally safer. We
therefore benchmark the results of our falsification tests against the results of NHTSA crash
tests. NHTSA crash tests entail colliding a vehicle with a concrete barrier; they are meant to
simulate the results of a collision with a stationary object or a head-on collision with another
vehicle of similar weight. The primary outcome in the NHTSA crash test is the Head Injury
Criterion (HIC). This variable is derived from an accelerometer mounted on the crash test
dummy’s head and measures the forces that the head is exposed to. A higher HIC value
corresponds to a higher probability of severe or fatal head injury.
Table 6 presents results from regressions of HIC scores on vehicle weight using the
NHTSA crash test data. All regressions include as controls a light truck indicator, a quadratic
in vehicle model year, and a quadratic in collision speed. The estimation sample in the first
two columns contains all NHTSA vehicle-to-barrier frontal crash tests conducted from 1980
to 2009 (the average year is 1997). Column (1) reports regression results when the dependent
variable is HIC. The results indicate that an additional 1,000 pounds of vehicle weight is
associated with a statistically insignificant 3% increase in HIC (17.7 points). Column (2)
reports regression results when the dependent variable is an indicator for whether HIC
exceeds 700. This threshold is of interest because it represents the point at which there is a
significant (5%) chance of severe brain injury (Mertz, Prasad, and Irwin 1997). The results

18

indicate that an additional 1,000 pounds of vehicle weight is associated with a statistically
insignificant 8.7% increase in the probability that HIC exceeds 700 (2.4 percentage points).
The composition of vehicles that NHTSA tests, however, is not identical to the composition
of vehicles on the roadways. To account for this fact, we estimate regressions in which each
test result is weighted by the sales share of the tested vehicle.24 Columns (3) and (4) report
the results from these regressions. The sample size falls because we do not have sales share
data for every tested vehicle, but the results are qualitatively unchanged. An additional 1,000
pounds of vehicle weight is associated with small, statistically insignificant increases in HIC
or the probability that HIC exceeds 700. Overall, there is a weak positive relationship
between vehicle weight and HIC values. The point estimates suggest that an additional 1,000
pounds of vehicle weight could raise the fatality rate by 3% to 9%, but none of the
coefficients are statistically significant. We thus expect a weak relationship between vehicle
weight and fatalities in collisions between two equal weight vehicles if our research design is
sound.
Table 7 presents results from regressions in which the estimation sample consists of
collisions involving two vehicles of similar weight – the difference in vehicle weight cannot
exceed 200 pounds. In each regression, an indicator for fatalities in the struck vehicle is
regressed on the average weight of the two vehicles and the set of controls from our
preferred specification. Column (1) indicates that an increase of 1,000 pounds in average
vehicle weight predicts a statistically insignificant 2% decrease in the probability of a fatality
(0.00 percentage points). Column (2) restricts the sample to head-on collisions between two
vehicles of the same weight, the type of collision simulated by NHTSA. In this sample, an
increase of 1,000 pounds in average vehicle weight predicts a statistically insignificant 19%
decrease in the probability of a fatality (0.11 percentage points).25 Columns (3) and (4)
replicate columns (1) and (2) but restrict the sample so that the difference in vehicle weight
cannot exceed 100 pounds. The estimates remain small or negative and statistically
insignificant, but are less precisely estimated.
Overall, the estimates in Table 7 indicate that there is a weak relationship between
vehicle weight and fatalities in collisions between two vehicles of equal weight, and we

Vehicle sales share data come from Ward’s Automotive Yearbook.
The average probability of a fatality is much higher in column (2) than in column (1) because head-on
collisions are more dangerous than the average collision.
24
25

19

cannot reject the hypothesis that this relationship is zero. This finding is consistent with
NHTSA crash test results (Table 6) and inconsistent with the hypothesis that driver selection
bias or sampling frame bias is generating the results in Section 4. The most precise estimate
in Table 7 – column (1) – suggests that increasing average vehicle weight by 1,000 pounds
decreases the fatality rate by 2%. This figure is close to the range implied by the NHTSA
crash test data. In contrast, if the relationship between striking vehicle weight and struck
vehicle fatalities were generated by driver selection bias or sampling frame bias, then we
would expect a large positive coefficient on average vehicle weight when two vehicles of
equal weight collide. The preferred estimate from Section 4 indicates that a 1,000 pound
increase in striking vehicle weight raises the probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle by
47%. If this coefficient represented driver selection bias, and if two aggressive drivers were
twice as dangerous as one aggressive driver, then we might expect a 1,000 pound increase in
both vehicles weights to raise the probability of a fatality by 94% (2*47 = 94). However, no
coefficient in Table 7 is above 2%.
As an additional set of falsification tests, we examine the relationship between
vehicle weight and fatalities in collisions involving a single vehicle. If drivers of heavier
vehicles are more aggressive, then we expect a strong positive relationship between vehicle
weight and fatalities in these collisions. Table 8 presents results for single-vehicle collisions.
In these collisions, we regress a fatality indicator on vehicle weight and other controls. The
results in column (1) pertain to all single-vehicle collisions; a 1,000 pound increase in vehicle
weight is associated with a 3% increase in the probability of a fatality (0.04 percentage
points).26 Column (2) pertains to single-vehicle frontal collisions, the type of collision
simulated by NHTSA. A 1,000 pound increase in vehicle weight is associated with a 2%
increase in the probability of a fatality (0.03 percentage points). Columns (3) and (4) present
results that are analogous to columns (1) and (2) but are estimated using a probit
specification instead of a linear probability model. In both columns, a 1,000 pound increase
in vehicle weight is associated with an increase of less than 1% in the probability of a fatality.
In all columns, the percentage effects fall close to the range implied by the NHTSA crash
test data, suggesting no substantial bias due to driver selection.
The raw magnitude of the coefficients is much larger in Table 8 than in Table 7 because the fatality rate in
single-vehicle collisions is approximately 7 times higher than the fatality rate in two-vehicle collisions. This
occurs because observed single-vehicle collisions tend to be more severe; drivers have no incentive to report
minor single-vehicle collisions to their insurers or the police.
26

20

5.2 VEHICLE MODEL FIXED EFFECTS RESULTS
To further establish the robustness of our results, we explore two alternative sources
of identification. Our first alternative leverages within-model changes in vehicle weight to
estimate the effect of striking vehicle weight on fatalities. To implement this design, we
include vehicle model fixed effects for the striking vehicle in our preferred specification. The
effect of striking vehicle weight on fatalities is thus identified on the basis of changes in
vehicle weight that occur when a vehicle model is refreshed. This design minimizes the
impact of driver selection as long as the composition of customers for a particular vehicle
model remains relatively stable when the model is refreshed.
Table 9 reports estimates from models that include vehicle model fixed effects.
Column (1) presents results from our preferred specification estimated on the sample for
which we have complete vehicle model data. The sample size is substantially smaller than
our main analytic sample because only four states – Kentucky, Maryland, Ohio, and
Wyoming – report detailed vehicle model data. In this subsample, a 1,000 pound increase in
striking vehicle weight is associated with a 47% increase in the probability of a fatality in the
struck vehicle (0.06 percentage points, t = 7.3). This effect is consistent with the estimates
from Section 4. Column (2) presents results from the same specification with vehicle model
fixed effects added.27 A 1,000 pound increase in striking vehicle weight is now associated
with a 58% increase in the probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle (0.07 percentage
points, t = 4.5). The correspondence between the two coefficient estimates suggests that
driver selection does not seriously bias our results, and we cannot reject the hypothesis that
both coefficients converge to the same value.
5.3 INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES RESULTS
Our second alternate source of identification leverages the number of occupants in
the striking vehicle as an instrument for striking vehicle weight. The number of occupants in
the striking vehicle directly affects total striking vehicle weight, so the first condition for an
Across the four states with detailed vehicle model data, there are 18,746 make-model combinations. Our
specification thus includes 18,745 vehicle model fixed effects.
27

21

instrumental variable – that it be correlated with the regressor of interest – is satisfied. The
instrumental variables (IV) regression we estimate is:

!
struck veh fatality i = !1 striking
veh added weight i + ! 2striking veh curb weight i +
X1i" 1 + X 2i" 2 + Wi" 3 + # i

(4)

!
In this regression, striking
veh added weight i equals the number of occupants in

the striking vehicle multiplied by 164 pounds, which is the average weight of an additional
occupant circa 2000.28 The regression controls for the curb weight of each vehicle (i.e.,
vehicle weight absent any passengers or cargo) as well as all the covariates from our
preferred specification. The identification thus comes from variation in the number of
occupants in the striking vehicle after controlling for the curb weight of the striking vehicle.
This means that the identifying variation in the IV regression is orthogonal to the variation
in curb weight that we use in Section 4.
Nevertheless, it is not obvious that the number of occupants in the striking vehicle
satisfies the second condition for an instrumental variable – that it be uncorrelated with any
other factors that affect fatalities in the struck vehicle. It is possible that, even after
controlling for vehicle curb weight and other characteristics, drivers who carry additional
occupants in their vehicles drive more aggressively than drivers who do not carry additional
occupants. If this were true, then our IV estimates would be biased upward. We thus do not
interpret our IV estimates as being more robust than our OLS estimates. Instead, we
recognize that the identifying variation in the IV regression is orthogonal to the identifying
variation in the OLS regression. If the two regressions produce similar estimates, this
suggests that both are estimating causal effects. If the two regressions produce very different
estimates, this suggests that one (or both) may be biased.

We calculate this figure as follows. First, for the subset of accidents for which we have detailed occupant
characteristics, we tabulate the share of additional occupants that are male adults, female adults, male children,
and female children. We find that 21.6% of additional occupants are male adults, 39.2% are female adults,
19.2% are male children, and 20.0% are female children. Using national statistics on body weight by gender and
age we then compute the average weight of an additional occupant as 0.216*190 lbs + 0.392*163 lbs +
0.192*110 lbs + 0.200*114 lbs = 149 lbs (Ogden et al. 2004). Finally, we add 15 lbs per occupant to account
for clothing, outerwear, and personal belongings (149 lbs + 15 lbs = 164 lbs).
28

22

The last two columns of Table 9 report coefficients from the instrumental variables
sample. The IV sample is approximately half the size of our main analytic sample because
data on the number of occupants is not available in every state. Column (3) presents results
from estimating the preferred OLS specification (column (7) of Table 2) on the IV sample.
A 1,000 pound increase in striking vehicle weight is associated with a statistically significant
0.064 percentage point increase in the probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle (t = 10.7).
This coefficient represents a 48% increase over the average probability of a fatality in a
struck vehicle, which is consistent with the results in Section 4. Column (4) presents results
from the IV regression in equation (4). The reported coefficient is !1, the coefficient on
predicted additional weight in the striking vehicle. An additional 1,000 pounds of occupant
weight in the striking vehicle is associated with a statistically significant 0.062 percentage
point increase in the probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle (t = 2.4). This coefficient
represents a 46% increase over the average probability of a fatality in the struck vehicle and
is almost identical to the coefficient in column (3). The correspondence between the OLS
and IV results thus increases our confidence in both estimators.
6. POLICY IMPLICATIONS
The econometric evidence demonstrates that the impact of heavier striking vehicles
on fatalities in struck vehicles is statistically significant and robust to the inclusion of an
extensive set of vehicle, driver and accident covariates, estimation methods and identification
strategies. Our estimates also scale to the national level. In a previous working paper, we
estimated the same models using data from the NHTSA General Estimates System (GES).
The GES is a random subsample of police reported accidents in all states. It thus has fewer
observations, but greater geographic coverage, than our merged state data sets. If we
estimate our preferred specification using GES data, we find that 1,000 pounds of additional
vehicle weight increases the probability of a fatality by 40% in the other vehicle. This
estimate is statistically significant (t = 4.8) and similar in magnitude to our preferred estimate
of 47% from the state data sets. We cannot reject the hypothesis that both estimates
converge to the same value.
We now explore whether the estimated causal effect of vehicle weight on fatalities is
economically significant and compare two possible price based policies to distribute the
23

external costs across drivers. To quantify the magnitude of the external costs of increased
vehicle weight, we design the following counterfactual experiment. We consider the
externality at the individual level, whereby purchasing and driving a heavy vehicle increases
the probability of a fatality in a collision with other vehicles on the road. We conduct a
thought experiment in which an individual chooses a vehicle of a certain weight; we then
calculate the external costs from this individual’s vehicle choice. We carry out this calculation
for each driver on the road while holding the remainder of the fleet constant. We sum across
individuals to get the total externality from all individuals’ vehicle choices.
For the purposes of this calculation, we assume that the individual chooses a vehicle
weighing as much as the average 2005 model year vehicle in our data (3,616 pounds).29 We
calculate total external costs against two baseline vehicles that the individual could buy – a
slightly lighter vehicle and the lightest possible vehicle. The “slightly lighter” counterfactual
vehicle is a proxy for the average 1989 model year vehicle in our data, which weighs 2,953
pounds. The “lightest possible” counterfactual vehicle is the smallest drivable car in mass
production in 2005, which weighs 1,850 pounds. In addition, we run a scenario that
incorporates the external costs from pedestrian and motorcycle fatalities. All of our scenarios
represent partial equilibrium approaches to arriving at total external costs – they assume that
our regression estimates would not change if the vehicle fleet changed in response to the
policies considered (in reality, there could be a modest change in the regression coefficients
if the vehicle fleet changes in response to policy). Constructing a general equilibrium model
is beyond the scope of this paper, and we restrict ourselves to providing estimates of the
total external costs in the context of the current vehicle fleet.
We assume the individual purchases a vehicle weighing 3,616 lbs, or the mean weight
of 2005 model year vehicles in our sample. The first counterfactual vehicle that the
individual could have purchased weighs 2,953 pounds, or the mean weight of 1989 model
year vehicles in our sample. From 1989 to 2005, the average model sold gained 625 pounds,
with heterogeneity in weight gain by model. During this period the Honda Civic gained 457
pounds, the Toyota Camry gained 515 pounds, and the Ford Explorer gained 490 pounds.
The Honda Odyssey, a premier minivan, gained 1,060 pounds. Honda’s smallest compact

We calculate the average weight across all 2005 (or 1989) model year cars and light trucks weighing less than
6,000 lbs in our eight state accident database.
29

24

car, the 2010 Honda Fit, weighs 360 pounds more than the 1981 Accord, which is now a full
size sedan. Similar patterns emerge for most other manufacturers.
When summed across all individuals, our counterfactual scenario computes the total
external cost of a 2005 model year vehicle fleet over the representative 1989 model year
vehicle. Our experiment is not affected by the specific distribution of vehicle weight within
the fleet as the probability of a fatality is assumed linear in striking vehicle weight – the
linearity ensures that mean vehicle weight is a sufficient statistic for our policy analysis. We
choose 2005 as our cutoff year as many of the parameters necessary for our full simulation
were only available until 2005.
The change in the probability of an external fatality for an individual buying vehicle
model i weighing wi over a lighter vehicle weighing wcf is given by:

External Cost i = ! " (wi # wcf ) " P(accident) "VSL

(5)

For ! we employ our preferred estimate of the causal effect of weight on the
probability of a fatality in an accident, or 0.110 percentage points for each additional 1,000
lbs in striking vehicle weight.30 In all experiments, we set wi at 3,616 pounds. We calculate the
probability of a vehicle being involved in a multivehicle collision at 3.65% per year (NHTSA,
2007).31 We apply the DOT value of a statistical life of $5.8 million.
If our simulated individual chooses a vehicle weighing 3,616 lbs (wi) instead of one
weighing 2,953 lbs (wcf), she causes an additional 0.000027 external fatalities per year in
expectation, valued at $154.39. Summing this figure across all vehicles, the total external cost
of vehicle weight gain relative to the 1989 baseline vehicle is $35 billion per year. This figure
represents the “weight gain since 1989” scenario but does not encompass the total external
costs of vehicle weight.
Our second counterfactual scenario assumes the individual purchases the 3,616 lb
vehicle (wi) over a vehicle weighing 1,850 lbs (wcf), which represents the lightest vehicle in
mass production that can transport at least two adult passengers and is classified as an
automobile. This is the approximate weight of Toyota’s iQ, Mercedes Benz’s Smart Car, or
the first generation Honda Insight. The intuition behind calculating the total external cost
using this baseline vehicle is that individuals privately choose the size of the externality by
For comparison, the probability in our sample of a fatality in a two-vehicle collision (conditional on the
collision occurring) is 0.190%.
31 We estimate the probability of being involved in an accident by dividing the total number of vehicles
involved in multivehicle collisions by the total number of registered vehicles in 2005 (BTS, 2010 Table 1-11).
30

25

choosing a heavier vehicle than required to provide baseline transportation services. This
calculation recognizes that a driver of a Smart Car poses little or no risk to other roadway
users except bicyclists or motorcyclists.32
If our simulated individual chooses a vehicle weighing 3,616 lbs instead of one
weighing 1,850 lbs, she causes an additional 0.000071 external fatalities per year in
expectation, valued at $411.34. Summing across all drivers, this translates into a total external
cost of $93 billion per year. This scenario, however, ignores the external fatality risks that
vehicles pose to pedestrians and motorcyclists. In 2005, there were 2,659 motorcycle crash
fatalities (involving light vehicles) and 5,864 non-motorist fatalities due to fatal crashes
(NHTSA 2010). This is equivalent to an external “baseline” fatality cost of $49.4 billion. The
total external cost of “excess” vehicle weight and baseline fatality risk is therefore $142.4
billion.
The above calculations ignore the impact of higher striking vehicle weight in
multivehicle collisions with more than two vehicles. The majority of these accidents involve
three vehicles. We repeat the simulation above but add the external costs in three-vehicle
collisions. We assume that striking vehicle weight has half the causal effect (per vehicle
struck) in three-vehicle accidents as compared to its effect in two-vehicle collisions. This
assumption is conservative in comparison to our three-vehicle collision estimates in Table 5.
These calculations raise external costs in the “weight gain since 1989” scenario to $38 billion
and external costs in the “lightest possible vehicle” scenario to $101.6 billion. Total external
costs rise to $151 billion.33
While the magnitude of the total external costs is a straightforward calculation,
translating it into an optimal policy is not. The externality consists of fatalities in collisions
with pedestrians, motorcyclists, and other vehicles. These costs, as discussed in Section 2, are
not currently reflected in liability insurance because most coverage levels are far below the
VSL of $5.8 million. One way to incorporate these external risks is to include them in a per
mile insurance charge. In contrast to existing proposals for “pay as you drive” (PAYD)
insurance (e.g. Parry 2005; Bordoff and Noel 2008), our results demonstrate that the per
mile insurance charge should vary sharply by weight – a heavier car generates greater
We do not consider a “zero weight” baseline vehicle because that weight lies far outside the support of our
data. Furthermore, it is unclear what counterfactual to construct if the vehicle does not exist at all. Would the
collision not occur, or would the struck vehicle instead hit a different vehicle or a roadside object?
33 A spreadsheet detailing these calculations is available from the authors.
32

26

expected per mile external costs than a lighter car. In order to assess a tax that varies per
pound and per mile, one needs accurate information on vehicle miles travelled (VMT) for
each vehicle, which creates substantial monitoring challenges.
A practical policy alternative is to distribute the total external costs by raising the
gasoline tax assessed per gallon. Taxing gasoline is appealing because it is simple and because
gasoline usage is positively related to both miles driven and vehicle weight. The United
States consumed 140 billion gallons of gasoline in 2005 (EIA 2010). If we spread the total
external costs calculated above across 140 billion gallons of gasoline, this translates into 27
cents per gallon in the “weight gain since 1989” scenario ($38 billion/140 billion gallons =
27 cents/gallon). The total externality due to vehicle fatalities when the baseline vehicle is
1,850 pounds translates into a tax of 73 cents per gallon ($101.6 billion/140 billion gallons =
73 cents/gallon). Including pedestrian and motorcycle fatalities translates into a tax of $1.08
per gallon ($151 billion/140 billion gallons = $1.08/gallon).
While the gasoline tax does not differ by the type of vehicle fueled, it is correlated
with vehicle weight, because heavier vehicles have lower fuel economy. Figure 3 plots a
lowess smoother of miles per gallon (mpg) against vehicle weight, estimated for cars in
model year 2005 using the data from Knittel (forthcoming).34 There is a strong negative and
slightly nonlinear relationship between the two variables. A linear regression indicates that an
additional 1,000 pounds in vehicle weight decreases fuel economy by 4.5 mpg. A gas tax thus
results in heavier vehicles indirectly paying a higher per mile tax through the correlation of
mpg with vehicle weight. In this sense, the gas tax approximates a weight varying mileage
tax.
A natural question is how close the gasoline tax comes to achieving the desired
weight varying mileage tax. We perform a back of the envelope calculation using a large set
of vehicles for which we have vehicle weight and mpg ratings from Knittel (forthcoming).
For the analysis, we remove boutique vehicles, which essentially have zero market share (e.g.
Lamborghini, Ferrari, Bentley), flex fuel vehicles, which have inflated mpg ratings for
accounting reasons, and a few miscoded observations. We examine vehicles built from 1997
to 2006 to approximate the vehicle fleet in the last year of our sample. This sample contains

For this comparison, we require vehicle weight and EPA fuel economy ratings. The latter are not contained
in our VIN decoder database, but Chris Knittel has graciously shared his model level data on weight and fuel
economy ratings.
34

27

8,201 model-year combinations and includes most cars and light trucks sold in the United
States during this period.
The weight based external cost for vehicle type i per VMT is given by

cie

=

(

)

! wi !wcf "VSL"P( accident )
VMT

+

c epedmot

(6)

where ! is again the estimated causal effect of vehicle weight on external fatalities (0.0011),
wi is the chosen vehicle’s weight, wcf is the baseline vehicle’s weight, VSL is the value of a
statistical life and P(accident) is the probability of being involved in a multivehicle collision.
e
VMT are held constant for each model at 11,000 miles per year. The parameter c pedmot is the

total number of fatalities in collisions between vehicles and pedestrians, bicyclists and
motorcycles, multiplied by the VSL; it sums to $49.4 billion, or 1.65 cents per VMT. We
e
calculate cie for each model in our database. The average value of ci across all models is 5.4

cents per mile, and it increases by 2.1 cents per mile for every 1,000 lb increase in wi.
The gas tax per mile for model i is given by
cig =

ce
mpgi

(7)

where ce is the average per gallon external cost of fatalities in multivehicle collisions or
collisions with pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorcycles. We calculate ce above as $1.08 per
gallon. For mpgi we use the standard 45/55 weighting of the EPA city and highway fuel
economy ratings.35 The gas tax per mile therefore only varies across models through
differences in fuel economy.
The weight-based tax displays higher variability, with a standard deviation of 1.6
cents per mile compared to the gas tax’s standard deviation of 1.3 cents per mile. The
difference between the two taxes for model i can be expressed as:
! i = cig " cie = # +

ce
" $ wi
mpgi

(8)

Pre-2008 EPA fuel economy ratings are widely recognized to overstate the actual mileage achieved by the
average driver (Edmunds 2006). This affects our subsequent analysis because the $1.08 gas tax was derived
from actual fuel economy rather than the EPA’s forecast fuel economy. We thus rescale the EPA ratings so
that the average fuel economy in this sample matches the average fuel economy observed nationwide (17.8
mpg), after adjusting for weight differences between the two samples. The rescaling factor that achieves this
equivalence is 0.73. Our conclusions in the subsequent analysis are unchanged if we instead leave the EPA
ratings untouched and recalculate the gas tax using EPA mileage ratings – in both cases the per mile gas tax
closely tracks the weight based mileage tax.
35

28

where ! =

" ! wcf !VSL ! P(accident) e
" #VSL # P(accident)
" c pedmot and ! =
. We keep both !
VMT
VMT

and " fixed at the values stated previously in this simulation. From equations (6) and (7), we
see that the per mile weight tax increases in weight and the gas tax per mile decreases in fuel
efficiency, as expected. However, an interesting relationship emerges for the difference
between the two pricing tools, given in equation (8). "i is decreasing in better fuel efficiency
and higher weight. A negative "i means that, for vehicle model i, the weight tax is higher
than the gas tax. Thus, cars most heavily advantaged by the gas tax are heavy vehicles that
are relatively fuel efficient for their size (e.g. Mercedes E320 CDI [35.5 mpg; 3,835 lbs]).
Cars most heavily advantaged by the weight tax are lighter vehicles that are gas guzzlers
compared to others their size (e.g. Ford GT [18.7 mpg; 3,351 lbs]).
Figure 4 presents a scatterplot of the gas tax versus the weight tax for all models
from 1997–2006 in the cleaned Knittel (forthcoming) database. The difference between the
two taxes is small for most models, but it can be significant at the extremes, ranging between
–3.7 cents to 5.3 cents per mile. A one cent difference per mile equates to $110 dollars on an
annual basis. For 62% of the models in our database, the absolute value of the difference
between the two taxes is less than one cent per mile, and for 95% of the models the absolute
value of the difference is less than 2 cents per mile. The average difference between the two
taxes is 0.69 cents per mile, which represents 12.9% of the average value of the per mile
weight tax.
A related question is what level of gas tax would best mimic the weight tax across all
models. For any gas tax set at c per gallon, we can write the following equation:

cie = c ! 1 mpgi + ! i

(9)

In this equation, c ! 1 mpgi equals the gas tax per mile for vehicle i (dollars/gallon
divided by miles/gallon = dollars/mile), and !i equals the difference between the gas tax per
mile and the weight based mileage tax. If we specify a quadratic loss function, we can
estimate the gas tax that best mimics the weight tax by estimating a least squares regression
of the weight based mileage tax on the inverse of miles per gallon.36 Each observation in this
Equation (9) reveals that we must constrain the intercept to be zero in this regression – the only degree of
freedom in setting the gas tax comes from choosing c .
36

29

regression is a different vehicle model. The resulting estimate from this OLS regression is

c = $0.96 per gallon, which is similar in magnitude to our previously computed tax of $1.08
(though the two quantities are significantly different at the 5% level).37 The total revenue
raised by either of the gas taxes is close to the total revenue raised by the mileage based tax.
In all cases, the revenues could be redistributed to make the taxes revenue neutral.
While many countries encourage fuel efficiency through high gasoline taxes, the
United States encourages fuel efficiency through CAFE standards. In principle, fuel
economy standards could achieve the same “downsizing” of the vehicle fleet as a gasoline
tax – a properly specified fuel economy standard should act as a de facto tax on heavier
vehicles. A primary difference between the two instruments is that the fuel economy
standard “tax” would be collected when purchasing the vehicle and would be amortized over
the vehicle’s lifetime VMT, while the gas tax would be collected in small increments
throughout the life of the vehicle. This difference could be important if consumers exhibit
high discount rates or if salience is important (Finkelstein 2009). Calculating the exact fuel
economy standards that achieve equivalent effects to a $1.08 per gallon gas tax is beyond the
scope of this paper, as it requires a variety of supply and demand elasticities. Nevertheless,
we note two important points in the context of CAFE standards.
First, current CAFE standards are insufficient to internalize the externality presented
in this paper. Goldberg (1998) estimates that CAFE increases the price of pickup trucks by
0.6% and reduces the price of subcompacts by 0.5%. This equates to a tax on pickup trucks
(relative to subcompacts) of approximately $200. The gasoline tax discussed above, however,
equates to a tax on pickup trucks (relative to subcompacts) of over $4,000 over the life of
the vehicle. Second, the light truck coefficient in Table 2 suggests that removing the current
split in CAFE standards between cars and light trucks would improve welfare. The results in
Table 2 imply that light truck frames impose significant external risks upon other roadway
users but provide little or no safety benefit to their own occupants. This suggests that light
truck purchases should be discouraged, but current CAFE standards encourage light truck
production by imposing a much lower mileage standard on trucks than on cars.

The least squares regression minimizes the sum of squared deviations. We can alternatively estimate a median
regression to minimize the sum of absolute deviations. The median regression coefficient is $0.95, which is
virtually identical to the OLS coefficient of $0.96.
37

30

7. CONCLUSION
The US vehicle fleet has become significantly heavier over the past two decades. The
average car on the road in 2008 was roughly 530 pounds heavier than the average car on the
road in 1988, representing a 20% increase. This trend and its potential traffic safety
implications have been widely discussed by policymakers when contemplating more
stringent fuel economy standards or greenhouse gas emissions standards. However, it is less
widely recognized that an unregulated vehicle fleet is inefficiently heavy due to the “arms
race” nature of vehicle choice. In this paper, we estimate the external effects of choosing a
heavier vehicle on fatalities in two-vehicle collisions. We present robust evidence that
increasing striking vehicle weight by 1,000 pounds increases the probability of a fatality in
the struck vehicle by 40% to 50%. This finding is unchanged across different specifications,
estimation methods, and different subsets of the sample. We show that there are also
significant impacts on serious injuries.
The external costs of fatalities are currently not internalized in the form of a first- or
second-best policy. We calculate that a simple gasoline tax that internalizes the fleet weight
gain since 1989 is 27 cents per gallon. We further calculate that internalizing the total cost of
external fatalities due to vehicle weight and operation, including crashes with motorcycles
and pedestrians, requires a tax on the order of $1.08 per gallon. Parry and Small (2005),
applying a lower VSL to monetize other external costs and not accounting for the vehicle
weight externality, calculate an optimal value of $1.01 per gallon for the U.S. gas tax
(approximately 60 cents above its current level). Internalizing the vehicle weight externality
would increase this optimal value substantially.

31

References
Ahmad, S., and D. L. Greene. 2005. “Effect of Fuel Economy on Automobile Safety: A
Reexamination.” Journal of the Transportation Research Board (1941): 1–7.
Anderson, M. 2008. “Safety for whom? The effects of light trucks on traffic fatalities.”
Journal of Health Economics 27(4): 973–989.
Austin, D., and T. Dinan. 2005. “Clearing the air: The costs and consequences of higher
CAFE standards and increased gasoline taxes.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 50(3): 562–582.
Bento, A. M, L. H Goulder, M. R Jacobsen, and R. H von Haefen. 2009. “Distributional and
efficiency impacts of increased US gasoline taxes.” The American Economic Review
99(3): 667–699.
Bordoff, J., and P. Noel. 2008. “Pay-As-You-Drive auto insurance: A simple way to reduce
driving-related harms and increase equity.” Hamilton Project Discussion Paper.
Busse, M. R, C. R Knittel, and F. Zettelmeyer. 2009. “Pain at the Pump: How Gasoline
Prices Affect Automobile Purchasing in New and Used Markets.”
Crandall, Robert W., and John D. Graham. 1989. “The Effect of Fuel Economy Standards
on Automobile Safety.” Journal of Law and Economics 32(1): 97-118.
Edmunds, Dan. 2006. “EPA Overhauls Fuel Economy Estimates for 2008.”
http://www.edmunds.com/fuel-economy/epa-overhauls-fuel-economy-estimatesfor-2008.html.
Evans, L. 1984. “Accident involvement rate and car size.” Accident Analysis & Prevention
16(5): 387–406.
Fernández-Val, I. 2009. “Fixed effects estimation of structural parameters and marginal
effects in panel probit models.” Journal of Econometrics 150(1): 71–85.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2009. “E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
124(3): 969-1010.
Gayer, T. 2004. “The Fatality Risks of Sport-Utility Vehicles, Vans, and Pickups Relative to
Cars.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 28(2): 103–133.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1998. “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency
Standards in the US.” The Journal of Industrial Economics 46(1): 1-33.
Hakim, Danny. 2003. “S.U.V.’s to Be Redesigned to Reduce Risk to Cars.” The New York
Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/04/business/suv-s-to-be-redesigned-toreduce-risk-to-cars.html?pagewanted=all.

32

“Insurance Information Institute - Compulsory Auto/Uninsured Motorists.”
http://www.iii.org/IU/Compulsory-Auto-Uninsured-Motorists/.
Jacobsen, M. 2010. “Fuel Economy, Car Class Mix, and Safety.” U.C. San Diego Working
Paper.
Kahane, C. 2003. “Vehicle weight, fatality risk and crash compatibility of model year 1991-99
passenger cars and light trucks.” NHTSA Technical Report.
Kennickell, A. B. 2003. “A Rolling Tide: Changes in the Distribution of Wealth in the US.”
Federal Reserve Occasional Staff Study.
Khazzoom, J. D. 1994. “Fuel Efficiency and Automobile Safety: Single-Vehicle Highway
Fatalities for Passenger Cars.” The Energy Journal 15(4): 49–102.
Kleit, A. N. 2004. “Impacts of long-range increases in the corporate average fuel economy
(CAFE) standard.” Economic Inquiry 42(2): 279–94.
Klier, T., and J. Linn. 2008. “New Vehicle Characteristics and the Cost of the Corporate
Average Fuel Economy Standard.”
Knittel, C. R. Forthcoming. “Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Offs and
Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector.” American Economic Review.
Li, S., C. Timmins, and R. H von Haefen. 2009. “How do gasoline prices affect fleet fuel
economy?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2): 113–137.
Li, Shanjun. Forthcoming. “Traffic safety and vehicle choice: quantifying the effects of the
‘arms race’ on American roads.” Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Mertz, H. J., P. Prasad, and A. L. Irwin. 1997. “Injury risk curves for children and adults in
frontal and rear collisions (SAE 973318).” In Proceeding of the 41st Stapp Car Crash
Conference, p. 13–30.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. “FARS Encyclopedia.” http://wwwfars.nhtsa.dot.gov/Main/index.aspx.
———. 2007. “Traffic Safety Facts 2005.”
Noland, R. B. 2005. “Fuel economy and traffic fatalities: multivariate analysis of international
data.” Energy Policy 33(17): 2183–2190.
———. 2004. “Motor Vehicle Fuel Efficiency and Traffic Fatalities.” The Energy Journal
25(4): 1–22.
Ogden, Cynthia L, Cheryl D Fryar, Margaret D Carroll, and Katherine M Flegal. 2004.
“Mean body weight, height, and body mass index, United States 1960-2002.” Advance
Data (347): 1-17.

33

Parry, Ian W. H. 2005. “Is Pay-as-You-Drive Insurance a Better Way to Reduce Gasoline
than Gasoline Taxes?” The American Economic Review 95(2): 288-293.
Parry, Ian W. H., and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. “Does Britain or the United States Have the
Right Gasoline Tax?” The American Economic Review 95(4): 1276-1289.
Peltzman, Sam. 1975. “The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation.” The Journal of Political
Economy 83(4): 677-725.
Portney, Paul R., Ian W. H. Parry, Howard K. Gruenspecht, and Winston Harrington. 2003.
“Policy Watch: The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17(4): 203-217.
Robertson, L. S. 1991. “How to save fuel and reduce injuries in automobiles.” The Journal of
Trauma 31(1): 107.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2009. “Light-Duty Automotive
Technology, Carbon Dioxide Emissions, and Fuel Economy Trends: 1975 Through
2009.”
US Energy Information Administration. “Use of Gasoline - Energy Explained, Your Guide
To Understanding Energy.”
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/energyexplained/index.cfm?page=gasoline_use.
Van Auken, M., and J. W Zellner. 2005. “An Assessment of the Effects of Vehicle Weight
and Size on Fatality Risk in 1985 to 1998 Model Year Passenger Cars and 1985 to
1997 Model Year Light Trucks and Vans.” SAE International.
Ward’s Reports Incorporated. 1994. Ward’s Automotive Yearbook.
White, M. J. 2004. “The ‘Arms Race’ on American Roads: The Effect of Sport Utility
Vehicles and Pickup Trucks on Traffic Safety.” The Journal of Law and Economics 47:
333-355.

34

Figure 1: External Costs of Vehicle Weight

Figure 2: Marginal Effects of Striking Vehicle Weight

Marginal Effect on Fatality Probability

0.003

0.002

0.001

0
2000

2500

3000

3500

4000

4500

Striking Vehicle Weight
Linear OLS

Quadratic OLS

Quadratic OLS w/Interaction

Linear Probit

Quadratic Probit

Quadratic Probit w/Interaction

5000

Figure 3: Fuel Economy vs. Weight for 2005 Model Year Light Vehicles

Figure 4: Sunflower Scatterplot of Gas Tax vs. Weight Tax for Cars and Trucks

Notes: The graph above displays the joint distribution of the weight tax and gas tax per mile
for the sample of cars and trucks with model years 1997-2006 from the database provided by
Knittel (forthcoming). We remove boutique cars, flex fuel vehicles, and a few outliers with
incorrectly recorded fuel ratings. The sunflower plot bunches multiple observations into
single flowers, where the number of petals indicates the total number of observations
represented by the flower. The petals of light flowers represent one observation each and the
petals of darker flowers represent 13 observations each.

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Two-Vehicle Collision Data Set
Base Sample
Mean
Sample Size
(Std Dev)
Weight

Complete Covariates Sample
Mean
Sample Size
(Std Dev)

3,076 lbs
(685)

4,849,575

3,113 lbs
(694)

2,829,768

Light Truck

24.5%
(43.0)

4,849,575

25.8%
(43.8)

2,829,768

Model Year

1992
(5.6)

4,849,575

1993
(5.7)

2,829,768

Accident Year

1998
(4.4)

4,849,575

1999
(4.3)

2,829,768

Occupants

1.41
(0.84)

2,608,821

1.45
(0.87)

1,476,441

Fatality

0.19%
(4.36)

4,849,575

0.23%
(4.83)

2,829,768

Serious Injury

2.7%
(16.1)

4,849,575

3.4%
(18.0)

2,829,768

Alcohol Involved

8.3%
(27.6)

2,753,533

10.0%
(30.1)

1,723,694

Notes: Both samples are limited to collisions involving two light vehicles built post-1980.
The complete covariates sample is further limited to collisions in which all covariates in our
preferred specification are non-missing.

Table 2: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Weight of Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00088
(0.00004)

0.12685
(0.00531)

0.00093
(0.00005)

0.12797
(0.00616)

0.00101
(0.00005)

0.13440
(0.00685)

0.00110
(0.00006)

0.00065
(0.00006)

0.00064
(0.00006)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00088
46%

0.00077
41%

0.00093
42%

0.00085
38%

0.00101
44%

0.00086
37%

0.00110
47%

0.00065
49%

0.00064
48%

Weight of Struck Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

-0.00047
(0.00004)

-0.08196
(0.00644)

-0.00053
(0.00004)

-0.08548
(0.00727)

-0.00101
(0.00005)

-0.15988
(0.00815)

-0.00097
(0.00005)

-0.00060
(0.00006)

-0.00065
(0.00006)

Striking Vehicle is Light Truck

0.00117
(0.00006)

0.15977
(0.00861)

0.00105
(0.00008)

0.13016
(0.00958)

0.00088
(0.00009)

0.10113
(0.01075)

0.00093
(0.00009)

0.00054
(0.00010)

0.00054
(0.00010)

Struck Vehicle is Light Truck

-0.00014
(0.00006)

-0.02541
(0.00987)

-0.00036
(0.00007)

-0.06192
(0.01081)

-0.00001
(0.00007)

-0.03605
(0.01154)

0.00021
(0.00008)

-0.00015
(0.00009)

-0.00012
(0.00009)

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

OLS

OLS

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Specification
Weather, Time, and County Fixed Effects
Driver Characteristics
City Fixed Effects
Occupants and Seat Belt Usage
Sample Size

Yes
4,849,575

4,849,575

3,572,439

3,536,684

3,223,746

3,197,882

2,829,768

1,470,596

1,470,596

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving two vehicles. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered at the
collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are computed as the average effect of a 1,000 lb increase in weight across all observations included in the
regression. All regressions include as right-hand-side variables the weight of each vehicle, indicators for whether each vehicle is a light truck, and year fixed effects. Weather, time, and
county fixed effects controls include rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, a quadratic in model year for each vehicle, and year, hour, and county
fixed effects. Driver characteristic controls include quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for male drivers and young male drivers, and
indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle.

Table 3: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Serious Injuries
Dependent Variable: Presence of Serious Injuries in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Weight of Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00484
(0.00014)

0.07616
(0.00207)

0.00573
(0.00017)

0.08332
(0.00242)

0.00615
(0.00019)

0.08494
(0.00260)

0.00687
(0.00021)

0.00324
(0.00020)

0.00316
(0.00020)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00484
18%

0.00470
18%

0.00573
19%

0.00543
18%

0.00615
19%

0.00563
17%

0.00687
20%

0.00324
20%

0.00316
20%

Weight of Struck Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

-0.00720
(0.00013)

-0.12392
(0.00226)

-0.00797
(0.00016)

-0.12874
(0.00261)

-0.00921
(0.00018)

-0.14280
(0.00282)

-0.00891
(0.00020)

-0.00479
(0.00019)

-0.00514
(0.00019)

Striking Vehicle is Light Truck

0.00567
(0.00022)

0.08524
(0.00322)

0.00456
(0.00027)

0.06400
(0.00367)

0.00412
(0.00029)

0.05399
(0.00392)

0.00448
(0.00032)

0.00215
(0.00030)

0.00215
(0.00030)

Struck Vehicle is Light Truck

-0.00033
(0.00020)

-0.00894
(0.00343)

-0.00212
(0.00024)

-0.03734
(0.00389)

-0.00075
(0.00027)

-0.02072
(0.00414)

0.00005
(0.00029)

-0.00069
(0.00028)

-0.00048
(0.00028)

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

OLS

OLS

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Specification
Weather, Time, and County Fixed Effects
Driver Characteristics
City Fixed Effects
Occupants and Seat Belt Usage
Sample Size

Yes
4,849,575

4,849,575

3,572,439

3,571,255

3,223,746

3,223,344

2,829,768

1,470,596

1,470,596

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving two vehicles. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered at the
collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are computed as the average effect of a 1,000 lb increase in weight across all observations included in the
regression. All regressions include as right-hand-side variables the weight of each vehicle, indicators for whether each vehicle is a light truck, and year fixed effects. Weather, time, and
county fixed effects controls include rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, a quadratic in model year for each vehicle, and year, hour, and county
fixed effects. Driver characteristic controls include quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for male drivers and young male drivers, and
indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle.

Table 4: Heterogeneous Effects of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Weight of Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00099
(0.00030)

0.00083
(0.00031)

0.40831
(0.04016)

0.41150
(0.04048)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00101
44%

0.00101
43%

0.00096
41%

0.00096
41%

Weight of Striking Vehicle Squared

0.00000
(0.00005)

0.00003
(0.00005)

-0.03802
(0.00549)

-0.03843
(0.00553)

Weight of Striking Vehicle
* Weight of Struck Vehicle

-0.00031
(0.00007)

0.00611
(0.00884)

Specification

OLS

OLS

Probit

Probit

Sample Size

3,223,746

3,223,746

3,197,882

3,197,882

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving two vehicles.
Parentheses contain standard errors clustered at the collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are
computed as the average effect of a 1,000 lb increase in weight across all observations included in the regression. All
regressions include the following right-hand-side variables: weight of each vehicle, a quadratic in model year for each vehicle,
indicators for whether each vehicle is a light truck, rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway,
quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for male drivers and young male drivers,
indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle, and year, hour, and city fixed effects.

Table 5: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities in Three-Vehicle Accidents
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Weight of Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00088
(0.00010)

0.11785
(0.01203)

0.00086
(0.00012)

0.10934
(0.01391)

0.00081
(0.00013)

0.10541
(0.01583)

0.00086
(0.00014)

0.00065
(0.00019)

0.00064
(0.00019)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00088
42%

0.00078
37%

0.00086
36%

0.00083
32%

0.00081
32%

0.00079
28%

0.00086
35%

0.00065
42%

0.00064
41%

Weight of Struck Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

-0.00062
(0.00011)

-0.09830
(0.01865)

-0.00078
(0.00014)

-0.11463
(0.02104)

-0.00127
(0.00016)

-0.19317
(0.02415)

-0.00109
(0.00017)

-0.00079
(0.00023)

-0.00084
(0.00024)

Striking Vehicle is Light Truck

0.00064
(0.00014)

0.08021
(0.01863)

0.00055
(0.00017)

0.06840
(0.02044)

0.00056
(0.00019)

0.06530
(0.02345)

0.00061
(0.00020)

0.00039
(0.00030)

0.00039
(0.00030)

Struck Vehicle is Light Truck

-0.00022
(0.00018)

-0.03293
(0.02969)

-0.00031
(0.00022)

-0.05346
(0.03178)

0.00031
(0.00024)

0.00197
(0.03484)

0.00051
(0.00026)

-0.00014
(0.00036)

-0.00012
(0.00036)

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

OLS

OLS

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Specification
Weather, Time, and County Fixed Effects
Driver Characteristics
City Fixed Effects
Occupants and Seat Belt Usage
Sample Size

Yes
518,378

518,378

391,456

356,970

348,543

306,684

317,769

110,541

110,541

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving three vehicles. Striking vehicle weight coefficients represent the average
effect of increasing the weight of one striking vehicle by 1,000 pounds; they are the average of the coefficients on the first and second striking vehicles. Parentheses contain standard
errors clustered at the collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are computed as the average effect of a 1,000 lb increase in the weight of one striking
vehicle across all observations included in the regression. All regressions include as right-hand-side variables the weight of each vehicle, indicators for whether each vehicle is a light
truck, and year fixed effects. Weather, time, and county fixed effects controls include rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, a quadratic in model
year for each vehicle, and year, hour, and county fixed effects. Driver characteristic controls include quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for
male drivers and young male drivers, and indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle.

Table 6: Relationship Between Vehicle Weight and NHTSA Crash Test Performance
Dependent Variable:

HIC

HIC>700

HIC

HIC>700

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Weight of Vehicle

17.7
(16.1)

0.024
(0.018)

38.2
(43.5)

0.018
(0.040)

Percentage Effect of
1,000 lb Increase

3.0%

8.7%

6.7%

7.2%

Yes

Yes

2,847

2,847

Sales Share Weighted
Sample Size

4,788

4,788

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample in the first two
columns contains all NHTSA vehicle-to-barrier frontal crash test results. The estimation sample
in the last two columns contains only crash tests involving vehicles for which we have sales share
data. Parentheses contain standard errors clustered by vehicle make. All regressions include the
following right-hand-side variables: weight of tested vehicle, a quadratic in model year, a light
truck indicator, and a quadratic in collision speed. Sales share weighted regressions are weighted
by the tested vehicle's sales share for a given year.

Table 7: Effect of Vehicle Weight in Collisions Between Two Equal Weight Vehicles
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Average Vehicle Weight in Collision (1000s of lbs)

-0.00004
(0.00017)

-0.00110
(0.00108)

0.00003
(0.00023)

-0.00181
(0.00137)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Average Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

-0.00004
-2%

-0.00110
-19%

0.00003
2%

-0.00181
-35%

200 lbs

200 lbs

100 lbs

100 lbs

Max Weight Difference Between Vehicles
Frontal Collisions Only
Sample Size

Yes
539,350

39,242

Yes
288,988

20,488

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions in which the difference
in weight between the two vehicles is less than 200 lbs (first two columns) or 100 lbs (last two columns). Parentheses
contain standard errors clustered at the collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are
computed as the average effect of a 1,000 lb increase in weight across all observations included in the regression. All
regressions include the following right-hand-side variables: weight of each vehicle, a quadratic in model year for each
vehicle, indicators for whether each vehicle is a light truck, rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend),
Interstate highway, quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for male drivers and
young male drivers, indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle, and year, hour, and city fixed effects.

Table 8: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities in Single-Vehicle Collisions
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Weight of Vehicle
(1000s of lbs)

0.00044
(0.00026)

0.00030
(0.00048)

0.00153
(0.00655)

0.00434
(0.01330)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00044
3%

0.00030
2%

0.00005
0%

0.00014
1%

Collision Type

1 Vehicle

1 Veh, Frontal

1 Vehicle

1 Veh, Frontal

Specification

OLS

OLS

Probit

Probit

Sample Size

774,790

224,696

916,766

223,236

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving a single vehicle.
Parentheses contain robust standard errors. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in vehicle weight are computed as the average effect of
a 1,000 lb increase in weight across all observations included in the regression. All regressions include the following right-handside variables: weight of vehicle, a quadratic in model year, indicators for whether a vehicle is a light truck, rain, darkness, day of
week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, quadratic in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators
for male drivers and young male drivers, indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle, and year, hour, and either city fixed
effects (OLS) or county fixed effects (probit).

Table 9: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities Using Alternative Sources of Identification
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Weight of Striking Vehicle/
Additional Weight in Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00058
(0.00008)

0.00072
(0.00016)

0.00064
(0.00006)

0.00062
(0.00026)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00058
47%

0.00072
58%

0.00064
48%

0.00062
46%

Specification

OLS

OLS w/Model FEs

OLS

IV

Sample Size

1,011,982

1,011,982

1,475,762

1,475,762

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving two vehicles. Parentheses contain
standard errors clustered at the collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are computed as the average effect of a
1,000 lb increase in weight across all observations included in the regression. All regressions include the following right-hand-side variables:
weight of each vehicle, a quadratic in model year for each vehicle, indicators for whether each vehicle is a light truck, rain, darkness, day of week
(weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for male drivers and
young male drivers, indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle, and year and hour fixed effects. OLS regressions with model fixed effects
contain fixed effects for each vehicle model and county fixed effects. IV regressions contain city fixed effects and use the number of occupants in
the striking vehicle times 164 lbs per occupant as the instrument for additional weight in the striking vehicle weight.

Table A1: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities in Accidents Excluding Light Trucks
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Weight of Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00085
(0.00005)

0.16826
(0.00881)

0.00086
(0.00006)

0.15696
(0.01010)

0.00096
(0.00007)

0.17577
(0.01187)

0.00105
(0.00007)

0.00041
(0.00007)

0.00041
(0.00007)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00085
56%

0.00084
56%

0.00086
49%

0.00087
48%

0.00096
52%

0.00094
50%

0.00105
57%

0.00041
43%

0.00041
42%

Weight of Struck Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

-0.00032
(0.00005)

-0.06786
(0.01014)

-0.00047
(0.00006)

-0.08552
(0.01142)

-0.00117
(0.00007)

-0.20630
(0.01281)

-0.00111
(0.00008)

-0.00059
(0.00008)

-0.00061
(0.00008)

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

Probit

OLS

OLS

OLS

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Specification
Weather, Time, and County Fixed Effects
Driver Characteristics
City Fixed Effects
Occupants and Seat Belt Usage
Sample Size

Yes
2,801,186

2,801,186

2,012,046

1,962,129

1,815,558

1,771,574

1,578,094

824,544

824,544

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving two cars – collisions involving light trucks are excluded. Parentheses
contain standard errors clustered at the collision level. Effects of a 1,000 lb increase in striking vehicle weight are computed as the average effect of a 1,000 lb increase in weight
across all observations included in the regression. All regressions include as right-hand-side variables the weight of each vehicle and year fixed effects. Weather, time, and county fixed
effects controls include rain, darkness, day of week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, a quadratic in model year for each vehicle, and year, hour, and county fixed effects.
Driver characteristic controls include quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60, indicators for male drivers and young male drivers, and indicators for any seat
belt usage in the vehicle.

Table A2: Effect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities for States with High and Low Missing Weight Data
Dependent Variable: Presence of Fatalities in Struck Vehicle
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Weight of Striking Vehicle (1000s of lbs)

0.00046
(0.00005)

0.00115
(0.00006)

0.00063
(0.00007)

0.00135
(0.00008)

Effect of 1000 lb Increase in Striking Vehicle Weight/
Percent Increase Over Sample Mean

0.00046
46%

0.00115
44%

0.00063
51%

0.00135
44%

24%

41%

24%

41%

Yes

Yes

1,103,620

1,726,148

Percent of Accidents with Missing Weight Data
Weather, Time, Driver, and City Controls
Sample Size

2,144,719

2,704,856

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The estimation sample is limited to collisions involving two vehicles
Columns (1) and (3) are estimated using data from states in which a low proportion of observations are missing weight data
(Ohio, Washington, and Wyoming). Columns (2) and (4) are estimated using data from states in which a high proportion of
observations are missing weight data (Florida, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, and Missouri). Parentheses contain standard
errors clustered at the collision level. All regressions include as right-hand-side variables the weight of each vehicle, indicators
for whether each vehicle is a light truck, and year fixed effects. Weather, time, driver, and city controls include rain, darkness,
day of week (weekday versus weekend), Interstate highway, quadratics in driver age, indicators for drivers under 21 or over 60,
indicators for male drivers and young male drivers, indicators for any seat belt usage in the vehicle, and year, hour, and city
fixed effects.

