NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY
Bronwyn H. Hall
Working Paper 17178
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17178

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

University of Maastricht and University of California at Berkeley. Email: bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu
Paper prepared for the Nordic economic policy conference on productivity and competitiveness, 29
April 2011, Helsinki, Finland. The revision of this paper has benefitted greatly from comments by
Ari Hytinnen, Jakob Madsden, Jacques Mairesse, and Anders Sorenson. I also thank John Jankowski
for essential help with the US innovation data. This paper was produced as part of the SCIFI-GLOW
Collaborative Project supported by the European Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme for
Research and Technological Development, under the Socio-economic Sciences and Humanities theme
(Contract no. SSH7-CT-2008-217436). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Innovation and Productivity
Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 17178
June 2011, Revised August 2011
JEL No. O30
ABSTRACT
What do we know about the relationship between innovation and productivity among firms? The workhorse
model of this relationship is presented and the implications of analysis using this model and the usually
available data on product and process innovation are derived. The recent empirical evidence on the
relationship between innovation and productivity in firms is then surveyed. The conclusion is that
there are substantial positive impacts of product innovation on revenue productivity, but that the impact
of process innovation is more ambiguous, suggesting some market power on the part of the firms being
analyzed.
Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

Innovation and Productivity
Bronwyn H. Hall1
July 2011
Early work on the sources of productivity growth revealed that growth in capital and labor
explained less than half of such growth in the United States and many other countries. The
remainder (the ‘residual’) was ascribed to technical change and a large literature grew up
that attempted to find measures for technical change (improvements in capital and labor
quality, R&D activities, and so forth) and use these measures to try to explain the residual
growth in productivity (Griliches 1996, 1998, among others). Considerable success has
been achieved by this approach, to the extent that many countries are now moving to
incorporate measures of R&D capital stock in their systems of national income accounts,
and therefore to directly attribute some of economic growth to its contribution as well as
adding the creation of knowledge capital to output itself.
Driven by interest in the unexplained portion of productivity growth and partly in response
to various economic slowdowns and productivity gaps among nations, a large body of
research on innovative activity and productivity in firms has accumulated. For reasons of
data availability, this work has mostly used two measures of innovative activity: R&D
spending and patent counts.2 As measures of innovation, each of these has both positive
and negative attributes. Both pertain primarily to technological innovation and are more
suited to measuring innovation in manufacturing firms than in other areas such as services.
R&D spending has the advantage that it is denominated in comparable units (currency) and
represents a (costly) decision variable on the part of the firm about its appropriate level of
innovative activity. For the same reason, it is only an input to innovation and cannot tell us
about innovation success. Patent counts are a measure of invention success, and can be
considered at least a partial measure of innovation output, but they are inherently very
noisy (a few are associated with very valuable inventions and most describe inventions of
little value) and the extent of their innovation coverage varies by sector, with sectors like
pharmaceuticals and instruments making heavy use of patents while other sectors use
them very little.
As the industrial structure of advanced economies has shifted away from manufacturing
and towards services, economists and others have gradually become aware that concepts
University of Maastricht, University of California at Berkeley, NBER, and IFS. Email:
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

1

2

A recent survey of results for the R&D-productivity relationship is Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen (2010).

2

like “technical change” and “R&D” describe only some of the sources of increased
productivity in the economy, and recent research has begun to look at innovation more
broadly as a source of growth. This research has been greatly helped by the introduction of
the Oslo Manual (Tanaka et al. 2005) with guidelines for the definition of various kinds of
innovation and by the surveys of innovative activity in business firms that have been
conducted in a large number of countries around the world, mostly using this manual as a
guide (Mairesse and Mohnen 2010). Several non-R&D kinds of innovative expenditure have
been identified: the later phases of development and testing that are not included in R&D,
capital expenditures related to the introduction of new processes, marketing expenditures
related to new products, certain kinds of employee training, expenditures on design and
technical specifications, etc.
Figure 1, which is based on data from these kinds of surveys, shows the distribution of the
share of firms that report any kind of innovation during the three year period 2006-2008
by country and size of firm.3 The figure is instructive: it shows that in most countries,
between 30 and 50 per cent of firms introduce a product or process innovation during a
three year period, and that the rate of introduction is much higher and also more even
across countries among large firms, as might have been expected. In fact, the coefficient of
variation for the innovation share across countries is 0.3 for the SMEs and 0.12 for the large
firms, confirming the higher dispersion rate for SMEs.
Figure 2 shows a breakdown by product and process innovation, where innovation is
defined as the development of a new to the firm process or product by the enterprise or its
group.4 In this case we are able to compare the European countries to the United States, by
restricting the population of firms to a common set of innovative sectors across the two
regions.5 The two types of innovation are roughly equal, with a slight preference for
process innovation and some differences across countries. It is however, worth noting that
The data for this and the subsequent figure comes for the most part from the European Community
Innovation Survey Data for the United States comes from the new 2008 Business R&D and Innovation Survey
(BRDIS), conducted by the National Science Foundation and may not be exactly comparable to the European
data.

3

In the US case, the definition does not include the group to which the enterprise belongs. Because group
structures are rare in the US, this distinction makes little difference. However, it does mean that the European
numbers could be slightly higher given the broader definition of the firm doing the innovating.
4

These sectors are manufacturing, telecommunications, computer services and software publishing, finance,
and some technical professional services. The restriction is necessary because the U.S. data do not contain
enough detail outside manufacturing to match the innovative sector definition used by Eurostat, which is
quite broad. The narrow definition used here is NACE activities C, J58, J61, J62, J63, K, M71. The broader
definition used by Eurostat and elsewhere in this paper includes NACE activities B, D, E, G46, and H (mining,
utilities, wholesale trade excluding motor vehicles, and transportation and storage).
5

3

the United States is by no means the most innovative among these countries by this
measure, although this conclusion should be viewed with caution given the slight
noncomparability of the U.S. data. 6
How does the aggregate innovation picture compare with aggregate productivity
measures? To answer this question, I compared the innovation rates at the country level
with overall labor productivity (GDP per hours worked, also from OECD data). The results
are shown in Figure 3.7 With the exception of an outlier (Norway), the share of both SMEs
and large firms that innovate appears to be positively related to labor productivity at the
country level. Simple univariate regressions for the relationship were moderately
significant, and even more so when robust methods such as Least Absolute Deviations or
Least Median of Squares were used.
Although the correlation displayed should not be taken too seriously, given the number of
confounding influences and differences in industrial structure across countries, even at the
aggregate level there does seem to be a relationship between innovative activity by firms
and productivity, albeit one that leaves room for many other influences. It is natural to ask
how this relationship comes about – what actions by individual firms lead to aggregate
productivity improvements? One can think of two main channels by which the presence of
more innovative firms can translate into productivity improvements: first, innovation in
existing firms can both increase their efficiency and improve the goods and services they
offer, thus increasing demand as well as reducing costs of production. Second, innovating
firms are likely to grow more than others and new entrants with better products to offer
are likely to displace existing inefficient firms, with a concomitant increase in aggregate
productivity levels. In both cases the relationship between innovation and productivity is
influenced by the institutional and macroeconomic environment in which the firms
operate, possibly leading to substantial differences across countries in the relationship
between them.

Although the sampling frame for the BRDIS was the population of U.S. firms with 5 or more employees, this
survey was the successor to the longrunning RD-1 survey which was only filled out by RD-doing firms, and
the innovation questions were at the end of a long survey, most of which concerned R&D. So there is some
suspicion that they may not always have been accurately answered by non-R&D-doers. This suggestion has
been informally confirmed by conversations with the NSF. The product innovation rate for 3% of the firms
that report doing R&D in the BRDIS survey was 66%, whereas the rate for non-R&D-doers was 7%. The gap,
which is much larger than that in Europe, does suggest some undercounting for the non-R&D firms.

6

The innovation rate is defined as the share of all firms in innovating sectors that have introduced any new
process or product during the past three years, including organizational and marketing innovations. The data
are from Eurostat’s database for the sixth Community Innovation Survey, variable INNO.
7

4

The present paper will review the ways in which economists have analyzed the
relationship between productivity and innovation, focusing on the use of such innovation
survey data as well as other data on innovative output such as patents. The differing
measures of innovation (dummy variables, innovative sales, and innovation expenditure)
that the various surveys yield will be reviewed and their drawbacks and advantages
discussed. The distinction between innovation input (expenditures and choices under the
control of the firm) and innovation output (depending on inputs but also with a large
element of chance) is important and there are rationales for using both concepts.
After discussing measures of innovation, the paper will review two approaches to
measuring the relationship between productivity and innovation: the econometric or
regression approach and the growth accounting approach. Both are in their relative infancy
due to the fact that the appropriate data has been lacking until quite recently (and is still
not widely available).

Innovation – the concept and its measurement
There were two early empirical efforts which generated datasets on innovation that have
been used in some studies (regrettably few studies, in fact). They are the SPRU study of UK
firms begun in 1970, and conducted over a period 15 years through 1984 (Freeman and
Soete 1997) and the study by Acs and Audretsch during the 1980s that looked at US firm
innovations. The SPRU study asked almost 400 experts in industry to identify significant
technical innovations that were commercialized in the UK sometime between 1945 and
1983 and then surveyed the firms that had introduced the innovations. The database
contains over 4000 innovations, almost all of which are in the manufacturing sector. It has
been used to show that the relationship between innovative activity and firm size is largely
U-shaped, and that smaller firms show greater innovative activity than they do formal R&D
activity (Pavitt et al. 1987). A couple of the papers surveyed below (Geroski 1989 and
Sterlacchini 1989) make use of this database, but it has not been exploited extensively in
the analysis of innovation and productivity.
The 1990 Acs and Audretsch study for the US Small Business Administration (SBA) was
based on a survey of over 100 trade journals in 1982 that looked for announcement of the
market introduction of inventions. The definition used by the SBA was the following:
“a process that begins with an invention, proceeds with the development of
the invention and results in introduction of a new product, process or service
to the marketplace”
This survey yielded over 8000 US innovations, most if which probably dated to 1978-1982,
but all of which were introduced in 1982. Acs and Audretsch use these data to analyze the
5

role of small firms in innovation, the growth of firms, and the evolution of market structure.
Unfortunately they do not provide any analysis of the relationship between these invention
introductions and firm productivity.
Both the SPRU and the SBA surveys used the innovation as the unit of observation, and any
firm-level analysis using these data is therefore based only on innovative firms. In contrast,
the innovation surveys described below are conducted at the firm level and sometimes
collect data on non-innovative firms as well. Thanks to work by the OECD and others, we
now have a definition of innovation done by firms that is fairly standard across a wide
range of countries and surveys:
“An innovation is the implementation of a new or significantly improved
product (good or service), or process, a new marketing method, or a new
organisational method in business practices, workplace organisation or
external relations.”8
Most of the work on innovation described in this paper has been based on surveys that use
a version of this definition. Thus there has been consistency in the definition of the
innovation variables across study, although perhaps not consistency in the interviewees’
understanding of the definition. However, note that there is at least one slightly ambiguous
feature of the definition, in that it does not define “new” very precisely. Some of the surveys
have made a distinction between “new to the firm” innovations and “new to the market”
innovations, which can be a way of distinguishing more radical innovation from imitation.
But in general, the interpretation of “new” is left to the survey respondent.
In spite of the apparent clarity of the definition of innovation in the Oslo Manual,
measuring innovation in a form that is useful for statistical analysis has proved challenging.
The central problem is that no two innovations are alike. Some innovations (e. g., the
invention of the telephone or perhaps the telegraph) create a whole new market sector
whereas others are useful but trivial, and there is a wide range in between. In general we
can say that smaller innovations are more numerous than game-changing ones. As shown
in Table 1, this fact is very visible in the data collected by Acs and Audretsch. During the
year 1982, over 85 per cent of the innovations they identified were modest improvements
to existing products, and none created entire new markets. Fewer than 2 per cent were
considered even the first of its type on the market in existing market categories.9

8

Oslo Manual (OECD 2005), third edition, p. 46.

Note that by using the 1982 date, Acs and Audretsch did miss two major innovations: the IBM personal
computer and Microsoft DOS, both of which were introduced in 1981 and which arguably meet the definition
of “created entire new market”.
9

6

The innovation surveys have typically measured innovation in two ways: first, by asking
whether the firm introduced an innovation of a certain type (product, process,
organisational, marketing, etc.) during a preceding period (usually the past three years)
and second, by asking what share of the firm’s sales are due to products introduced during
the same preceding period. The first measure has a number of drawbacks, which have
become quite evident as it has been used in many empirical studies. When examined across
a range of firm sizes, it produces the misleading results that larger firms are more likely to
be innovative, whereas in truth larger firms are involved in a wider range of activities and
therefore more likely to have an innovation in at least one of them. So this variable cannot
be used to make the kind of statements that one sometimes hears, such as “large firms are
more innovative than small firms.”
Another problem is the previously mentioned unequal size of innovations and the failure in
some surveys to distinguish between “new to the market” and “new to the firm.” Based on
the Acs and Audretsch results we know that many more of the innovative firms will have
introduced improvements to existing products rather than entirely new goods and
services, but the latter may be more important than the former. This view of the
“skewness” of innovation values is supported by a large amount of research on the
valuation of patented inventions (Harhoff et al. 1999; Scherer and Harhoff 2000; Hall et al.
2005). Although patented inventions are not precisely the same as innovations, they are
similar and share some of their distributional properties, with the majority worth very
little, and a few that are quite valuable to their owners.
Because of the imprecision and noisiness of the innovation dummies, many researchers
prefer to use the second measure, the share of sales of innovative products, which does
give a good indication of how important the innovation(s) were overall for the firm in
question. Unfortunately, this measure is useful only for goods and services and cannot be
used to capture process or organisational innovation. Nevertheless, it is the one relied on
by more than half of the papers discussed in the following sections, often accompanied by a
dummy for process innovation. Only one example exists where firms were asked to
quantify the impact of process innovation on cost reduction (Peters 2006, for Germany).

Productivity – the concept and its measurement
What we mean by the term “productivity” is fairly easy to understand although difficult to
measure: it is the quantity of output that can be produced using a given level of inputs. At
this level of the definition, there is not even a presumption of optimality or efficiency in
production. However, normally we assume that the entity whose productivity we wish to
measure is “efficient” in the sense that it is using the minimum necessary level of inputs to
produce a certain level of output, given its level of technological knowledge, its
7

organization, its size, and other endowments, as well as the environment in which it
operates.
Economists generally describe the relationship between output and the level of inputs
using a production function, of which the most convenient for analysis is the following:10

Q = ACα Lβ

(1)

Where Q is output, C is the level of capital stock, and L is labor (and potentially other noncapital inputs).11 A is the overall level of productivity which may vary across entities. That
is, because of organizational differences, frictions, or other constraints, entities with
identical levels of C and L may not be able to achieve the same level of output Q.
For measurement purposes, the logarithm of equation (1) is taken:

qit = ait + α cit + β lit

i = entity , t = time

(2)

where the added subscripts denote the fact that productivity levels are usually measured
for a number of entities over several time periods. Equation (2) yields an expression for
total factor productivity (usually denoted TFP):

TFP ≡ ait = qit − α cit − β lit

(3)

All well and good, but measuring TFP therefore requires measures of real output Q, real
capital stock C, and labor input L (as well as possible other inputs, such as energy and
materials), to say nothing of the coefficients α and β. I discuss the latter problem first.
There are two widely used approaches to estimating the weights α and β to be applied to
the inputs in the productivity measure: 1) assume that input markets are competitive,
which implies that the coefficients are the shares of revenue received by each of the
factors;12 and 2) assume the coefficients are (roughly) constant across entities and estimate
I ask the well-informed reader for patience with the elementary review provided here, which is primarily
for the purpose of setting notation for the subsequent discussion.

10

The treatment here has been greatly simplified by omitting purchased inputs (such as materials, energy,
etc.). In practice these inputs are more important on a share basis than either capital or labor and need to be
included in estimation (typically accounting for about 0.7 of the inputs). Alternatively, one can measure
output as value added, which is usually defined as output less purchased inputs. The precise choice of what to
include or exclude depends to some extent on data availability, and several variations have been pursued in
the literature discussed here. In particular, many of the available datasets do not include measures of the
firm’s capital stock and researchers are forced to resort to proxies such as current investment spending.
11

This approach can be modified to account for scale economies and market power as in R. Hall (1988), or
indeed almost anything that implies homogeneity of some degree in the production function. See below for a
modification that allows the firms to have some degree of market power.
12

8

them via regression. Solution (1) is favored by statistical agencies and others who simply
need a measure of TFP for an individual entity and may not have a sample available for
estimation, and solution (2) is the one typically used by econometricians and the main one
employed in the literature discussed later in this paper, although there are some
exceptions.13
The second problem, how to measure the inputs and outputs themselves, is subject to a
multitude of solutions. Unfortunately, the choices can have considerable impact not only on
the measurement of TFP but also on the relation of that measure to innovation. The
difficulty lies in the measurement of real inputs and outputs, holding constant the unit of
measure over time. To take a concrete and well-known example, computers, which are a
component of capital, have changed considerably over time. If we measure their
contribution to the inputs simply as expenditure on computers, it is likely to be roughly
constant over time, and TFP will grow as the computers become more productive.
However, if instead we deflate the computer expenditure by an index of the effective price
of computing power, which has fallen dramatically over the past 30 years, the real quantity
of computers will grow substantially during the same period, and TFP growth will be
correspondingly less. In essence, some technical change or innovation has been transferred
from TFP to its inputs.14 The same argument applies to the labor input, where quality has
probably generally increased over time so that a person-hour 30 years ago is not the same
as one today. All this means that TFP measures need to be used carefully, with an
understanding of the approach used to deflation and quality adjustment.15 That is, much of
the effects of innovation may show up as higher quality inputs if they are quality adjusted,
and will not appear in output.
For the output measure, the problem is even more striking when we look at the level of the
firm or enterprise, because of the potential for variations in market power across firms,
A large literature has developed on the methodologies for estimating the production function in the
presence of simulateneity between input and output choice and errors of measurement. Some key papers are
Blundell and Bond (2000), Griliches and Mairesse (1984), and Olley and Pakes (1996).

13

Of course, if the analysis is done at the aggregate level, the production of computers will be in the output
measure, and their share of TFP will increase. See Denison (1966) and Jorgenson and Griliches(1967) for
discussion of this point.
14

On the output side, Hall (1996), Mairesse and Hall (1996), and Griliches (1994) present R&D-productivity
regressions that illustrate the effect a properly measured computing sector deflator can have on the
measured returns to R&D via its impact on the measurement of TFP. Those authors show that using a hedonic
price deflator for computing rather than an overall GDP deflator more than triples the elasticity of output
with respect to R&D, from 0.03 to 0.11. That is, most of the returns to R&D during the period estimated
(1980s) went to price reduction and real output increase, and very little was received by the firms in the form
of increased revenues. See also OECD (2003), pp. 43-44 for a discussion of this issue.
15

9

and for the role that innovation plays in creating and/or increasing that market power. The
easiest way to see this is to rewrite the TFP equation in terms of revenue rather than real
output, under the assumption of an iso-elastic demand equation. The idea behind this
approach is that each firm produces differentiated products and therefore faces its own
downward sloping demand curve. Firms have idiosyncratic output prices, so that deflation
of revenue by an overall deflator simply yields real revenue rather than an actual output
measure. I denote the log of real revenue by rit and the log of the firm’s output price by pit,
with rit = pit + qit. Write the iso-elastic demand equation facing the firm in logarithmic form
as follows:16

qit = η pit

(4)

where η is the (negative) demand elasticity. Combining equations (2) and (4) yields the
following expression for the (observable) revenue as a function of the inputs and TFP:

rit =

η +1
(ait + α cit + β lit )
η

(5)

The above equation implies that the estimated coefficients of capital and labor in the
productivity equation will be negative if demand is inelastic (0>η>-1) and biased
downward if demand is elastic (η<-1). As η approaches -∞ (perfectly elastic, or pricetaking), the bias disappears and the equation is identical to equation(2), but with revenue
in place of output.
The conclusion is that if a regression based on equation (5) is used to estimate TFP (ait), the
estimate will typically be biased downward over a reasonable range of demand elasticities.
Note also that for a profit-maximizing firm, the bias is equal to 1-m, where m is the markup.
The further we are from perfect competition (m=1) and the higher the markup, the greater
is the downward bias. After I present the basic model that relates innovation and
productivity in the next section, I will derive the implications of equation (5) for the
measurement of that relationship.

Modeling the relationship
When looking at the contribution of innovative activity to productivity, the usual starting
point is to add a measure of the knowledge or intangible capital created by innovative
activity to the production function:

This treatment of the problem is drawn from Griliches and Mairesse (1984). Also see Mairesse and
Jaumandreu (2005) and Foster et al. 2008 for discussions of the differences between revenue productivity
estimation and true productivity estimation.

16

10

Q = AC α Lβ K γ

(6)

Here K is some kind of proxy for the knowledge stock of the firm. K can stand for a number
of aspects of the entity’s innovative capability: its technological knowledge obtained via
R&D, its competency at transforming research results into useful products and processes,
and so forth. It can even be based on innovative success rather than capability.
Traditionally K has been measured as a stock of past R&D spending but as other kinds of
data have become available, other measures involving patents or innovation indicators
have been used.
As before, the logarithm of equation (1) is taken:

qit = ait + α cit + β lit + γ kit

i = entity , t = time

(7)

Because much of innovative activity is directed towards new products and product
improvement, it is useful to rewrite the demand equation to allow the knowledge stock to
shift the demand curve facing the firm:

qit = η pit + ϕ kit

ϕ >0

(8)

Assuming that the knowledge stock has a positive coefficient implies that the effect of
increased knowledge or innovative activity is to shift the demand curve out by making the
firm’s products more attractive to its customers, at a given price.
Combining equations (7) and (8) as before, we obtain the following equation for revenue:

η +1
 γ (η + 1) − ϕ 
rit = 
 ( ait + α cit + β lit ) + 
 kit
η
 η 



(9)

This equation shows that knowledge stock K is likely to contribute to revenue and
therefore to measured productivity growth via two channels: directly by increasing the
efficiency of production and indirectly by shifting the demand curve for the firm’s products
outward (note that η is negative so that -φ/η is positive). It is usual to think of these two
channels as process and product innovation.
For full identification of the system implied by equation (9), it would be desirable either to
have data on individual firm output prices to allow separate estimation of η and φ or to
have some information on the components of K that might be directed toward processes
and/or products.17 At the simplest level, one can gain some idea of the relative importance
Mairesse and Jaumandreu (2005) compare productivity estimates using revenue and output deflated at the
firm level for France and Spain. They do not find significant differences in the estimates, but they did not

17

11

of the two types of innovation for productivity using the innovation dummy variables
available from the various innovation surveys. One implication of the foregoing model is
that process innovation will have ambiguous effects on revenue productivity, effects that
depend on the firm’s market power, whereas the effect of product innovation is likely to be
positive.
In the studies reviewed here, the estimation of equation (9) is generally performed by
regressing a measure of log revenue per employee (rit-lit) on the logs of capital or
investment, firm size measured in terms of employment, and various proxies for innovative
activity. Industry dummies at the two-digit level are almost always included, to control for
things such as omitted inputs (in cases where value added is not available), differences in
vertical integration, the omission of capital stocks (in cases where only current investment
is available), and the overall level of technological knowledge. Although the model is in
terms of the stock of knowledge or innovative capability, the usual proxies for this variable
are the current level of innovative activity, measured as a dummy for some innovation
during the past three years, or as the share of products sold that were introduced during
the past three years. Because the estimation is almost always cross sectional, the fact that a
flow of innovation rather than a stock is used will make little difference to the
interpretation of the estimates, provided that innovation is persistent within firms. See
Peters (2009) for evidence that this is the case.

The empirical evidence
Appendix Tables 1 and 2 summarize the studies which have attempted to estimate a
quantitative relationship between firm-level productivity and innovation measures
explicitly.18 25 papers are listed, of which all but two use data from the Community
Innovation Survey (CIS) or its imitators in other countries. Of those using CIS-type data, 18
use some variant of the well-known CDM (Crepon, Duguet, and Mairesse) model for the
analysis. One of these papers used both levels and growth rates to measure productivity
(Loof and Heshmati 2006), but most have chosen either levels (14 papers) or growth rates
(10 papers) exclusively.
Use of the CDM model implies that most of the estimates are essentially cross-sectional
ones that ignore issues of the timing of innovation and its contribution to productivity
(exceptions are Masso and Vahter 2008, Belderbos et al 2004, Peters 2006). This is a
reflection of the nature of the innovation surveys, which ask about innovative behavior
during the past three years and contain or are matched to other firm information that is
include R&D in the equation nor do they have true quality-adjusted price deflators. These two facts may
account for the difference between their finding and that of Mairesse and Hall (1996) for the US.
18 The table ignores the large literature which studies R&D and productivity; see Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen
2010 for a recent survey of this topic.

12

contemporary with the innovation data. The data available are usually not sufficient to
construct a time series (panel) for the firms involved since the samples are redrawn for
each survey and there is little overlap.19 Thus the analysis usually relates productivity in
one period to innovation in the same period or slightly before that period but does not
trace out any dynamic response. It is noteworthy that the results for the papers that do use
lagged measures of innovation are not notably different from those using contemporary
measures, reinforcing the cross-sectional and long run nature of these results.
The CDM model has been described by many others in detail (see the references in
appendix Tables 1 and 2) and I will only summarize it here. It generally consists of three
sets of relationships, the first two of which can involve more than one equation. The first
set of equations describes whether a firm undertakes R&D and if so, how much, as a
function of firm and industry characteristics. The second set describes the various types of
innovation outcomes as a function of R&D intensity and other firm/industry
characteristics. In many cases, the R&D variable in the innovation equations is computed as
the expected R&D intensity given the firm’s characteristics. This procedure is grounded on
the idea that many firms do informal R&D but do not report their spending separately to
the statistical agency performing the survey. In a sense, the model fills in their R&D values
with what might have been expected given their size, industry, nature of competition, etc.
Looked at another way, including the fitted value of R&D intensity for firms that actually
report R&D is a form of instrumental variable estimation of the innovation equations,
which helps to correct for the simultaneity that might be present due to the fact that
innovation is measured over the past three years, whereas frequently R&D is a current year
measure.
The innovation equations in the CDM model can be probit equations for the probability of
product, process, or organizational innovation or they can also include an equation for the
share of innovative sales (typically the sales share of products introduced during the past
three years). In the latter case, the variable is sometimes transformed using logit transform
which allows for infinite rather than finite support. That is, if z is the share, ranging from 0
to 1, the logit transform log(z/(1-z)) ϵ (-∞, +∞) is used.20 Following the logic used above,
the predicted innovation probabilities or shares are then included in a productivity

For example, Criscuolo and Haskell (2003) report that there are 1596 manufacturing firms in their CIS2
sample and 4567 in their CIS3 sample, but only 509 appear in both surveys. Hall, Lotti, and Mairesse (2008)
have 9,462 firms in their sample drawn from three MCC surveys, but only 608 of these firms appear in all
three surveys.

19

The alert reader will note that this expression is undefined for z=0 and z=1. Normally this problem is solved
by setting z=0.01 and z=0.99 respectively.

20

13

equation. The resulting estimates give the contribution of expected innovation conditional
on R&D and other firm characteristics to productivity.
Tables 2a (levels, using innovative sales share), 2b (levels, using the product innovation
dummy), and 3 (growth rates) summarize the results of estimating the productivityinnovation relationship from the papers listed in the appendix tables. I discuss each of
these tables in turn. It should be noted that although I am treating the estimates as
comparable, the precise regressions used in any particular paper will differ from those in
other papers, as will the data construction itself. In addition, most researchers have
included innovation variables that are predicted values from earlier regressions, as in the
CDM model, while a few have included the actual innovation variables from the survey.
In spite of these variations, the results for the elasticity of output with respect to the
innovative sales share (shown in Table 2a) are reasonably consistent across countries and
time periods. The highest elasticities (0.23-0.29) are for knowledge-intensive or high
technology sectors. Most of the elasticities for Western Europe lie between 0.09 and 0.13,
and less-developed countries, the service sector, and the low technology sectors have
elasticities less than 0.09, with the exception of the insignificant estimate for Chilean data.
Thus we can conclude that innovative sales are associated with revenue productivity, and
that the association is stronger for higher technology sectors. For a typical Western
European manufacturing firm, doubling the share of innovative sales will increase revenue
productivity by about 11 per cent.
Table 2b presents the results of the productivity regression that uses a 0/1 measure of
product innovation instead of the innovative sales share. For reasons mentioned earlier,
this measure will vary by size of firm purely for measurement reasons and should be
considered a much weaker proxy for innovative output. We do see that the results are more
variable, although still positive for the most part. For manufacturing sectors in Western
Europe, typical values are around 0.05-0.10, implying that product innovating firms have
an average productivity that is about 8 per cent higher than non-innovators, but there is a
wide dispersion.
The results for process innovation in both Tables 2a and 2b are even more variable, with
some negative, some zero, and some positive. Note that the few positive estimates in Table
2a are for the two cases where the authors included this variable alone in the productivity
regression, without the innovative sales variable (Mairesse et al. 2005 for France and
Siedschlag et al. 2010 for Ireland). The other positive estimates occur when product
innovation is measured by a dummy rather than by the share of innovative sales, which
suggests that they are partly due to the measurement error implicit in using a dummy to
proxy for innovation. That is, we know from many of the surveys that process and product
14

innovation go together. Therefore if we have a weak measure of product innovation, we
might expect that the process innovation dummy would pick up more of the overall
innovative activity. Recalling the discussion of equation (9), one could argue that the
estimates in Table 2a, which are mostly negative for process innovation and positive for
product innovation, suggest that firms are operating in the inelastic portion of their
demand curves and that revenue productivity is enhanced mainly by the introduction of
new and improved products, and not by efficiency improvements in the production
process. 21
Table 3 presents results for a productivity regression where the left hand side is
productivity growth, rather than its level. This relationship is not precisely the growth rate
version of the regressions that lie behind Table 2, since it relates growth to the level of
innovative activity, not to its growth rate. In general, the results are similar to but slightly
lower than the level version of the equation, with an innovative sales elasticity focused on
the range 0.04-0.08, and a product innovation dummy of about 0.02. As before, process
innovation is negative when included with product innovation in the equation, although
positive on its own. It is noteworthy that the only study with a true estimate of the cost
savings due to process innovation rather than a dummy (Peters 2006) yields a large and
marginally significant elasticity of 0.14, implying that if we had better measures of process
innovation, we might be able to improve the measure of its impact considerably.
From this summary of the empirical relationship between the various innovation measures
and firm-level revenue productivity we can conclude the following: first, there is a positive
relationship, albeit somewhat noisy, between innovation in firms and their productivity
both the level and its growth. Second, the positive relationship is primarily due to product
innovation. The impact of process innovation is more variable, and often negative. This can
be interpreted in one of two ways: the typical firm enjoys some market power and operates
in the inelastic portion of its demand curve so that revenue productivity falls when it
becomes more efficient. Alternatively, it is possible that there is so much measurement
error in the innovation variables that only one of the two is positive and significant when
entered in the productivity equation. Without instruments that are better targeted to
predicting the two different kinds of innovation, this possibility cannot be ruled out.

The results surveyed here do not generally include the effects of organizational innovation, which has been
shown to be associated with revenue productivity improvement, especially when accompanied by IT
investment. However, in many cases the data available on organizational innovation (a simple dummy
variable) do not allow researchers to include this variable along with the other innovation variables in
productivity regressions, due to the collinearity of the various innovation variables previously referred to.

21

15

Conclusions
The foregoing survey of empirical evidence on the relationship between innovation and
productivity finds an economically significant impact of product innovation on revenue
productivity and a somewhat more ambiguous impact of process innovation. As I have
argued, the latter result is primarily due to the fact that we are not able to measure the real
quantity effect of process innovation, which is the relevant quantity for social welfare. We
can only measure the real revenue effect, which combines the impact of innovation on both
quantity and price. So overall we can conclude that in spite of the fact that innovative
activity is not very well measured in many cases, it does generally increase an individual
firm’s ability to derive revenue from its inputs.
Of course, this conclusion leads to new questions. What are the factors in the firm’s
environment that encourage such innovative activity? And how is aggregate productivity
influenced by the innovative activities of individual firms? Although it is beyond the scope
of this paper to answer these questions, some promising avenues to explore have been
suggested recently in the literature. Taking the second question first, the approach of
Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008), although intensive in its data requirements, has
yielded interesting insights on the relative importance of productivity growth in existing
firms and net entry in aggregate productivity growth. In addition these authors perform a
detailed analysis of the differences between revenue productivity growth and “physical”
productivity growth, making the same distinction between efficiency and demand effects
that I have made in this survey. They find that the use of revenue productivity will tend to
understate the contribution of entrants to productivity growth, and that demand variation
is a more important determinant of firm survival than efficiency in production.
A very interesting line of work would be to understand the extent to which innovative
activity on the part of entrants and the existing firms is behind the results in Foster et al.
(2008). That is, the paper provides evidence on the composition of aggregate productivity
growth but not on its sources. Aghion et al. 2009 find that foreign firm entry in
technologically advanced UK sectors spurs both innovation (measured as patents) and
productivity growth, whereas entry by such firms in lagging sectors reduces innovation
and productivity growth by domestic firms in those sectors, arguing that this is due to the
fact that firms are discouraged by the cost of catching up. On the other hand,
Gorodnichenko et al. 2010, using data from emerging market countries in Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union, find a robust relationship between foreign competition (selfreported by the firms) and innovation in all sectors, including the service sector. Thus we
have evidence that at least some kinds of entry encourage innovative activity, although
relatively little that traces the path from entry to innovation and then to productivity.
16

As to the regulatory and financial environment that encourages innovation on the part of
firms, following important efforts led by the World Bank to collect data on entry regulation,
the rule of law, and other country characteristics, a substantial cross country growth
literature has developed that relates these characteristics to entry (Djankov et al. (2002);
Aidis et al. 2009; Ciccone and Papaioannou 2006), investment (Alesina et al. 2003),
productivity (Cole et al. 2005), and firm size and growth (Fisman and Sarria-Allende 2004;
Klapper et al. 2006). Briefly summarized, stronger entry regulation and/or higher entry
costs are associated with fewer new firms, greater existing firm size and growth, lower
TFP, less investment, and higher profits.22 Most of the studies cited have made a serious
attempt to find instruments or controls which allow them to argue that this relationship is
causal. Thus far none of these studies explicitly looks at the impact on innovative activity
and its relationship with productivity, although one can argue that the entry of new firms is
a form of innovation. To get a full picture of the macro-economy that incorporates firm
entry and exit, innovation, and the resulting productivity growth, a picture that would
allow one to clearly understand the use of various policy levers, is a goal not yet achieved in
the literature.
One avenue that looks promising is the work of Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta
(2009), who extended Foster et al. (2008) to look at the allocative efficiency of entry and
exit by firms to data on firms in the US and seven European countries. They develop a
relative diagnostic measure of inefficient allocation of resources across firms based on the
covariance of firm size and productivity within industry. The idea of this measure is that
economies that are subject to inefficient regulation that prevents firms from growing or
shrinking to their optimal size will display a lower correlation between firm size and
productivity, since more productive firms will not be able to grow and displace less
productive firms. They show that this measure changed in the way one would expect in
three East European countries between the early 1990s and the 2000s. However, in spite of
its promise for analyzing the sources of aggregate productivity growth, this kind of work
has formidable data requirements. It also does not yet incorporate any measure of
innovation as a causal measure, but it seems that extending this approach might be useful
for exploring the simultaneous relationship between innovation, regulation, and
productivity.

22

See Djankov (2009) for a recent survey of this literature.

17

References
Acs, Z. J., and D. B. Audretsch (1990). Innovation and Small Firms. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Aghion, P., R. Blundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt, and S. Prantl (2009). The effects of entry on
incumbent innovation and productivity, Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 20-32.
Aidis, R., S. Estrin, and T. Mickiewicz (2009). Entrepreneurial Entry: Which Institutions
Matter?, Discussion Paper No. 7278. (CEPR, London, UK).
Alesina, A., S. Ardagna, G. Nicoletti, and F. Schiantarelli (2003). Regulation and Investment,
NBER Working Paper No. 9560. (NBER, Cambridge, MA).
Bartelsman, E. J., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2009). Cross Country Differences in
Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection, NBER Working Paper No. 15490. (NBER,
Cambridge, MA).
Belderbos, R., M. Carree, and B. Lokshin (2004). Cooperative R&D and firm performance,
Research Policy 33: 1477-1492.
Benavente H., J. M. (2006). The role of research and innovation in promoting productivity
in chile, Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15: 301-315.
Blundell, R., and S. R. Bond (2000). GMM Estimation with persistent panel data: an
application to production functions, Econometric Reviews 19: 321-340.
Chudnovsky, D., A. Lopez, and G. Pupato (2006). Innovation and productivity in developing
countries: A study of Argentine manufacturing firms' behavior (1992-2001), Research
Policy 35: 266-288.
Ciccone, A., and E. Papaioannou (2006). Red Tape and Delayed Entry, CEPR Discussion
Paper No. 5996. (CEPR, London, UK).
Cole, H. L., L. E. Ohanian, A. Riascos, and J. A. Schmitz, Jr. (2005). Latin America in the Rear
View Mirror, Journal of Monetary Economics 52: 69-107.
Crepon, B., E. Duguet, and J. Mairesse (1998). Research, Innovation, and Productivity: An
Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level, Economics of Innovation and New Technology 7:
115-156.
Criscuolo, C., and J. E. Haskel (2003). Innovation and Productivity growth in the UK:
evidence from CIS2 and CIS3, CeRiBA Working Paper. (LSE, London, UK).
18

Denison, E. F. (1966). Discussion of Jorgenson and Griliches, American Economic Review
56(1/2): 76-82.
Djankov, S. (2009). The Regulation of Entry: A Survey, World Bank Research Observer 24:
183-203.
Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2002). The Regulation of Entry,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1-37.
Duguet, E. (2006). Innovation Height, Spillovers and TFP Growth at the Firm Level:
Evidence from French Manufacturing for Company Performance. Economics of Innovation
and New Technology 15 (4/5): 415-442.
Fisman, R., and V. Sarria-Allende (2004). Regulation of Entry and the Distortion of
Industrial Organization, NBER Working Paper No. 10929. (NBER, Cambridge, MA).
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008). Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?, American Economic Review 98(1):
394-425.
Freeman, C. and L. Soete (1997). The Economics of Industrial Innovation, third edition.
(London: Pinter).
Geroski, P. A. (1989). Entry, Innovation and Productivity Growth, Review of Economics and
Statistics 71: 572-578.
Gorodnichenko, Y., J. Svejnar, and K. Terrell (2010). Globalization and innovation in
emerging markets, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2: 194–226.
Griffith, R., E. Huergo, J. Mairesse, and B. Peters (2006 ). Innovation and Productivity in
Four European Countries, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 22: 483-498.
Griliches, Z. (1998). R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence. Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press.
Griliches, Z. (1996). The discovery of the residual: A historical note. Journal of Economic
Literature 34(3): 1324-1330.
Griliches, Z. (1994). Productivity, R&D and the Data Constraint, American Economic Review
84: 1-23.
Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse (1984). Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level. In Z. Griliches
(ed.), R&D, Patents, and Productivity. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 339-374.
19

Hall, B. H. (1993). Industrial Research during the 1980s: Did the Rate of Return Fall?,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Micro (2): 289-344.
Hall, B. H. (1996). The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development. In B. L. R.
Smith, and C. E. Barfield (eds.), Technology, R&D, and the Economy (Brookings Institution
and American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC).
Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005). Market Value and Patent Citations, Rand
Journal of Economics 36: 16-38.
Hall, B. H., F. Lotti, and J. Mairesse (2009). Innovation and Productivity in SMEs: Empirical
Evidence for Italy, Small Business Economics 33: 13-33.
Hall, B. H., F. Lotti, and J. Mairesse (2008). R&D, innovation, and productivity: new evidence
from Italian manufacturing microdata, Industrial and Corporate Change, 17 (July): 813-839.
Hall, B. H., J. Mairesse, and P. Mohnen (2010). Measuring the Returns to R&D. In Hall, B. H.
and N. Rosenberg, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, pp. 1034-1076. Amsterdam
and New York: Elsevier.
Hall, R. E. (1988). The relationship between price and marginal cost in U. S. Industry.
Journal of Political Economy 96 (5): 921-947.
Harhoff, D., F. Narin, F. M. Scherer, and K. Vopel (1999). Citation Frequency and the Value of
Patented Inventions, Review of Economics and Statistics 81: 511-515.
Huergo, E., and J. Jaumandreu (2004). Firms' age, process innovation and productivity
growth, International Journal of Industrial Organization 22: 541-559.
Janz, N., H. Loof, and B. Peters (2003). Firm Level Innovation and Productivity – Is there a
Common Story Across Countries? Mannheim, Germany: ZEW Discussion Paper No. 03-26.
Jefferson, G. H., H. Bai, X. Guan, and X. Yu (2006). R&D Performance in Chinese industry,
Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15: 345-366.
Jorgenson, D. W., and Z. Griliches (1967). The Explanation of Productivity Change, Review of
Economic Studies 34: 249-283.
Klapper, L., L. Laeven, and R. Rajan (2006). Entry regulation as a barrier to
entrepreneurship, Journal of Financial Economics 82: 591-629.
Loof, H., and A. Heshmati (2006). On the relationship between innovation and
performance: A sensitivity analysis, Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15: 317344.
20

Loof, H., A. Heshmati, R. Asplund, and S.-O. Nåås (2001). Innovation and Performance in
Manufacturing Industries: A Comparison of Nordic Countries. Stockholm, Sweden: SSE/EFI
Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance No.457.
Mairesse, J., and B. H. Hall (1996). Estimating the productivity of research and development
in French and US. manufacturing firms: An exploration of simultaneity issues with GMM
methods. In K. Wagner, and B. van Ark (eds), International Productivity Differences and
Their Explanations (Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam), pp. 285-315.
Mairesse, J., and J. Jaumandreu (2005). Panel-data Estimates of the Production Function
and the Revenue Function: What Difference Does It Make?, Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 107: 651-672.
Mairesse, J. and P. Mohnen (2010). Using innovation surveys for econometric analysis, in B.
H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume II.
Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier, pp. 1129-1155.
Mairesse, J., P. Mohnen, and E. Kremp (2005). The Importance of R&D and Innovation for
Productivity: A Reexamination in Light of the 2000 French Innovation Survey, in Jacques
Mairesse and Manuel Trajtenberg (eds.), Special issue of Annales d’Economie et de
Statistique 79-80 in Memory of Zvi Griliches: 487-528.
Mairesse, J., and S. Robin (2010). Innovation and Productivity: a Firm-Level Analysis for
French Manufacturing and Services Using CIS3 and CIS4 data (1998-2000 and 2002-2004).
Paris, France: CREST-ENSAE.
Masso, J., and P. Vahter (2008). Technological innovation and productivity in late-transition
Estonia: econometric evidence from innovation surveys, European Journal of Development
Research 20: 240-261.
OECD/OCDE (2005). Oslo Manual: Guidelines for collecting and interpreting innovation data,
third edition. Paris: OECD.
OECD/OCDE (2003). The Sources of Economic Growth in OECD Countries. Paris: OECD.
Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
equipment industry, Econometrica 64: 1263-1297.
Parisi, M. L., F. Schiantarelli, and A. Sembenelli (2006). Productivity, innovation and R&D:
Micro evidence for Italy, European Economic Review 50: 2037-2061.
Pavitt, K., M. Robson, and J. Townsend (1987). The Size Distribution of Innovating Firms in
the UK: 1945-1983, Journal of Industrial Economics 35: 297-316.
21

Peters, B. (2009). Persistence of innovation: stylised facts and panel data evidence, Journal
of Technology Transfer 34: 226-243.
Peters, B. (2006). Productivity effects of innovation activities, Chapter 4 of Peters, B.,
Innovation and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation for German Firms, University
of Würzburg: PhD thesis.
Polder, M., G. Van Leeuwen, P. Mohnen, and W. Raymond (2009). Productivity effects of
innovation modes. The Hague: Statistics Netherlands Discussion Paper No. 09033.
Raffo, J., S. l'Huillery, and L. Miotti (2008). Northern and southern innovativity: a
comparison across European and Latin American countries, European Journal of
Development Research 20: 219-239.
Scherer, F. M., and D. Harhoff (2000). Technology Policy for a World of Skew-distributed
Outcomes, Research Policy 29: 559-566.
Siedschlag, I., Z. Zhang, and B. Cahill (2010). The effects of the internationalisation of firms
on innovation and productivity, ESRI Working Paper No. 363 (Economic and Social
Research Institute, Dublin, Ireland).
Sterlacchini, A. (1989). R&D, innovations, and total factor productivity growth in British
manufacturing, Applied Economics 21: 1549.
Tanaka, N., M. Glaude, and F. Gault (2005). Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting and
Interpreting Innovation Data, Paris: OECD and Eurostat.
US National Science Foundation (2010). NSF releases new statistics on business innovation,
SRS Info Brief NSF 11-300, Washington, DC, October.
van Leeuwen, G. (2002). Linking Innovation to Productivity Growth Using Two Waves of
the Community Innovation Survey, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working
Papers 2002/8. (OECD/OCDE, Paris).
Van Leeuwen, G., and L. Klomp (2006). On the contribution of innovation to multi-factor
productivity growth, Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15: 367-390.

22

Figure 1: Innovating firms by size, as a share of all firms, 2006-2008
Innovating firms by size, as a share of all firms, 2006-2008
Latvia
Poland
Hungary
Lithuania
Bulgaria
Romania
Slovak Republic
Malta
Spain
Croatia
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Norway
France
Slovenia
Finland
Italy
Sweden
Czech Republic
Cyprus
Austria
Estonia
Ireland
Portugal
Belgium
Luxembourg
Iceland
Germany

Large

0%

20%

40%
60%
Share of all firms (%)

Source: Eurostat, CIS-2008, inn_cis6_prod.

23

80%

SMEs

100%

Figure 2: Innovating firms by type of innovation, as a share of all firms, 2006-2008
Share of firms with innovation new to the firm or market, 2006-2008
Hungary
Latvia
Slovak Republic
Poland
Netherlands
Bulgaria
Norway
Romania
Lithuania
United States
Croatia
Sweden
Czech Republic
Spain
Austria
Estonia
France
Italy
Finland
Belgium
Germany
Cyprus
Portugal

Process

0%

5%

10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Share of firms in innovative sectors (see text)

Source: Eurostat, CIS-2008, inn_cis6_prod; NSF InfoBrief 11-300, October 2010.

24

Product

35%

40%

Figure 3: Labor productivity levels and innovation, by country
Labor productivity levels 2009 and innovation 2006-2008

GDP per hours worked (thousands of euros)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

Share of firms innovating (%)
SMEs

Large firms

Linear (SMEs)

Source: OECD.stat and Eurostat, CIS 2008.

25

Linear (Large firms)

90%

100%

Table 1: Manufacturing sector innovations by significance
Number
Large
Small
firms
firms

Share
Large
firms

Small
firms

Establishes whole new categories

0

0

0.00%

0.00%

First of its type on the market in
existing categories

50

30

1.76%

1.43%

A significant improvement on
existing technology

360

216

12.70%

10.27%

Modest improvement designed to
update existing products

2424

1858

85.53%

88.31%

Total

2834

2104

Source: Acs and Audretsch (1990), Table 2.3

Table 2a: Results for the productivity-innovation relationship in TFP levels
(product innovation measured as innovative sales share)
Sample
Chilean mfg sector
Chinese R&D-doing mfg sector
Dutch mfg sector
Finnish mfg sector
French mfg sector
French Hi-tech mfg #
French Low-tech mfg #
German K-intensive mfg sector
Irish firms #
Norwegian mfg sector
Swedish K-intensive mfg sector
Swedish mfg sector
Swedish mfg sector
Swedish service sector

Time period
1995-1998
1995-1999
1994-1996
1994-1996
1986-1990
1998-2000
1998-2000
1998-2000
2004-2008
1995-1997
1998-2000
1994-1996
1996-1998
1996-1998

Elasticity with
respect to innov
sales share
0.18 (0.11)*
0.035 (0.002)***
0.13 (0.03)***
0.09 (0.06)
0.07 (0.02)***
0.23 (0.15)*
0.05 (0.02)***
0.27 (0.10)***
0.11 (0.02)***
0.26 (0.06)***
0.29 (0.08)***
0.15 (0.04)***
0.12 (0.04)***
0.09 (0.05)*

Source: author's summary from Appendix Table 1.
# Innovative sales share and process innovation included separately in the production function.

Process innovation
dummy

-1.3 (0.5)***
-0.03 (0.06)
0.06 (0.02)***
0.10 (0.04)***
-0.14 (0.07)**
0.33 (0.08)***
0.01 (0.04)
-0.03 (0.12)
-0.15 (0.04)***
-0.07 (0.03)***
-0.07 (0.05)

Table 2b: Results for the productivity-innovation relationship in TFP levels
(product innovation measured as a dummy)
Sample

Time period

Product innovation
dummy

Argentinian mfg sector
Brazilian mfg sector
Estonian mfg sector
Estonian mfg sector
French mfg sector
French mfg sector
French mfg sector
French mfg sector
French service sector
German mfg sector
Irish firms #
Italian mfg sector
Italian mfg sector SMEs
Mexican mfg sector
Spanish mfg sector
Spanish mfg sector
Swiss mfg sector
UK mfg sector

1998-2000
1998-2000
1998-2000
2002-2004
1998-2000
1998-2000
1998-2000
2002-2004
2002-2004
1998-2000
2004-2008
1995-2003
1995-2003
1998-2000
2002-2004
1998-2000
1998-2000
1998-2000

-0.22 (0.15)
0.22 (0.04***
0.17 (0.08)**
0.03 (0.04)
0.08 (0.03)**
0.06 (0.02)***
0.05 (0.09)
-0.08 (0.13)
0.27 (0.52)
-0.05 (0.03)
0.45 (0.08)***
0.69 (0.15)***
0.60 (0.09)***
0.31 (0.09)**
0.16 (0.05)***
0.18 (0.03)***
0.06 (0.02)***
0.06 (0.02)***

Source: author's summary from Appendix Table 1.

Process innovation
dummy

-0.03 (0.09)
0.18 (0.05)***
0.07 (0.03)**
0.41 (0.12)***
0.45 (0.16)***
0.27 (0.45)
0.02 (0.05)
0.33 (0.08)***
-0.43 (0.13)***
0.19 (0.27)

-0.04 (0.04)
0.03 (0.04)

Table 3: Results for the productivity-innovation relationship in TFP growth rates
Sample

Time period

Argentinian mfg sector

1992-2001

Dutch mfg sector
Dutch mfg sector
French mfg sector
German mfg sector
Italian mfg sector
Spanish mfg sector
Swedish mfg sector
Swedish service sector
UK mfg sector
UK mfg sector

1994-1998
1996-1998
1986-1990
2000-2003
1992-1997
1990-1998
1996-1998
1996-1998
1994-1996
1998-2000

Elasticity wrt Innov Product innovation Process innovation
sales share
dummy
dummy
0.09 (0.08)

0.009 (0.001)***
0.0002*** #

0.18 (0.08)**

-1.2 (0.7)*
0.022 (0.004)***

0.04 (0.02)**
0.12 (0.09)
0.015 (0.004)***
0.07 (0.03)**
0.08 (0.03)***
-0.02 (0.02)
0.07 (0.03)**

Source: author's summary from Appendix Table 1.
# elasticity with respect to innovation expenditure per sales.
@ elasticity with respect to cost reduction per employee.

0.14 (0.08)* @
0.04 (0.12)

0.02 (0.01)*
-0.04 (0.02)**

Appendix Table 1: Empirical studies of the productivity-innovation relationship using productivity levels
Authors (year)

Country

Estimated impact of
innovation

Observations

Method*

Output measure

Innov measure

Comments

Benavente (2006) Chile

1995-98
438 mfg plants

CDM model: ALS

Log VA per emp

Log innov sales
share

0.18 (0.11)*

SR prod not related to innovation or R&D, but
related to engineers & admin (higher salaries);
innovation due to capital, not in productivity

Crepon, Duguet, &
France
Mairesse (1998)

SESSI 1986-90
CDM model: ALS
~5000 innov mfg firms

Log VA per emp

Log innov sales
share

0.065 (0.015)***

Positive impact of innovation sales share on
productivity, as well as positive association of
productivity with human capital in labor force

Estimation in 3 steps, no bivariate probit. Process
innovation adds 0.07 in France, nothing in other
countries; Product innovation positive except in
Germany.

innovation variables not separately well-identified
in productivity equation; process appears to be
negative and product positive for TFP.

France,
Germany,
Spain, UK

CIS3 1998-2000
FR 3625 mfg firms
DE 1123 mfg firms
ES 3588 mfgfirms
UK 1904 mfg firms

CDM model: sequential
Product and
Log sales per emp
with IV
process dummies

FR: 0.07 (0.03)** proc
0.06 (0.02)*** prod
DE: 0.02 (0.05) proc
-0.05 (0.03) prod
ES: -0.04 (0.04) proc
0.18 (0.03)*** prod
UK: 0.03 (0.04) proc
0.06 (0.02)*** prod

Hall, Lotti, &
Mairesse (2011)

Italy

MCC 1992-2003
14294 mfg firms

CDM with 4 types of
innovation: FIML for
Log sales per emp 4 innov dummies
selection;
quadrivariate probit; IV

prod: 0.69 (0.15)***
proc: -0.43 (0.13)***

Janz, Loof, &
Peters (2003)

Germany
Sweden

CIS3 1998-2000
1000 K-intensive
mfg firms

DE: 0.27 (0.10)*** prod
Log innov sales per
CDM model: sequential
-0.14 (0.07)** proc
Log sales per emp emp, process
with IV
SE: 0.29 (0.08)*** prod
dummy
-0.03 (0.12) proc

Allowed for feedback from productivity to
innovation output. Elasticity of productivity wrt
innov sales similar in both countries

Jefferson, Bai, et al
China
(2006)

1995-99
5500 R&D-doing
large/medium
sized firms

CDM model: sequential
Log innov sales
Log sales per emp
with IV
share

No correction for innovation selection bias

Loof & Heshmati
(2006)

Sweden

CIS3 1996-98
1071 mfg firms
718 service firms
92 utility firms

CDM variation: FIML
on selection submodel;
Log VA per emp
3SLS; sensitivity
analysis

Finland,
Norway,
Sweden

CIS2 1994-96 (95-97 in
Norway)
NO: 485 mfg firms
FI: 323 mfg firms
SE: 407 mfg firms

Griffith, Huergo,
Harrison, &
Mairesse (2006)

Loof, Heshmati,
Asplund, & Naas
(2001)

CDM variation:
sequential with 3SLS

0.035 (0.002)***

prod: 0.12 (0.04)*** mfg
Log innov sales per
0.09 (0.05)** service
emp, process
proc: -0.07 (0.03)*** mfg
dummy
-0.07 (0.05) service

FI: 0.090 (0.058) prod
-0.029 (0.060) proc
Log innov sales per
NO: 0.257 (0.062)*** prod
Log sales per emp emp, process
0.008 (0.044) proc
dummy
SE: 0.148 (0.044)*** prod
-0.148 (0.043)*** proc

survey data less reliable than register data; sales not
as good as VA in productivity eq

Allows for simultaneity btwn innovation & output feedback in NO but not FI and SE. Elasticity slightly
higher for radical innovations.

mfg 98-00:
0.41 (0.12)*** proc
0.05 (0.09) prod
Product and
mfg 02-04:
process dummies
0.45 (0.16)*** proc
-0.08 (0.13) prod
service: 0.27 (0.45) proc
0.27 (0.52) prod
HT: 0.23 (0.15)*
Logit transform of
0.07 (0.03)*** radical
innov sales share,
0.06 (0.02)*** process
process dummy,
LT: 0.05 (0.02)***
other dummies - all
-0.08 (0.05)* radical
separately
0.10 (0.04)*** process

Estimation is in 3 steps, but also in 2 steps, with
innov & labor productivity equations combined.
Process innovation enters productivity, but not
product. Explores using a single innovation
indicator, which works just as well.

Mairesse & Robin
France
(2010)

CIS3 1998-2000
3500 mfg firms
CIS4 2002-2004
5000 mfg firms
3600 service firms

Mairesse,
Mohnen, & Kremp France
(2005)

CIS3 1998-2000
2200 mfg firms

CDM & variations

Masso & Vahter
(2008)

Estonia

CIS3 1998-2000
1467 mfg firms
CIS4 2002-2004
992 mfg firms

CDM variation:
sequential with
bivariate probit for
innov

Log VA per emp

Product and
process dummies
(org dummies in
2nd period)

prod 98-00: 0.21 (0.08)***
02-04: 0.00 (0.05)
proc 98-00: -0.06 (0.10)
02-04: 0.15 (0.06)***

uses innov expenditure rather than R&D; proc &
prod dummies; prod innovation increases
productivity in recession; proc innovation in growth
period. One and two year lag effects are roughly the
same (cross sectional).

Estonia

CIS3 1998-2000
1467 mfg firms
CIS4 2002-2004
992 mfg firms

CDM variation:
sequential with
bivariate probit for
innov

Product and
process dummies
Log sales per emp
(org dummies in
2nd period)

prod 98-00: 0.17 (0.08)**
02-04: 0.03 (0.04)
proc 98-00: -0.03 (0.09)
02-04: 0.18 (0.05)***

uses innov expenditure rather than R&D; proc &
prod dummies; prod innovation increases
productivity in recession; proc innovation in growth
period. One and two year lag effects are roughly the
same (cross sectional).

3 innov dummies
(proc prod org) in
combo

mfg:
1.7 (0.4)*** org alone
1.0 (0.5)** org & proc
0.9 (0.2)*** all
serv:
4.3 (0.5)*** org alone
17.1 (2.2)*** org & proc
-8.3 (1.3)*** proc & prod
3.9 (0.5)*** all

Org innovation has strongest TFP effects. Process
and product, only when combined with org
innovation. However, signs of coefficient instability
due to correlation of 8 combinations when
predicted

AR: -0.22 (0.15)
BR: 0.22 (0.04)***
MX: 0.31 (0.09)***
FR: 0.08 (0.03)**
ES: 0.16 (0.05)***
CH: 0.10 (0.06)*

Interaction of innovative activities with national
systems weaker in developing countries. Foreign
and domestic subs are uniformly more productive,
but do more R&D only in France and Brazil.

Masso & Vahter
(2008)

Polder, Van
Leeuwen et al
(2009)

Netherlands

CIS 3.5-4.5 2002-2006
~1200 mfg & service
firms

Raffo, Lhuillery &
Miotti (2008)

France,
Spain,
Switzerland
, Argentina,
Brazil,
Mexico

CIS3 1998-2001 mfg
AR 1308 firms
BR 9452 firms
MX 1515 firms
FR 4618 firms
CH 925 firms
ES 3559 firms
(2002-04)

CDM model: FIML for
selection eqs; bivariate Log VA per emp
probit; IV

augmented CDM

Log VA per emp

Log VA per emp

product &
CDM model: sequential
Log sales per emp organizational
with IV
innov dummies

TFP using output ; going through innovation does
not add much to estimates of return to R&D, after
correcting for selectivity and endogeneity;
endogeneity correction impt for innov variables

van Leeuwen &
Klomp (2006)

Netherlands

Siedschlag, Zhang,
Ireland
and Cahill (2010)

CIS2 1994-96
1400 innov firms

CIS3 2004-2006
CIS4 2006-2008
723 firms (balanced
panel)

Process dummy;
innov sales share

prod: 0.13 (0.03)***
proc: -1.3 (0.5)***

CDM variation: 3SLS

Log sales per emp

CDM variation:
sequential with IV

Product, process,
and organizational innov sales: 0.11 (0.02)***
prod: 0.45 (0.08)***
Log sales per emp dummies, innov
proc: 0.33 (0.08)***
sales share - all
separately

Includes market share eq; feedback from sales to
innovation; revenue function approach better than
VA prod function framework (innov sales do not
enter VA function in the presence of R&D and
markup coefficients).

Uses innovation expenditure instead of R&D
spending; includes FDI and foreign ownership
characteristics.

* CDM = Crepon, Duguet, Mairesse model described in text. ALS = asymptotic least squares on multi-equation model. 3SLS = three stage least squares. FIML = full information maximum liklihood on
multivariate normal model. OLS = ordinary least squares. IV = instrumental variable estimation.
Source: Author's collection, supplemented by Tabla A.1 (Chudnovsky et al 2006), Table 4.1 (Peters 2006).

Appendix Table 2: Empirical studies of the productivity-innovation relationship using productivity growth
Authors (year)

Country

Belderbos,
NetherCarree, & Lokshin
lands
(2004)

Observations
CIS2, CIS3 19961998
2056 mfg firms

Method

Output measure

Innov measure

Estimated effect

Result

Productivity eq
only

Log VA per emp

Innov exp per
sales

elasticity ~ 0.0002 (0.00003)***

productivity and innov sales share on lagged
innovative activity and various kinds of cooperation

Chudnovsky,
Lopez, & Pupato Argentina
(2006)

INDEC-SECYT 19921996
prod only: 0.09 (0.08)
CDM variation:
product and
INDEC-SECYT 1998proc only: 0.18 (0.08)**
sequential
Log sales per emp process dummies;
2001
both:
0.14 (0.06)**
estimation with FE
interactions
718 mfg firms in
any:
0.13 (0.05)***
a panel

Criscuolo &
Haskel (2003)

UK

CIS2, 3 1994-2000
5000 mfg firms

Process dummy;
single eq regression TFP growth (not
share of innov
for TFP growth: OLS clear if sales or VA)
sales

Duguet (2006)

France

SESSI 1986-90
~5000 mfg firms

TFP growth reg
with latent innov or Log VA per hour
dummies (GMM)

Geroski (1989)

UK

1976-79
79 industries

panel reg (CRS)

Log output per
capital

# ind innov (flow)
0.025 (0.010)**
during past 3 yrs

distributed lag of innovation counts more important
than entry for TFP.

Huergo &
Jaumandreu
(2004)

Spain

1990-98
2300 mfg firms

semiparametric
estimate of TFP

TFP growth

process innov
dummy

Process innovation lead to TFP growth immediately,
then declines slowly over time. Primary interest is age
distribution of investment returns.

dummies for
radical &
incremental
innovation

uses innov expend rather than R&D; fixed effect
single eq estimation. Uses logit for prod/proc/both
innovation dummies. R&D increases prob of prod
innov; Tech acquisition increases prob of both

proc 94-96: 0.016 (0.009)*
proc 98-00: -0.038 (0.019)**
prod 94-96: -0.022 (0.017)
prod 98-00: 0.065 (0.033)**

Process innovation lead to TFP growth but with
substantial lag; novel process innovations negative at
first

0.022 (0.004)*** radical
-0.01 (0.01) incremental

only radical innovations affect TFP growth, with a
coefficient of 0.02. latent innovation does not enter.

0.015 (0.004)*** all
0 uncensored (innovators)

Loof & Heshmati
Sweden
(2006)

CIS3 1996-98
~3000 mfg,
service, + utility
firms

sensitivity analysis
Log VA per emp
using CDM model

Log innov sales per 0.07 (0.03)** mfg
emp
0.08 (0.03)*** service

mfg, prod level - 0.12 elasticity with innov sales
higher for profits, lower for services
mfg, prod growth - elasticity 0.07 wrt innov sales
higher for profits; and for services
survey data less reliable than register data; sales not
as good as VA

Parisi,
Schiantarelli, &
Sembenelli
(2006)

MCC 1992-1997
465 mfg firms
in both surveys

TFP growth
regressions: IV

Product and
prod: 0.12 (0.09)
process dummies proc: 0.04 (0.12)

Process innovations add to prod growth; product
innovations do not enter. R&D elasticity is 0.04. R&D
enters product innovation but not process.

Italy

Log sales per emp

Peters (2006)

Sterlacchini
(1989)

van Leeuwen
(2002)

Log innov sales per
prod: 0.04 (0.02)**
Log sales per emp emp; Log cost
proc: 0.14 (0.08)*
reduction per emp

MIP 2000-2003
522 mfg innov
firms

CDM variation:
sequential
estimation

UK

1954-84
15 mfg inds

TFP growth
cross sections for 6averaged over 6
year periods
years

Netherlands

CIS2,3 1994-1998
1929 mfg innov
firms
510 mfg innov
firms pooled

CDM variation:
share of innov
FIML on submodels Log sales per emp sales; process
for selection
dummy

Germany

# ind innov
produced; # ind
innov used

Uses survey estimates of cost savings due to procuess
innovation as well as innovative sales share; lag
between innovation and productivity growth

0.08 (0.04)** inn produced
0.07-0.30 innov used

correlates R&D and SPRU innovations by industy of
origin and use - ranking same. Prior to 73, ind of more
impt for TFP. After, correlation btwn R&D growth and
TFP, probably due to simultaneity. In 80s, relationship
btwn R&D/innov & TFP breaks down

prod dyn: 0.006 (0.004)*
prod static: 0.009 (0.001)***
proc dyn: -1.2 (0.7)*
proc static: -0.20 (0.50)

uses Griliches-Mairesse 1984 to connect revenue to
knowledge stock via demand equation; also includes
process innovation dummy. Estimation is both static
(pooled across periods) and dynamic (second period
only)

* CDM = Crepon, Duguet, Mairesse model described in text. ALS = asymptotic least squares on multi-equation model. 3SLS = three stage least squares. FIML = full information maximum liklihood on
multivariate normal model. OLS = ordinary least squares. IV = instrumental variable estimation.
Source: Author's collection, supplemented by Tabla A.1 (Chudnovsky et al 2006), Table 4.1 (Peters 2006).

