                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       COMMITTEE JURISDICTION, CONGRESSIONAL BEHAVIOR AND POLICY
                                OUTCOMES

                                         John M. de Figueiredo

                                         Working Paper 17171
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w17171


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




I would like to thank David King, Romain Wacziarg, and seminar participants at Stanford, MIT and
the Berkeley Franco-American Conference on the History, Economics and Law of Intellectual Property
Protection for helpful comments. Daniel Braga and Karen Freeman provided excellent for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John M. de Figueiredo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Committee Jurisdiction, Congressional Behavior and Policy Outcomes
John M. de Figueiredo
NBER Working Paper No. 17171
June 2011
JEL No. H11

                                              ABSTRACT

The literature on congressional committees has largely overlooked the impact of jurisdictional fights
on policy proposals and outcomes. This paper develops a theory of how legislators balance the benefits
of expanded committee jurisdiction against preferred policy outcomes. It shows why a) senior members
and young members in safe districts are most likely to challenge a committee’s jurisdiction; b) policy
proposals may be initiated off the proposer’s ideal point in order to obtain jurisdiction; c) policy outcomes
will generally be more moderate with jurisdictional fights than without these turf wars. We empirically
investigate these results examining proposed Internet intellectual property protection legislation in
the 106th Congress.


John M. de Figueiredo
The Law School
Duke University
210 Science Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jdefig@law.duke.edu
             Committee Jurisdiction, Congressional Behavior and Policy Outcomes

                                          May 24, 2011


1. INTRODUCTION

       Congressional committees, as gatekeepers of policy, have enormous power to determine

the shape of proposed legislation that reaches the House floor. Scholars have elucidated many

reasons why the full membership of Congress might delegate its power to constituent

committees. These include that committees offer advantages in cost-effectively obtaining and

disseminating information (Krehbiel 1992; Gilligan and Krehbiel 1989), in avoiding cycling in

voting and promoting compromise and log-rolling through the politically efficient distribution of

rents to constituencies (Weingast and Marshall 1988; Krutz 2001), and encouraging legislators to

engage in long-term reputation building to create better information for voters (Kroszner and

Strattman 2000). All of these models, however, have an underlying assumption: all

jurisdictional boundaries for committees are static and clearly defined for all issues. There is no

ambiguity as to the single committee that exercises agenda-setting power over any given bill.

       In practice, however, committee jurisdictional boundaries are fluid and ambiguous

(Baumgartner et al. 2000). In order to expand their powers, committees attempt to expand

jurisdiction to issues on the periphery of other committees’ jurisdiction (King 1997). In

addition, new issues and technologies come about where no committee is clearly responsible

(e.g. nuclear power, computing, Internet) (Oleszek 2001). The contribution of this paper to is to

demonstrate that while static boundaries convey monopoly agenda-setting power to the

controlling committee that may lead to extreme policy, jurisdictional fights between committees

lead not only to strategic behavior by committee members with respect to constituency interests,

but can often lead to more moderate policy.
       This paper examines how jurisdictional conflict between U.S. House committees affects

policy proposals and policy outcomes. By considering legislators and committees as foresightful

and strategic, the paper explores the congressional actors who have incentive to challenge

jurisdiction, and how these potential challenges affect the policy positions of the two committees

engaged in a jurisdictional turf war. While several previous papers in the area have adroitly

described the phenomenon of jurisdictional conflict (Adler and Still 2000; King 1994; Hardin

1998; Oleszek 2001, 2004) they have not linked the process of jurisdictional challenge to its

effect on policy outcomes. A small number of other papers have recognized that jurisdiction

may affect policy outcomes, but these works have described only the broad contours of this

phenomenon (Baumgartner and Jones 1993; Bimber 1996; King 1997) and only tangentially

consider its effects. If jurisdictional turf wars result in no differences in policy outcomes than

those instances of no jurisdictional conflict, then they are of muted interest as a topic for

scholarly study. If jurisdictional turf wars result in large swings in policy outcomes than would

otherwise happen, then the literature is quite sparse relative to its policy importance.

       The paper begins by developing a theory on jurisdiction with forward-looking

committees and legislators. From this theory, hypotheses are generated related to the incentives

to introduce new bills and to explain eventual policy proposals and outcomes. We predict the

conditions under which compromise will be likely and the nature of this compromise. The paper

then examines the theory with multiple pieces of evidence and statistical analyses from proposed

legislation offering copyright protection to databases (also now known as Internet intellectual

property legislation). In 1999, the House of Representatives encountered a well-known instance

of jurisdictional uncertainty and encroachment on that intellectual property issue with the

introduction of H.R. 353 and H.R. 1858 covering database copyright protection (Baron 2000;




                                                  2
Oleszek 2004). With many interest groups acting on each side of the issue, and legislators

balancing jurisdictional issues against policy outcomes, the fight between the two bills typifies

how jurisdictional battles evolve in Congress.

       This paper predicts theoretically, and demonstrates empirically, a number of interesting

patterns in the behavior of legislators. First, it shows how committees and legislators balance the

benefits from policy outcomes with the benefits and costs associated with challenging

jurisdiction over a policy domain. Seeking jurisdiction is not a cost-free exercise, and legislators

may be willing to accept a sub-optimal policy in order to obtain future jurisdiction over another

agenda. This is not considered in other theories of committee power. Second, the paper argues

that those with the greatest incentive to challenge an incumbent jurisdiction will be senior

members, and young members who are in safe districts for whom jurisdiction, and the political

rents that come with it, is most valuable. Statistical analyses are consistent with this prediction.

These results stand in contrast to the current empirical literature, which generally assumes

closed-rule, monopoly committee jurisdictions. Finally, policy proposals and outcomes can be

significantly affected by the possibility of a challenging committee arising. In particular, the

mere threat of introducing a challenger bill can serve to moderate the incumbent’s proposal.

This is important because it suggests that in many areas, policy outcomes may be the result of an

equilibrium strategy that the incumbent committee plays in order to fend off potential challenger

committees. Thus, introducing jurisdictional conflict frequently serves to create more moderate

policy positions than would occur in a model of monopoly, agenda-setting committee power.

Introducing multiple pieces of empirical evidence, we show how this occurs.

       In the next section, we offer some background on House committee jurisdictions and

develop a simple theoretical perspective that explicates the behavior when two competing bills




                                                  3
are introduced. Section 3 summarizes the legislative fights over Internet database protection that

occurred in the 106th Congress. Section 4 examines each of the hypotheses using both

descriptive and statistical evidence. Section 5 concludes.



2. THE THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

       2.1. INSTITUTIONAL DETAIL: THE BILL REFERRAL PROCESS

       The process of bill introduction is extremely detailed and complex. In this section, we

provide an overview of how bills are referred to committees. Potential legislation in the House is

proposed by representatives in the form of bills. Bills are introduced onto the House floor, and

then forwarded to the House Parliamentarian, who refers the bill to a House committee for

review, modification, or termination. The House Parliamentarian is an appointee of the Speaker

of the House and generally considered an unbiased referrer of bills (King 1997), referring bills

probabilistically on the merits to individual committees. 1

       The bill referral process comprises two parts: a codified component and a discretionary

component. Rule X of the House Rules allots jurisdiction covering pre-specified topics to

certain committees. For example, the Judiciary Committee has formal jurisdiction over “patents,

the Patent and Trademark Office, copyrights, and trademarks,” and the Commerce Committee

has formal jurisdiction over “consumer affairs and consumer protection, interstate and foreign

commerce generally.” Bills that fit neatly into the subject areas identified by Rule X are

allocated by the Parliamentarian to the committees with codified jurisdiction over the issue.

       Many bills, however, may not fit cleanly into the subject areas identified in Rule X.

Some topics may be at the fringe of the jurisdiction of one committee, other bills may not fit into

any jurisdiction. Figure 1 illustrates this with a Venn diagram. Imagine two committees, 1 and




                                                 4
2, which have jurisdiction over some subset of issue areas. The span of issues is represented by

the box. There are some issues for which there is no committee jurisdiction. This is found in the

area between the circles. There are other issues such as A that are at the fringe of one

committee’s jurisdiction (such as Internet intellectual property protection). This paper is about

bills like A. It is in these cases that the Parliamentarian may exercise discretion in bill referral.

       When there is jurisdictional ambiguity, the Parliamentarian, as surrogate for the Speaker

of the House, turns to other factors in determining the recipient committee (King 1997; Oleszek

2004). The first factor is whether the current bill amends a public law over which a committee

already has jurisdiction. The second factor is previous bill referral precedents, in a common law

sense, as guidance for the current bill. The third factor is committee expertise in the policy area,

evidenced by oversight hearings (Talbert et al. 1995), the strategic selection of committee

staffers, and joining of special issue caucuses. The fourth factor is bill titles and preambles and

matching these subject indicators to committees. The Parliamentarian takes all these factors into

account when deciding where the “weight of the bill” resides, and which committee should

receive the bill. For these reasons legislators adjust their behavior and the language in their bills,

to enhance the probability that a bill will be referred to a particular committee.

       2.2. THEORY

       We begin by considering the preferences of legislators and committees. A formal model

is outlined in an electronic appendix. 2 We make four simplifying assumptions. First, all

legislators of a given committee prefer more jurisdiction to less jurisdiction for that committee. 3

Second, jurisdiction is zero-sum. One committee’s gain in jurisdiction is another committee’s

loss. Third, the members of a committee may have differing incentives to introduce a bill. That




                                                   5
is, bill introduction is not random, but there is a predictable process (with noise) that gives rise to

them. 4 Finally, the goal of a given legislator is to be re-elected.

        With these four assumptions in hand, we can now analyze bill introduction. We begin by

considering only two committees and single-committee referral. In the next section, we will

examine multiple referrals. Any bill proposed by a legislator has three components of benefit that

help the legislator to be reelected and help the committee members gain power. The first

component is the benefit of the policy outcome. The second benefit is from legislative

jurisdiction. The third is the benefit from oversight jurisdiction. However, policy creation is not

free; it comes at a cost to the legislator. We consider each of these factors below.

        The first benefit, policy outcomes, has been well-modeled in spatial location models

(Snyder 1991, for example). In these models, legislators choose policies that are on or close to

the ideal points of the median voter in their constituency. The closer the policy outcome is to the

ideal policy of the median voter in their constituencies, the more utility the legislator obtains.

        The second benefit is from legislative jurisdiction. Legislative jurisdiction is the right of

committee members to create, review, modify, and refer legislation on a given issue to the floor

of the House. There are multiple benefits supplied by legislative jurisdiction. First, with

legislative jurisdiction, committees can craft legislation close to their own likings, thus obtaining

policy benefits. Second, committee members have control over bills they can exploit in

logrolling with other committees. Third, committee members can extract informational and

financial rents from the constituencies they regulate (Kroszner and Strattman 2000). The benefit

to the committee members is assumed to be increasing at a decreasing rate in jurisdiction.

        A final type of benefit is oversight jurisdiction. Enacted laws are normally delegated to a

surrogate for implementation and interpretation. For example, telecommunications policy is




                                                   6
frequently delegated to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Intellectual property

rules are sometimes delegated to the US Patent Office (USPTO), or are sometimes left in the

hands of the the federal courts. With each policy that is delegated, there normally is a

congressional committee that provides oversight of the agency charged with implementation.

So, for example, the Commerce Committee oversees the FCC and the Judiciary Committee

oversees the federal courts. In most cases, legislative jurisdiction is coupled with oversight

responsibilities, but this does not necessarily have to be the case. 5 To the extent that the agency

can promulgate regulations affecting industry and interest groups, congressional committees with

oversight can place pressure (hearings, budgetary) on agencies to administratively to create

policy that might have been difficult to implement within the legislative branch.

        All of these benefits are not cost-free to the committee members. In order to engage in

policy-making, jurisdiction, and oversight matters, members must invest time and effort, which

is related to how much expertise the legislator has in the policy area and her facility in crafting

legislation (Hall and Wayman 1990). There is heterogeneity in costs across committees, as well

as within committees. 6

       Thus, we can summarize the calculation made by an individual legislator. She values

(and can trade-off through a rational cost-benefit calculation) policy outcomes that are close to

her ideal point, as well as (against) legislative and oversight jurisdiction over issues. These

benefits come at a cost of exerting effort in bill creation and introduction. A re-election

maximizing legislator then weighs these benefits and costs and finds her own optimal bill

introduction behavior.

       With the behavior of legislators characterized, let us take a policy issue in the position A

in Figure 1. This is an issue over which an incumbent committee would normally have




                                                  7
jurisdiction. We assume a) that the incumbent committee already has a bill under consideration

(this is not a necessary condition, but makes exposition easier), and b) that all bills referred to the

incumbent committee end up at the ideal policy point of the members (characterized by the

median voter of that committee) in the absence of a competing bill.

        Now a potential challenger bill arises from a member of another committee. If the

challenger does introduce a bill, there is a probability, p, that this bill will be referred by the

Parliamentarian to the challenger committee, and a probability (1-p) that it will be referred to the

incumbent committee. If the bill is referred to the incumbent committee, the bill is assumed to

die. To examine the effect of jurisdictional conflicts on policy outcomes, we consider two

baseline cases. The first is an open rule, unidimensional median-voter model, where one

committee has monopoly agenda-setting power to unilaterally send bills to the floor, but any

member on the floor can propose amendments at zero (or very low) costs. In this model, the

equilibrium policy is determined by the median floor voter. This is because for any proposal that

is not at median voter’s ideal point, there is another policy that can be introduced which the

median prefers. This makes any proposal that is not on the median voter’s ideal point unstable.

        Let us consider a second baseline model common in the literature -- a closed-rule,

unidimensional median-voter model with monopoly agenda-setting power for the incumbent

committee. This is equivalent in theory to the probability of a second bill being referred to the

challenger committee being zero (p = 0). This is similar to the previous case, except the policy

proposed by the incumbent committee cannot be amended. Thus, the median floor voter’s

decision involves comparing the status quo, x, with the bill proposed by the committee, y. As

long as y is closer to the median voter’s ideal point than x, y will be an equilibrium.




                                                   8
        Within this second baseline model, let us examine a serious jurisdictional challenge: a

challenger committee receives the second bill with p = 0.3. All parties know that a member of

this challenger committee can credibly threaten to introduce a competing bill, because by

introducing that bill, the challenger’s committee gains some legislative jurisdiction over the issue

and the incumbent committee loses some legislative jurisdiction over the issue (even if the bill

does not pass). This, in turn, enhances the bargaining position of the member of the challenger

committee. To prevent this loss of jurisdictional claims, the incumbent committee members will

move the position of their bill (through mark-up, for example) closer to the challenger’s

preferences so as to create little incentive for a challenger bill to arise in the first place. This

“compromise” solution will be a position such that the member of the challenger committee is no

worse off under the bill he or she would have introduced initially plus the expected jurisdictional

gains the challenger would make (minus the costs of bill introduction).

        What becomes evident is that as p increases, the incumbent committee is willing to

introduce a bill closer to the challenger’s ideal point. That is, as the threat of a challenger

committee member encroaching on the policy space increases, the more the incumbent

committee members are willing to attenuate their initial policy position to prevent this

encroachment. Thus, members are willing to modify policy for jurisdiction. This is a form of

compromise—offering a more moderate policy position to induce no jurisdictional challenge

from a potential competitor. This leads to the first hypothesis.

ATTENTUATION HYPOTHESIS
H1: The greater the probability a challenger bill will be referred to another committee, the more
moderate the incumbent committee’s policy position will be to prevent jurisdictional
encroachment.




                                                    9
       As the theory notes, legislators can engage in trade-offs. There are two prototypical types

of models of legislators’ utility functions. The first is a spatial model in policy space, where

legislators seek to achieve their highest utility policy outcome. The second is a jurisdictional

encroachment model, where legislators are trying to obtain the most legislative and oversight

jurisdiction feasible. In this paper, legislators will maximize utility over both variables jointly.

       We can, moreover, predict those legislators who, within a challenger committee, will

have the greatest incentive to act. Jurisdiction has two properties. First, as Hall (1998) notes,

committee leadership positions play a leading role in jurisdictional grabs. That is, senior

members of the challenging committee (those who are subcommittee chairs and ranking minority

members) attempt to expand their current power through these jurisdictional games. In this

view, bills that are likely to expand a committee’s jurisdiction are sponsored by these high-

ranking members. An alternative view, supported by King (1997), is that legislative jurisdiction

takes time to build, over multiple bill referrals in many congresses. Oversight jurisdiction takes

time to implement as well (Weingast and Moran 1983). If jurisdiction is a mechanism to

produce “revenues” over the long-term, then people who expect to receive that income stream

for the longest time should assign the highest value to engaging in jurisdictional grabs. This

would suggest that junior members of the challenging committee in safe seats (who can expect to

be around for a long time) will have the greatest incentive to engage in jurisdictional challenges.

These considerations are not taken into account in the previous theories of bill sponsorship. This

leads to Hypothesis 2.

JURISDICTION HYPOTHESES
H2a: If legislative and oversight jurisdiction is valued highly enough by members of the
challenger committee, the members of the challenger committee will introduce policies that are
not close to its ideal point so as to gain jurisdiction.
H2b: Senior members in the challenger committee are most likely to sponsor challenger bills.




                                                  10
H2c: Young members in safe seats on the challenger committee are most likely to sponsor
challenger bills.


       2.3. THEORETICAL EXTENSIONS

       One of the recent characteristics of the bill referral process is the use of multiple referral.

As Oleszek (2004) describes in detail, there have been at various times over the past 35 years

three main mechanisms that a Speaker or Parliamentarian can use to refer a bill to multiple

committees: joint referral (referral to multiple committees simultaneously), sequential referral

(referral to multiple committees sequentially), and split referral (referral of different parts of the

bill to different committees simultaneously). Oleszek argues that the Parliamentarian can

minimize hard fought turf wars by exploiting the multiple referral process.

       This theory also suggests that multiple referrals might mitigate, but should not negate, the

inter-jurisdictional fights. Although the theory is most cleanly applied to the case of a single

referral, one of the assumptions of the theory is that even if an incumbent committee is forced to

share jurisdiction with a one other or with multiple challenger committees, there is a loss of

monopoly power (and the benefits it conveys) to the incumbent committee. The theory predicts

that to prevent this, the focal committee will change its proposed policy position, away from its

most-preferred policy position, even in a multiple referral situation. Compared to single

referrals, multiple referrals may temper turf wars somewhat because the incumbent committee

retains some jurisdictional claim, but the theory would also predict that the potential loss of

monopoly jurisdiction by the incumbent committee will still cause some policy attenuation.

       A second concern articulated that may limit the scope of the theory is an unfavorable

policy outcome for the Speaker after moderating the incumbent committee’s policy stance. If in

averting turf wars between committees, the incumbent committee shifts its position to a policy




                                                  11
that is further away from the Speaker’s ideal point than the non-attenuated position, it would be

in the Speaker’s interest to bypass the Parliamentarian and refer the bill directly to the incumbent

committee. The mere knowledge that a Speaker may do this could affect p and thus mitigate the

attenuation hypothesis.

       A number of factors should minimize this concern. First, King (1997) suggests that the

Speaker has delegated authority consciously in the referral process to the Parliamentarian in

order to keep politics and policy out of this aspect. (See footnote 1 for a further explication of

this argument.) He cites, as just one example, the fact that Parliamentarians span multiple

speakers, have decades of training, and are truly thought of as being unbiased. Second, to the

extent Speakers are themselves involved in the bill referral process separate from the

Parliamentarian’s role, 7 it is the case that many issues are not so partisan so as to create divisions

with the majority party’s leadership. However, the theory need not be limited to non-partisan

issues. Indeed, third, frequently the Speaker may not have good information with respect to his

preferred policy outcome or the degree of moderation that might occur during a committee’s

deliberations. For example, bills are becoming more complex and their full policy implications

less certain because of new problem areas, such as homeland security, advancing technologies,

and changing economic situations (Oleszek 2004: 86). Alternatively, as the position of bills

reach the fringe position, A, it may be difficult for the Speaker to anticipate jurisdictional

challenges.

       Overall, the theory generates two general predictions. First, legislators will trade off the

costs and benefits of obtaining additional jurisdictional scope for the committee with their own

policy preferences. Second, legislators will act in predictable ways based on their positions on

the committees and their electoral vulnerabilities. In the next section, we examine these




                                                  12
hypotheses with reference to Internet intellectual property bills.



3. BACKGROUND: INTERNET DATABASE PROTECTION

        In January 1999, Howard Coble (R-NC) introduced (for a second time), a bill (H.R. 353)

to strengthen Internet intellectual property protection (Baron 2000). A group of companies and

interest groups, led by eBay, the Realtors Association, and Reed Elsevier, had been pressing

Congress to act. The rise of the Internet made it particularly easy for pirates to extract and copy

on-line, electronic, and Internet databases. Indeed, many of these companies had become subject

to “attack” from “pirates.”

        For example, Bidder’s Edge, a rival to eBay, had built its business model on auction

aggregation. The company designed algorithms to search across 120 online auction sites, and

then download information from these sites into its own database to be displayed on its own site.

The “spiders” copied and downloaded about 80,000 web pages from eBay onto the Bidder’s

Edge site daily; eBay estimated that Bidder’s Edge alone accounted for between 1% and 1.5%

of the queries received by eBay. This imposed a heavy load on eBay’s servers and made its

computers operate slower for customers accessing the site directly.

        These “attacker” companies sought legal protection under a 1991 U.S Supreme Court

decision known popularly as the “Feist” (Feist Publication, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service

Company, 499 US 340). The key question before the Supreme Court involved the scope of

copyright protection. What information in databases could be protected? The Feist Court ruled,

“…all facts-scientific, historical, biographical and news of the day . . . are part of the public

domain available to every person.” They continued:

         “The facts contained in existing works may be freely copied because copyright protects only the elements
that owe their origin to the compiler -- the selection, coordination, and arrangement of facts.”




                                                        13
        Given that Bidder’s Edge was using publicly available facts about auctions, Bidder’s

Edge argued it stood to reason, in light of the Feist decision, that the facts in the online databases

were not protected by copyright, and thus could be copied, provided that their selection,

coordination, and arrangement were not.

        Against this backdrop, database companies such as Monster.com, NASDAQ, and the

NYSE, sought a re-write of the copyright law, and turned to the chair of the House Judiciary

Committee, Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property, Howard Coble. eBay, the

Realtors, and the publishers prevailed upon Rep. Coble introduced a bill to strengthen the

copyright protection afforded to electronic and online databases. In January 1999, Rep. Coble

introduced a bill to increase intellectual property protection for electronic databases.

        The Collections of Information Antipiracy Act (H.R. 353) introduced by Coble, did not

grant copyright protection to facts per se, but it did seek to protect databases and thus overturn

Feist. Amending the Sherman Antitrust Act, H.R. 353 made it illegal for any person to:

“make available to others, or extract to make available to others, all or a substantial part of a collection of
information gathered, organized, or maintained by another person through the investment of substantial monetary or
other resources, so as to cause material harm to the primary market or a related market of that other person, …for a
product or service that incorporates that collection of information and is offered or intended to be offered in
commerce by that other person….”

Any person who was harmed under the terms of the H.R. 353 could bring a civil court case

against the alleged infringer, and ask for the recovery of lost profits, treble damages under the

Sherman Act’s penalty provisions, and payment of reasonable attorneys’ fees. The Act was well

received by database producers. As head of the Intellectual Property Subcommittee that had

traditionally overseen copyright legislation, Coble was well-positioned to shepherd his bill

through the 106th House of Representatives to a final, and expected winning vote on the

Republican-majority floor.




                                                        14
         H.R. 353, however, resulted in the organization of a competing coalition of interest

groups comprising old and new economy firms and associations that opposed the bill,

spearheaded by Yahoo!, NetCoalition (a consortium of ten large Internet companies, including

AOL and Amazon), Bloomberg, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and the American Research

Libraries Association. These database users were concerned about how a strengthening of

copyright protection might affect their business models. A large number of universities,

including Harvard, Chicago, and Stanford, (and their associated research libraries) argued if

database companies were able to compile and copyright the facts from their databases, scientific

research of all types would be constrained significantly and might even be slowed to a snail’s

pace. Smaller universities, too, articulated concerns that if H.R. 353 became law it would

hamstring their teaching missions because materials and databases used for teaching purposes

would no longer be accessible.

         In May 1999, as H.R. 353 was working its way through the Judiciary Committee, this

coalition persuaded Thomas Bliley (R-VA), chairman of the Commerce Committee, to introduce

a competing bill that had the effect of codifying into proposed legislation the Feist decision with

some small additional protections. This bill, the Consumer and Investor Access to Information

Act of 1999 (H.R. 1858), was referred to the Commerce Committee, Subcommittee on

Telecommunications, Trade, and Consumer Protection. H.R. 1858 made it:

“… unlawful for any person or entity…to sell or distribute to the public a database that--
     (1) is a duplicate of another database that was collected and organized by another person or entity; and
     (2) is sold or distributed in commerce in competition with that other database”

         Enforcement of the Act rested with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), and violators

of the Act were punished under the rules respecting unfair or deceptive acts or practices under

section 5 of the enabling legislation, a much more lenient punishment than H. R. 353 prescribed.




                                                         15
Under Rule X, the House Commerce Committee is granted jurisdiction over the Federal Trade

Commission. There were now two competing bills in Congress in two committees.

       In Figure 2, we outline in a one-dimensional spatial diagram, the positions of the players.

Feist (F) was a lenient outcome, offering very low protection to databases. The Judiciary

Committee introduced a bill with very strong protections, which it manifested in the introduction

of the H.R. 353 (C). We place C opposite F, but closer to the median voter, M, than to F, the

median voter. Thus, an unopposed Coble bill would likely become law because it captures the

median voter. Finally, the Commerce Committee introduced H.R. 1858 (B), such that it was on

the interval [F, C]. We place it to the right of Feist, and closer to the median voter than C.



4. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

       In this section, we examine empirically the predictions of the committee jurisdiction

model on legislator behavior, committee behavior, and policy outcomes. We explore the two

theoretical hypotheses by examining the copyright dispute between the two committees. While

none of the evidence presented provides unequivocal proof of the theory, the goal of this section

is to provide multiple pieces of evidence that together will build a sufficiently convincing story

that the theoretical mechanisms discussed in Part III actually are operating.

       4.1 ATTENTUATION HYPOTHESIS

       In examining the evidence for Hypothesis 1, we establish two main facts: the Judiciary

Committee was the incumbent committee, and the probability of a challenger committee arising

was so small that the Judiciary Committee did not attenuate its extreme position. If the

probability had been high, then, in equilibrium, the Judiciary Committee should have introduced

a moderate bill, close to the preferences of the competing committee, to stave off a jurisdictional




                                                 16
challenge. If the probability was low that a challenger committee would become involved, then

the bill introduced by the Judiciary Committee could more closely reflect the preferences of the

committee, and thus be more extreme.

       There are three main factors suggesting that the Judiciary Committee was the incumbent

committee, and that it was likely to receive H.R. 353. First, Representative Coble had a long-

standing interest in the bill. This was not the first time a nearly identical version of this same bill

had gone through the House. The earlier bill was also referred to the Judiciary Committee in the

105th Congress, giving precedent for the more recent bill to follow the same committee referral

path. Second, Coble’s staff, with the help of like-minded interest groups, had written H.R. 353.

King (1997) notes that bills contained language so as to route the bill to certain committees. For

example, H.R. 353 extended the Sherman Act, a law that was under Rule X’s jurisdiction of the

Judiciary Committee. Finally, the Judiciary Committee had a long-established precedent for

handling bills covering copyright. Table 1 examines all legislative hearings covering proposed

copyright bills in the 80th through 103rd congresses (1946-1994). The data include every

congressional hearing reported by the Congressional Information Research Service over that

period. Each hearing is categorized further into 222 topics (of which copyright is one); we

further limit our analysis to legislative hearings. 8 During this nearly 50-year period, the

Judiciary Committee received 86% (127) of copyright referrals. (We compare this to very stable

issues areas, such as agriculture, which exhibits an 86% to 90% probability of bill referral to the

Agriculture Committee.) We assume that this was the lowest probability that the Coble bill

would have been referred to the Judiciary committee.

       The second fact we try to establish is the degree of and reasons for attenuation. If the

somewhat extreme position of H.R. 353 is to be an equilibrium policy choice for the Judiciary




                                                  17
Committee, then we must assess the probability (p) that a challenger bill would be referred to a

second committee for consideration. If p is high, then Coble should have introduced a bill that

was moderate; if p is low the bill can mirror the Judiciary Committee’s preferences in

equilibrium. 9 As noted in Table 1, 14% of legislative hearings on copyright bills were sent to

another committee. Thus, there was an unconditional probability of 14% that another committee

might get a second bill. The Science, Space and Technology Committee (under various names)

received the second most number of copyright bill referrals at 5% (8) during 1946-1994, and

posed perhaps the greatest threat for producing a competing bill. However, Representative

James Sensenbrenner (R-Wis), Chairman of the Science, Space, and Technology Committee,

was in line to ascend to the chair of the Judiciary Committee, and did not want to undermine the

possibility of this coming to fruition in the next congress. He was thus reticent to introduce a bill

competing with the Judiciary Committee’s bill. With the Science Committee unlikely to

introduce a bill, the base probability that Coble faced was about p = 9% that another committee

would introduce and receive a competing bill. 10 Thus, the behavior of the Judiciary Committee

in introducing a somewhat extreme proposal is reasonable and therefore consistent with the

Attenuation Hypotheses.

       A final fact we attempt to establish is that the Representative Coble’s staff did not expect

a jurisdictional challenge to H.R. 353, and therefore introduced a bill that reflected the

preferences of the committee without attenuation. As part of this study, we conducted interviews

with 15 lobbyists who represented various interest groups on both sides of H.R. 353 and H.R.

1858. One lobbyist who helped to write and spearhead H.R. 353 noted:

       “We were a bit surprised by the extent of opposition to H.R. 353. Representative Coble has strong
       views on the need to protect databases and he understood our position. He had introduced a very
       similar bill in the last Congress. When we worked with Representative Coble’s staff, we
       discussed the possibility of another bill being introduced—possibly by another committee—and
       we dismissed that idea…. Would we have recommended a bill with lower penalties if we had




                                                      18
        known the opposition were [sic] going to introduce H.R. 1858? Possibly—it would have been a
        bill with fewer penalties and possibly more exemptions—but it is hard to know because we …
        never really discussed it. ”

Later he said:
        “We wrote [H.R. 353] to amend the [Sherman Antitrust Act] so that we [the Judiciary Committee]
        would get the bill. They [the H.R. 1858 coalition] were pretty clever to use the FTC [Federal
        Trade Commission] [in H.R. 1858] to try to sap support for our bill.”

Another lobbyist, representing an interest group that opposed H.R. 353, said,

        “We tried to negotiate with them [H.R. 353 supporters], but they wouldn’t budge. We explained
        how this could potentially destroy our businesses—really hurt the development of the Internet.
        They still wouldn’t budge. I think they were surprised when found a way to introduce H.R. 1858
        [around the Judiciary Committee and] into the Commerce Committee.”



The views of the lobbyists interviewed on both sides of the issue during the jurisdictional fight

(to extent that they are reflective of congressional opinion) provide additional evidence that

jurisdiction and policy attenuation issues were contemplated by legislative staffs. Moreover, we

find additional evidence for this hypothesis in the next section’s statistical analysis.

        4.2. JURISDICTION HYPOTHESES

        Hypothesis 2a predicts that challenger committee members may not support bills in their

best policy interest if they believe that such a position will expand the scope of the committee’s

legislative and oversight jurisdictional responsibilities. While the theory in Section 2 does not

exclude the possibility that bills will be introduced by challengers with policy positions they

support, there are few theories that predict that bills that are not in the policy interests of

legislators will be introduced.

        To test this hypothesis, we examine bill co-sponsorship and its relationship to turf wars

using multivariate statistical analysis focusing on the policy-jurisdiction trade-off. As noted in

Section 3, oversight of the implementation of database copyright bills was to be delegated to the




                                                      19
courts in H.R. 353 and to the FTC in H.R. 1858. Hence, Coble and Bliley delegated

implementation of their respective bills to surrogates for which they had proximate control.

       If Hypothesis 2a is credible, we should see the sponsors of H.R. 353 supporting their

constituents’ preferences. H.R. 353’s sponsors believe ex ante that the likelihood for a challenge

to the Coble-sponsored bill was low; thus, to them, the jurisdictional benefits were moot.

Supporters of H.R. 1858 could be responsive to their constituents, or to jurisdictional issues. If

we find the constituency responsiveness, this is consistent with a host of different theories.

However, if we do not find evidence of constituency responsiveness, but do find jurisdictional

responsiveness, the results will be consistent with a theory of jurisdictional conflict.

       We begin by considering as our dependent variable whether a legislator co-sponsored

H.R. 353 (1) or not (0). In a second set of specifications, we consider whether a legislator co-

sponsored H.R. 1858 (1) or not (0). We consider four types of independent variables. The first

variable, EDUCATIONAL EMPLOYMENT (from the Bureau of the Census), measures the

amount of educational employment (in thousands) in a legislator’s district. Given that within

congressional districts, the number of school-age children does not differ greatly, any differences

in educational employment across districts is usually due to the presence of one or more

universities in the district. Recall that only universities were a cleanly identifiable industry sector

that was uniformly opposed to H.R. 353, and supported H.R. 1858. Over 100 individual

universities and nearly all university trade groups representing community colleges through

Carnegie I research universities, publicly expressed opposition to H.R. 353 and support for H.R.

1858. Thus educational employment should be correlated with constituent preferences. 11

       The second set of variables identifies the committee assignments of the legislators, to

control for jurisdictional disputes. Dummy variables for membership on the House




                                                  20
COMMERCE COMMITTEE, JUDICIARY COMMITTEE, and SCIENCE COMMITTEE are

coded from the Congressional Quarterly. The third set of variables measures the ADA score of

the representative (provided by Professor Timothy Groseclose), as a proxy for the legislator’s

ideology. Finally, a number of control variables for the representative’s district are coded to

control for constituent characteristics that might be related to outcomes of the bills. These

include MEDIAN INCOME (in thousands of dollars), MEDIAN HOME VALUE (in hundreds

of thousands of dollars) (as a measure of wealth), and the number of individuals (in thousands)

with college degrees (EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT). All of these latter variables are

derived from the STF3 file of the 1990 U.S. Census of Housing and Population. 12

       The predictions of the theory with respect to Hypothesis 2a are threefold. First, to the

extent that the incumbent committee members believe they are acting in a setting where

committee jurisdictions are unchallenged, the proposed bill proposed should reflect the true

policy concerns of its sponsors’ constituents. Therefore, we should find the coefficients on

educational employment to be negative and statistically significant for the H.R. 353 regressions.

Second, if the members of the challenging (Commerce) committee are seeking jurisdiction, and

not actual policy outcomes, they should not be voting in ways consistent with their constituents’

preferences. So the coefficients on educational employment for H.R. 1858 should not be

statistically significant. Finally, jurisdictional conflict between committees should be manifested

in committee memberships, with committee members splitting their votes to support their own

bills. Thus, in the H.R. 353 regression, there should be a positive coefficient on the Judiciary

Committee variable and a negative coefficient on the Commerce Committee variable. The

opposite should be true of the H.R. 1858 regressions. All three of these predictions together are




                                                21
consistent with the various predictions of Hypothesis 2a, and the latter two are inconsistent with

theories of committee monopoly power.

       I have estimated this model with a probit, logit, and rare events probit (King and Zeng

2001) specifications, and all have nearly identical results. We present the results of a probit

analysis in Table 2. In all statistical models in this paper, the coefficients report the change in

the probability of the dependent variable for an infinitesimal change in each independent,

continuous variable and, by default, the discrete change in the probability for dummy variables.

The two-sided t-statistics are presented below the coefficient estimates, with the 95%, and 99%

significance level noted for each coefficient. Models (1) and (2) use H.R. 353 as the dependent

variable; Models (3) and (4) use H.R. 1858 as the dependent variable. Models (1) and (3)

contain only the constituency and ideology variables; Models (2) and (4) include the committee

assignment variables. H.R. 353 was cosponsored by 17% of the members of Congress; the

sponsors of H.R. 1858 represented only about 4% of the House’s membership.

       In Models (1) and (2) the coefficient on educational sector employment is negative and

statistically significant as predicted. In no specification is the coefficient on ADA score or any

other control variables statistically significant. Replacing ADA score with the party affiliation of

the representative has no qualitative effect on the results. The large negative coefficient on

educational employment for Models (1) and (2) is consistent with H.R. 353’s co-sponsors voting

with the preferences of the constituents. Every 10,000-person (about 1.5%) increase in

educational employment (roughly the employment of a large university in the district) makes a

legislator 7.7% less likely to sponsor H.R. 353. This is consistent with the first prediction and

also provides further support for the Attenuation Hypothesis. In Models (3) and (4), the

coefficients on educational employment are not statistically different from zero. This is




                                                  22
consistent with H.R. 1858 supporters not sincerely voting with their constituents’ interests,

which supports the second prediction.

       Finally, the four coefficients on the Judiciary and Commerce Committee membership

variables are all large in magnitude, signed as predicted, and three of the four are statistically

significant. Science Committee members exhibit no discernible higher or lower co-sponsorship

tendencies for the two bills than other members of the House. A Commerce Committee member

is 10.1% less likely to cosponsor H.R. 353 than the average House member, and 23.4% more

likely to cosponsor H.R. 1858 than the average member. A Judiciary Committee member is

33.5% more likely to cosponsor H.R. 353 and 1.1% less likely to the cosponsor H.R. 1858 than

the average House member. This last coefficient on Judiciary Committee membership is

negative as expected, but does not reach statistical significance. Rep. Rick Boucher, who sits on

both the Commerce and Judiciary Committees, was the only Judiciary Committee member to co-

sponsor the Bliley bill. The small number of sponsors (18) likely drives the lack of statistical

significance on this coefficient. Other than this consideration, all coefficients come out as

expected. This last result on committee membership is consistent with the third prediction of

jurisdictional battles between committees.

       Together, these three results suggest that turf wars are important, and that the incumbents,

not expecting a challenge, acted more sincerely than the challengers did in the policy domain,

consistent with Part 2a of the Jurisdictional Hypothesis.

       Hypotheses 2b and 2c further refine the predictions about bill introduction. They predict

that senior members overall and junior members in safe seats of the challenging committee will

have the greatest incentive to exert effort in mounting a jurisdictional challenge. The legislators




                                                  23
who gain the most from jurisdictional disputes are those who can take advantage of the

committee’s current jurisdiction, and those who value the property right over the long term.

        To test this hypothesis, we conduct an econometric analysis of the co-sponsorship

behavior of members of the challenging committee. We consider the identities of the members

of the Commerce Committee (n = 53) who co-sponsored H.R. 1858, the challenging bill, using

as our dependent variable whether a member of the Commerce Committee cosponsored H.R.

1858 (1) or not (0). The independent variables are as before, but this time we include three

additional variables. The first is COMMITTEE RANK. This is an ordinal measure of

Commerce Committee seniority (obtained from the Congressional Quarterly) and ranges from 1

(for the chairman or ranking member) to 29 (for the most junior members). The second is

ELECTION MARGIN. It is a measure of how safe the member is in her seat (margin of victory

in thousands of votes in the last election) (obtained from the Clerk of the House). Finally we

interact COMMITTEE RANK with ELECTION MARGIN. We predict that the coefficient on

COMMITTEE RANK should be negative (more senior members are more likely to support

challenging bills) and the coefficient on the interaction variable of ELECTION

MARGIN*COMMITTEE RANK should be positive (junior members with larger margins of

victory in the last election are more likely to support challenging bills).

        The results of the probit analysis are presented in Model (5) of Table 3. Congruent with

our earlier findings, legislator ideology, educational employment, and the control variables do

not have statistically significant coefficients. 13 There is, however, a statistically significant

relationship between the two variables of theoretical interest and the dependent variable. Senior

members of the Commerce Committee are more likely to sponsor H.R. 1858. Each step up on

the committee makes an individual 4.4% more likely to sponsor H.R. 1858. Moreover, junior




                                                   24
legislators with large vote margins in the last election are more likely to support H.R. 1858 than

are others. These results provide evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis of Hall (1998)

(Hypothesis 2b) and King (1997) (Hypothesis 2c). 14

       These results can also be juxtaposed with those of Krehbiel’s (1995) examination of

budget bills, which shows that electoral margins make no difference in bill co-sponsorship, while

more junior members of committees are more likely to co-sponsor bills. One key factor that

differentiates Krehbiel’s work from this study is that there is no jurisdictional conflict in

Krehbiel’s analysis of budget votes. Indeed, it may be that precisely because there is

jurisdictional conflict, the current paper refines the results of Krehbiel. Junior members get little

benefit from jurisdiction (in this paper), but may derive considerable benefit from high profile

co-sponsorship on budgeting issues (in Krehbiel’s paper). However, representing safe districts

makes enormous difference to junior members in jurisdictional disputes, and can lead to more

co-sponsorship.

       4.3. LIMITATIONS

       The current empirical work is not without limitations. First, the setting provides only a

weak test of the attenuation hypothesis. This hypothesis predicts that legislators will attenuate

policy outcomes close to their preferences to deter jurisdictional challenges. In fact, the

empirical evidence on the Judiciary Committee argues the inverse: the Judiciary Committee did

not expect a jurisdictional challenge so it did not attenuate policy. Although this evidence is

consistent with the attenuation hypothesis, a more robust test would allow the researcher to more

concretely examine the attenuation hypothesis. 15

       Second, the results in Models 1-4 must be interpreted a bit carefully. Although a chi-

square test of the coefficients on Educational Employment and Commerce Committee in Model




                                                  25
4 rejects that they are jointly equal to zero, the test for attenuation is again a weak one. Models 3

and 4 reject that legislators are more likely to sponsor H.R. 1858 if Educational Employment in

the district is large. This fact is consistent with the theory, but this is the null, and therefore a

less than ideal test. 16 For example, we cannot reject the conjecture that extreme policy results

from interest group action. A better test is certainly called for in future work.

        Third, because the discussion here is a case study, its generalizability may be limited.

Moreover, because the incumbent committee did not engage in attenuation (but, thought about it,

according to the lobbyists), the paper maintains a somewhat weak test of the attenuation

hypothesis. We also recognize that while much of the evidence is consistent with the hypothesis

it is not conclusive. Rather, the paper has attempted to bring together multiple pieces of

evidence to demonstrate that the attenuation hypothesis was in play. We believe that the

preponderance of the evidence regarding motivations and outcomes suggests that attenuation

occurs. That said, a large sample study would seem to be warranted for future research.



5. CONCLUSION

        Jurisdictional conflict between committees within Congress is common and increasing

(Baumgartner et al. 2000). The theoretical perspective developed in this paper extends a small

but important body of literature examining congressional committee jurisdiction. It demonstrates

that actors with foresight can have large impacts on policy outcomes by merely threatening to

engage in jurisdictional turf wars. Moreover, legislators and committees will engage in

jurisdictional turf wars even if that means introducing sub-optimal legislation from the sponsor’s

viewpoint. This is because the gains from obtaining a slice of legislative or oversight jurisdiction

over an issue may result in a greater gain to utility than the loss of a particular policy position. In




                                                   26
many cases, policy outcomes are predicted to be closer to the status quo than they would be in

the unidimensional, closed rule, monopoly committee dominance literature.

        The paper examines two Internet intellectual property protection bills before the 106th

Congress, to test implications of the theory. The descriptive and statistical evidence illustrates

how jurisdictional wars between committees play out. The evidence is consistent with the main

tenets of the paper. This paper sheds new light on the committee jurisdiction literature. It

suggests that scholars examining the relationship between committee behavior and policy

outcomes should be careful to consider the jurisdictional disputes that could potentially arise and

how that might affect policy outcomes. Without controlling for this effect, scholars may

generate spurious results. This analysis will help guide thinking about how these effects play

out.

Acknowledgement: I would like to thank David King, Romain Wacziarg, and seminar participants at

Stanford, MIT and the Berkeley Franco-American Conference on the History, Economics and Law of

Intellectual Property Protection for helpful comments. Daniel Braga and Karen Freeman provided

excellent for research assistance.



                                          REFERENCES

    Adler, E. Scott, and Dennis Still. “Redefining Committee Jurisdictions: A Bill Referral

Approach.” Presented at the Midwest Political Science Association annual meeting, Chicago,

IL, April, 2000.

    Balla, Steven (2000). “Legislative Organization and Congressional Review of Agency

Regulations,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 16(2): 424-448.

    Baron, David P. (2000). “eBay and Database Protection,” Stanford Business School, Case S-P-33.




                                                 27
   Baumgartner, Frank R., and Bryan D. Jones (1993). Agendas and Instability in American

Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

   Baumgartner, Frank B., Bryan D. Jones, and Michael C. MacLeod (2000). “The Evolution

of Legislative Jurisdictions,” Journal of Politics 62: 321-349.

   Bimber, Bruce (1996). The Politics of Expertise in Congress. Albany, NY: State University

Press of New York.

   de Figueiredo, John M. (2002). “Committee Jurisdiction and Internet Intellectual Property

Protection,” MIT Working Paper.

   de Figueiredo, John M., and Brian S. Silverman (2006). “Academic Earmarks and the

Returns to Lobbying,” Journal of Law and Economics 49(2): 597-625.

   Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Company, 1991; 499 US 340.

   Gilligan, Thomas, and Keith Krehbiel (1989) “Asymmetric Information and Legislative

Rules with Heterogeneous Committees,” American Journal of Political Science 33(2): 459-490.

   Hall, Richard L., and Frank W. Wayman (1990). “Buying Time: Moneyed Interests and

the Mobilizations of Bias in Congressional Committees.” American Political Science

Review 3: 797-820.

   Hall, Richard L. (1998). Participation in Congress. New Haven: Yale University Press.

   Hardin, John W. (1998). “Advocacy versus Certainty: The Dynamics of Committee

Jurisdiction Concentration,” Journal of Politics 60(2): 374-397.

   Jones, Bryan D, Frank R. Baumgartner, and Jeffery C. Talbert (1993). “The Destruction of

Issue Monopolies in Congress,” American Political Science Review 87: 657-71.

   King, David C. (1994). “The Nature of Congressional Committee Jurisdictions,”

The American Political Science Review 88(1): 48-62.




                                                28
   King, David C. (1997). Turf Wars: How Congressional Committees Claim Jurisdiction.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

   King, Gary, and Langche Cheng (2001). “Logistics Regression in Rare Events Data,”

Political Analysis: 137-154.

   Krehbiel, Keith (1992). Information and Legislative Organization. Ann Arbor, MI:

University of Michigan Press.

   Krehbiel, Keith (1995). “Cosponsors and Wafflers from A to Z,” American Journal of

Political Science 39(4): 906-923.

   Kroszner, Randall S., and Thomas Strattman (2000). "Congressional Committees as

Reputation-Building Mechanisms: Repeat PAC Giving and Seniority on the House Banking

Committee," Business and Politics 2: 35-52.

   Kurtz, Glen S. (2001). “Tactical Maneuvering on Omnibus Bills in Congress,” American

Journal of Political Science 45(1): 210-223.

   Mayhew, David R. (1974). Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven: Yale

University Press.

   McCubbins, Mathew D., and Thomas Schwartz (1984). “Congressional Oversight Overlooked:

Police Patrols versus Fire Alarms,” American Journal of Political Science, 28(1): 165-179.

   McNollgast (1987). “Administrative Procedures as Instruments of Political Control,” Journal

of Law, Economics and Organization 3:243-277.

   Oleszek, Walter J. (2001). “The Internet and Congressional Decisionmaking,” A Report

Prepared for the Chairman of the House Rules Committee, September 19: Congressional

Research Service.




                                               29
   Oleszek, Walter J. (2004). Congressional Procedures and the Policy Process. CQ Press:

Washington, D.C.

   Schiller, Wendy J. (1995). “Senators as Political Entrepreneurs: Using Bill Sponsorship to

Shape Legislative Agendas,” American Journal of Political Science 39(1): 186-203.

   Snyder, James (1991). “On Buying Legislatures,” Economics and Politics 3(2): 93-109.

   Snyder, James (1992). “Long-Term Investing in Politicians; Or, Give Early, Give Often”

Journal of Law & Economics 35: 15-43.

   Talbert, Jeffery, Bryan Jones, and Frank Baumgartner (1995). “Non-Legislative Hearings

and Policy Change in Congress,” American Journal of Political Science 39: 383-406.

   Weingast, Barry R., and William Marshall (1988). “The Industrial Organization of

Congress; or, Why Legislature, like Firms, Are Not Organized as Markets,” Journal of Political

Economy 96: 132-96.

   Weingast, B., and P. Moran (1983). “Bureaucratic Discretion or Congressional Control?

Regulatory Policymaking by the Federal Trade Commission,” Journal of Political Economy 91:

765-800.




                                              30
                                                        ENDNOTES

1
    As King (1997: 79-80) notes: “the House parliamentarians are described as neutral arbiters of

jurisdictional disputes. Although these guardians are agents of the Speaker, who is an agent of the

majority party, the Speaker abides by advice from the parliamentarians when turf wars arise. … Today,

although the House rules say that the Speaker refers bills, the Speaker's referrals are overwhelmingly

guided (and usually written) by the parliamentarian. Following the revolt against Cannon in 1910 (and the

brief "King Caucus" period of the early 1910s), jurisdictional arbitration was largely taken out of partisan

hands and given to the parliamentarian, who uses nonpartisan decision rules that reward jurisdictionally

proximate committees.” For a further discussion of this important assumption, see King (1997: 78-88)

and Section IIC of this paper.
2
    A formal model can be found at http://www.law.duke.edu/fac/defigueiredo
3
    “Why fight over committee jurisdictions? These battles are about power, influence and property rights

over public policies. From the Latin words juris and dictio, jurisdiction literally means the right or

authority to make pronouncements that are binding and are backed up by law. ‘No characteristic of the

committee system,’ writes the Congressional Research Service, ‘is more critical than its jurisdictional

structure— the way in which it divides and distributes control over policy subjects.’” (King 1997: 11-12).

In addition Oleszek (2004: 81) also quotes individual legislators identifying jurisdiction’s importance.
4
    This assumption is necessary for the scope of strategic bill introduction by legislators.
5
    For example, antitrust enforcement of entertainment firms is left to the Department of Justice, though

both Commerce and Judiciary Committees have legislative jurisdiction for antitrust.
6
    If bill introduction is a cost-free exercise, then the expected net benefit to introducing a bill is strictly

positive for all members of Congress for any p > 0. However, the cost is not zero. Members with

experience, expertise, and interest in the focal policy issue or related policy issues will likely have lower

costs of formulating policy in the focal area at hand. That is, it is very expensive for an Agriculture




                                                          31
Committee member to write a bill regarding copyright, but it is less expensive for a Commerce

Committee member.
7
    This may be true recently as the Republicans fired two Senate Parliamentarians in early 2000s as they

referred key bills in a manner inconsistent with the Majority Leader’s wishes.
8
     The data were obtained from the Center for American Politics and Public Policy web page at the

University of Washington, http://depts.washington.edu/ampol/.
9
     H.R. 353 likely reflected the sincere preferences of the Judiciary Committee. To establish sincerity of

the preferences, we turn to two main arguments. First, the current bill was almost identical to the bill

introduced into the previous Congress, when there was no jurisdictional challenge. Second, H.R. 353

reflected the consistent behavior and rhetoric of the Judiciary Committee in supporting strong protections

for intellectual property rights. Although the Coble bill had the support of the median voter ( as indicated

by the voice vote in the previous Congress) it was stronger than the Feist decision.
10
     King has pointed out that in reality, the true probabilities are probably much lower than reflected in this

paper, but highly correlated with the estimated probabilities.
11
     We attempted to identify another measure of university presence. Following de Figueiredo and

Silverman (2006), we downloaded from the Department of Education, Division of Education Statistics,

the names and zip codes of every post-secondary institution in the United States in 1999 from the

Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System. We then examined all Carnegie-designated

institutions. There are 434 districts with Carnegie designated institutions which makes it infeasible to use

the presence of a university in a district as an alternative measure to Educational Employment.
12
     The maximum correlation between any of these three control variables is 0.76. The results presented

herein are robust to dropping any one of these control variables.
13
     The lack of statistical significance on the Educational Employment coefficient is subject to the caveats

in Section IV,C.




                                                        32
14
     A similar analysis done on Judiciary Committee H.R. 353 cosponsors finds that neither of these

variables have a statistically significant effect. This is consistent with the theory, because only challenger

committees stand to gain jurisdiction from these jurisdictional turf wars.
15
     The statistical test of H.R. 1858 attempts to address this issue.
16
     A second possible reason for this result is that there is more variance in Educational Employment for

non-Bliley supporters than for Bliley supporters. Although, the standard deviation is 25% higher, it is

still less than 5% of the mean value of the variable, which is likely not quite large enough to single-

handedly drive the t-statistic on the Educational Employment coefficient down to such a low level in

Model 4.




                                                        33
      Figure 1: Scope of Jurisdiction


Scope of Issues

                                      Committee 2
                                  A    Jurisdiction

                  Committee 1
                   Jurisdiction
          Figure 2: Preference Ordering

                     IP Protection (IPP)




          F    B          M                C


Low IPP                                        High IPP
               TABLE 1: HOUSE COMMITTEE HEARINGS ON COPYRIGHT BILLS


                                                            Interior/                Science/                          Total
                        Energy &   Foreign   Governmen       Insular                  Space/      Small     Ways &   Number of
Congress   Agriculture Commerce    Affairs   t Operations    Affairs    Judiciary   Technology   Business   Means      Bills
   80         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         9
   81         0%          0%         0%          0%           8%          92%           0%         0%         0%        12
   82         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%        11
   83         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         5
   84         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         4
   85         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         3
   86         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%          50%          50%         0%         0%         2
   87         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%          71%          29%         0%         0%         7
   88         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         1
   89         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         3
   90         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         2
   91         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%           0%           0%         0%         0%         0
   92         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         3
   93         0%         20%         0%         20%           0%          60%           0%         0%         0%         5
   94         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%          83%          17%         0%         0%         6
   95         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         2
   96         9%          0%         0%         18%           0%          45%          27%         0%         0%        11
   97         0%          7%         0%          0%           0%          71%           7%         0%        14%        14
   98         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%          91%           9%         0%         0%        11
   99         0%          0%        10%          0%           0%          70%          10%         0%        10%        10
  100         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%          92%           0%         8%         0%        13
  101         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%          88%          13%         0%         0%        16
  102         0%          7%         0%          0%           0%          87%           7%         0%         0%        15
  103         0%          0%         0%          0%           0%         100%           0%         0%         0%         7
 Total        1%          2%         1%          2%           1%          85%           8%         1%         2%       172
         TABLE 2: ECONOMETRIC RESULTS FROM BILL COSPONSORSHIP

                                              H.R. 353    H.R. 353    H.R. 1858   H.R. 1858
               Variable                       Model 1     Model 2      Model 3     Model 4


    Educational Employment                    -0.0083**   -0.0078**    0.0004      0.0008
                                               (-2.11)     (-1.99)     (0.19)      (0.54)

      Commerce Committee                                  -0.1014**               0.2344***
                                                           (-1.96)                  (5.88)

        Science Committee                                 -0.0278                  0.0179
                                                           (-0.50)                 (0.71)

       Judiciary Committee                                0.3350***                -0.0112
                                                            (4.55)                  (-0.49)

                 ADA                           -0.0003    -0.0002     -0.00015    -0.00003
                                                (-0.58)    (-.44)      (-0.56)     (-0.21)

       Median Home Value                        0.0026    -0.0073      0.0104      0.0018
                                                (0.07)     (-0.18)     (0.48)      (0.09)

          Median Income                         0.0003     0.0036      -0.0016     -0.0012
                                                (0.78)     (0.94)       (-0.72)     (-0.85)

     Educational Attainment                     .0016      0.0017      -0.0001     -0.0002
                                                (1.08)     (1.17)       (-0.17)     (-0.29)

                  n                              435        435         435          435
                  LL                            11.50      37.39        1.45        38.70

Two-sided t-statistics below coefficient estimates
** 95% significance
*** 99% significance
TABLE 3: COMMERCE COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP COSPONSORS

                                                       H.R. 1858
                         Variable                       Model 5

                                                         -0.0026
              Educational Employment
                                                          (-0.26)

                           ADA                           -0.0003
                                                          (-0.01)

                 Median Home Value                       -0.0109
                                                          (-0.02)

                    Median Income                        -0.0031
                                                          (-0.50)

               Educational Attainment                    0.0006
                                                         (0.22)

                   Committee Rank                       -0.0441**
                                                         (-2.57)

                    Election Margin                      -0.0019
                                                          (-0.89)
             Committee Rank * Election                  0.0004**
                     Margin                              (2.06)

                            n                               53
                            LL                            -18.76

          Two-sided t-statistics below coefficient estimates
          ** 95% significance
                 Committee Jurisdiction, Congressional Behavior and Policy Outcomes


                                 APPENDIX: A SHORT FORMAL MODEL


         We begin characterizing the general game, and then apply it to the expected equilibrium

behavior of the H.R. 353 and 1858.

         There are two committees (J and T), and there are three legislators (P, Q, and R). We

note J as the “incumbent” committee, and T as the “challenging committee.” P is a member of J

and fully embodies the preferences and policies of the J. P can be thought of as the median voter

of J, or as the committee chair. For simplicity, as we explicate the game, we drop the subscript

of P and refer only to J or to the “incumbent” or “incumbent committee.” Q and R are members

of committee T.

         The moves of the game are as follows. First, the incumbent chooses a policy C, and

simultaneously, the challenging committee determines whether Q or R will represent the

challenger committee to potentially introduce a bill to compete with the incumbent’s policy (we

call this chosen legislator the challenger). Second, the challenger chooses whether or not to

introduce a competing bill, B. Third, nature moves and with probability p refers B to the

challenger’s committee (and to the incumbent’s committee with probability 1-p). Finally, the

incumbent and challenger choose to dispense with the bills choosing either a floor fight, a

compromise, or to kill both bills.

         We can characterize the utility functions for Q and R of the challenger committee as

follows:


U tQ = − | Q − xt* | + F Q (o) + G Q (l ) + δE[− | Q − xt*+1 |, Ft +J1 (o), GtJ+1 (l )] − C Q (e)   eq (1)

U tR = − | R − xt* | + F R (o) + G R (l ) + δE[− | R − xt*+1 |, Ft +J1 (o), GtJ+1 (l )] − C R (e)   eq (2)
where U t j is the utility to legislator j , j ∈ {Q, R} in period t, xt* is the equilibrium policy

generated in period t, F j (o) is the benefit to oversight jurisdiction, o, G j (l ) is the benefit to

legislative jurisdiction, l, δ is the discount rate, and C j (e) is the cost, C, of effort, e, legislator j

exerts in writing a bill. We can re-index the legislator who is chosen to represent the challenger

committee, in equilibrium, T. Thus, the utility functions for the incumbent, J, and the chosen

challenger, T, can be reduced to:


U tJ = − | J − xt* | + F J (o) + G J (l ) + δE[− | J − xt*+1 |, Ft +J1 (o), GtJ+1 (l )] − C J (e)                   eq (3)

U tT = − | T − xt* | + F T (o) + G T (l ) + δE[− | T − xt*+1 |, Ft +J1 (o), GtJ+1 (l )] − C T (e)                   eq (4)


where U ti is the utility to committee i, i ∈ {J , T } in period t, and all remaining terms are as

before. Recall that eq (4) is just the winner of the subgame between Q and R in eq (1) and eq (2).

         The first term of this utility function is the benefit that the committee (legislator) obtains

from the equilibrium policy that will be passed. Committees (legislators) receive positive benefit

the closer the policy outcome is to their ideal point. The second term is the discounted benefit

                                                                                       ∂U ti (.)
obtained by the committee (legislator) from oversight jurisdiction,                                     > 0 . The third term
                                                                                                   ∂o

is the legislative jurisdiction a committee (legislator) has. Note that the benefits to the two

committees are zero-sum—any gain in jurisdiction by one committee is a loss by a second

committee (however, this is not the case for legislator that sit on the same committee).

         In the fight between committees, we assume that the incumbent committee, J, has all the

jurisdictional power, while the challenger committee, T, has none. This maps into policy A in

Figure 1. Normalizing this, we say that G J (l ) = 1, G T (l ) = 0 at the outset and create a bound for



                                                              1
all time periods such that G i (l ) ∈ [0,1] . So if the challenger bill is referred to J, there is no

change in utility to either committee. However, if the challenger bill is referred to T, then J loses

                                                                                         ∂U tJ (.)
utility and T gains that same amount of utility, so that − ∂U t
                                                                      T
                                                                          (.)
                                                                                     =                    < 0.
                                                                                ∂l                   ∂l

          The fourth term is the discounted expected payoff to the committee (legislator) of waiting

until the next congress to enact policy, and is a function of the policy outcome in the next period

and both jurisdictional outcomes. Finally, there is a cost to bill introduction, and that is

encapsulated in C i (e) , such that the incumbent committee has lower marginal cost in writing a


bill than all potential challengers ∂C (e)         > ∂C (e)
                                      T                J
                                                                   , but all challengers do not have the
                                              ∂e              ∂e

same marginal costs. This will induce the incumbent committee to introduce bills before the

challenger will, ceteris paribus.

          We can now discuss the first hypothesis of attenuation. There are two ways to analyze it.

A simple and general way is to examine the utility function of the challenger. Recognize that the

challenger can maintain the same utility levels if she gets less jurisdiction (second and third

term) and more policy (first term). That is, the challenger is willing to trade jurisdiction for

policy.

          An alternative way to examine this is to apply it to the case being analyzed. We leave the

challenger selection process aside for now and assume the best challenger has been selected. In

the model, an incumbent committee member, J, proposes a bill that is referred to the incumbent

committee (equivalent an issue in the position A in Figure 1). The challenger committee

member, T, can choose either to introduce a bill at cost, C T (e) , or not introduce a bill. If there is

no bill introduction, then the equilibrium policy outcome is the incumbent’s policy position,

provided is closer to the median voter, M, than the status quo, F, is to M, will become policy.



                                                      2
        If the challenger does introduce a bill, there is a probability, p, that this bill will be

referred by the Parliamentarian to the challenger committee, will be pivotal in the behavior of

committees. If the bill is introduced to the incumbent’s committee, the equilibrium is the same

as the case above (when there is no challenger bill).

        If the second bill is referred to the challenger committee, the challenger committee has

obtained some amount of jurisdictional benefit because the Parliamentarian now recognizes T as

a legitimate source of legislative jurisdiction over the issue. Conversely, J loses some

jurisdictional benefit, because formerly its legislative jurisdiction was unchallenged.

        With two bills in two committees, there are three possible outcomes. First, both bills

could come to the floor and a floor fight would ensue, the costs to the majority party are very

high (e.g. campaign finance reform), and we assume the Speaker, through his gate-keeping

capabilities, will kill both bills. This would be equivalent to a second outcome—the leadership

will kill both bills and the status quo will persist until the next year, when there is a possibility to

introduce bills again.

        To consider the effects of jurisdictional outcomes on policy, let us consider extreme

effects of the bill referral process. Let us assume the probability of a second bill referral to the

challenger committee, T, is p = 1. First, recognize that that even if no policy passes, T is better

off and J is worse off, for reasonable bill introduction costs C T (e) . This is because by merely

having the second bill referred to T, the challenger gains some legislative jurisdiction over the

issue and J loses some legislative jurisdiction over the issue. Second, on the policy-making

front, the incumbent will introduce a bill so as to maximize its expected utility. In order to do

this, the incumbent must introduce bill C so that the challenger is no worse off than the

compromise policy solution plus the expected jurisdictional gains it would make (minus the costs




                                                    3
of bill introduction) from introducing another bill. As the probability that T receives a second

bill increases, the incumbent is willing to introduce a bill closer to T’s ideal point. The

equilibrium policy when there is jurisdictional conflict will be on the interval [T,F’] where F’ is

the same distance from F to T, but positioned on the opposite side of T than is F. This is a form

of compromise—offering a more moderate policy position to induce no challenge from a

potential competitor. 1 This provides the intuition for Hypothesis 1. Thus, the compensation

required for the jurisdictional gain moves the policy closer to T; higher cost moves the

equilibrium away from T. The higher T values jurisdiction, the closer is equilibrium policy to F’.

         We can now append the challenger selection process. In order to achieve sub-game

perfection in the full game, we must know what is the Nash equilibrium in the first stage. It is

clear that a Nash equilibrium strategy for the challenger committee is to choose a challenging

legislator who generates the most policy compromise. That is going to be the legislator who

obtains the most utility from challenging. The incumbent’s equilibrium policy offer is as close to

T as is necessary to stop a jurisdictional challenge. Both the incumbent and the challengers have

no incentive to move off their strategies, given the other’s strategy. Hence, we have a Nash

equilibrium in the first stage. Thus, a complete characterization of Hypothesis 1 is that

1
  In a one period game (without expectations), there will always be compromise, enforced by the Speaker’s
gatekeeping power. However, politicians create policy today in the shadow of the future. If there is full
information of these expectations in the next period, compromise is still reached. This is because both committees
know the expectations about the outcome of the legislative game in the next period, and can factor this into the
compromise they frame in this period. However, if there is uncertainty, and information is private, then compromise
may be elusive. Assume each committee makes a private, unbiased assessment of its future prospects in the next
congress, with some error, ε ~ N(0, σ2) (Priest and Klein 1984). If both sides have negative errors (private
pessimistic draws about their prospects for the next period) then there will be more room for compromise in the
current period. If both sides have positive errors (private optimism about their possibilities in the next period), then
there will be no compromise and both bills will die. If one side is optimistic and one side is pessimistic, then it is
the relative optimism and pessimism that will matter. With respect to the two focal bills, both bills were killed in the
Rules Committee by the House leadership. Both sides were optimistic about their chances in the next Congress, and
this resulted in neither side accepting compromise. Thus, even though either bill would likely have made the
median voter of the House floor better off than Feist, both bills died. A more complete account can be found in
Author (2002).




                                                           4
challenger forces the incumbent’s attenuation to a point as close to T as possible with the

selection of the challenging legislator.

       While we cannot identify precise who this legislator is theoretically, we can examine the

comparative statics. These comparative statics are the same as they are for the fight between the

two committees, as outlined earlier in the appendix. Specifically, a legislator on the competing

committee is more likely to be selected the more she gains from jurisdiction, the more she gains

from policy outcomes, and the more she values the future. This then leads us to Hypothesis 2.




                                                 5
