                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   STANDARD-RATE WAGE SETTING,
                    LABOR QUALITY, AND UNIONS



                          Charles Brown



                      Working Paper No. 1717




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1985




I am grateful to seminar participants at Columbia University and
the National Bureau of Economic Research for very helpful comments.
Specific suggestions by J. Altonji, L. Katz, G. Solon and A. Weiss
have been incorporated; remaining shortcomings are mine to claim.
Gunther Elert helped with the tabulations in Section 2. The
National Science Foundation and the Computer Science Center at the
University of Maryland (where this paper was begun) for supporting
the computer work in the Appendix. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #1717
                                          October 1985




                    Standard—Rate Wage Setting,
                     Labor Quality, and Unions

                              ABSTP?CT




"Standard rate" wage policies, under which all workers in a
particular job receive the same wage, are common for blue—
collar workers, especially those covered by collective
bargaining agreements and those who work for large employers.
This paper analyzes the impact of standard—rate wage setting.

There are two important conclusions. First, a standard—rate
rule which leaves the employer free to set the rate can
either increase or reduce the quality of labor hired. Given
empirically likely distributions of alternative wages for
workers, it pushes employers toward the middle of the quality
distribution. Second, union standard—rate policies allow
Ufliofl—flOflufliofl differences in wages for workers of a given
quality to exist even when union employers are free to alter
the quality of their workforces.




                                     Charles Brown
                                     Institute for Social Research
                                     The University of Michigan
                                     Ann Arbor, MI 48106
       Standard-rate wage determination, under which all workers in a particular

job receive the same wage, is an empirically important policy which has

received little theoretical attention. One study of workers in metropolitan

areas found that 37 percent of the plant workers were paid under "single—rate"

plans which "provide the same rate to all experienced workers in the same job

classification," and an additional 16 percent were paid under a system whereby

one's progression through a range of wage rates in a job classification is

"based on automatic advancement according to length of service" (Cox, 1971, p.

54). Thus, over half of the plant workers were in compensation systems where

wages do not vary directly with performance within a job classification.

      Buckley's (1985) study of 28 blue collar occupations focused on actual

wages paid rather than on wage-setting systems. In each occupation studied,

an establishment could fall into one of three groups: only one worker in the

job; several workers in the job receiving the same wage; several workers in

the job paid at two or more wage rates. In 13 of the 28 jobs categories, more

workers were in the second (single wage) group than in the multiple-wage

group. For those in the multiple-wage group, within—establishment, within—

job wage spreads were calculated (percent difference between high and low

wage). In half of the job categories, the mean within—establishment within—

job   wage spread was 18 percent or less. Both Cox and Buckley found much less
rate standardization among while collar workers.
      Freeman and Medoff (19814, p. 80) found that unionized establishments are
much more likely than are nonunion establishments in the same industry to use

both single-rate and automatic progression wage determination (514% vs 27%

and 114% vs 8%, respectively). Brown and Medoff (19814) found a similar tendency

for larger establishments to adopt single-rate policies (holding unionization

constant). While Freeman and Medoff highlighted the implications of their

finding for wage inequality, there has been little theoretical discussion of
other implications of standard—rate policies. In this paper, I analyze the

effect of such policies by themselves and their effect when combined with a

union—imposed wage floor.

     In section 1 ,   I   consider a firm which can hire as many workers of a given

quality as it wishes, so long as it is willing to pay the going wage for such

workers. In this case, the firm has no incentive to have unequal quality

workers in a given job (so standard rates are irrelevant).      If unionized such

a firm simply upgrades quality until its workers receive no higher wage than

similar workers receive elsewhere. In section 2, I assume a firm faces a

limited number of potential workers of varying qualities, so a homogeneous

workforce (within a job category) is impossible. Such a firm will hire

workers of differing qualities and pay each quality its reservation wage.

Thus, a standard—rate requirement that all workers (in a job classification)

receive the same wage is a real constraint, even if the employer is free to

choose the wage. In section 3, a union which imposes a wage floor and a

standard—rate requirement is analyzed. Concluding comments are presented in

section .

     There   are two important conclusions. First, a standard—rate rule which
leaves the employer free to set the rate can either increase or reduce the
quality   of labor hired. Given empirically likely alternative—wage functions,

it will raise the quality of labor of employers who would otherwise hire low

quality workers and reduce it for employers who would otherwise hire high

quality labor. Second, union standard—rate policies allow union-nonunion

differences in wages for workers of a given quality to exist even when union

employers are free to alter the quality of their workforces.




                                          2
1.    Homogeneous Workforce
      In   this and subsequent sections, I assume that the firm has a fixed

number of vacancies per period (in a particular job) to fill, and that the

"quality" of each potential worker, q, is easily observed. It is convenient

to measure the quality of potential workers so that q is uniformly distributed

between 0 and 1. The value of marginal product of a worker of quality q is

v(q). All potential workers of quality q are assumed to have alternative wage

a(q). This abstracts from problems measuring q and from commuting costs or

other factors which would lead to different reservation wages among workers of

the   same quality. I assume v'(q) > 0 and a'(q) > 0, and v"(q) — a"(q) < 0.
       In this section, I analyze a firm which can hire as many workers of
quality q as it   wants    by offering to pay them a(q).

The firm's problem is

                                                     —
                                       max    v(q)       a(q)
                                        q


and it choses q so that v'(q)            a'(q). The second—order condition v"(q) —

a"(q) < 0 guarantees a unique choice of q. Each worker receives a wage equal
to a(q).

      Let q and a(q) be the firm's choice of quality level and its wage in

the absence of unionization. If the firm is unionized and required to pay

wage W > a(q), the firm's problem becomes


                 max   ir = v(q)   —          subject to
                                       Wu                       a(q) < W.
                  q


The firm simply upgrades its quality until a(q) =                  It   is forced to buy a

higher quality than it would choose in the absence of unions, but its workers

receive their alternative wage elsewhere. This upgrading until union workers



                                               3
receive no higher wages than comparable nonunion workersunderlies

Pettengill's (1980) general equilibrium analysis of unionization. Empirical

studies of individual workers who change union status confirm the conclusion

of simpler studies that, long after unionization first reached its current

level, union status raises wages. Reconciling the clear incentives to upgrade

with the apparently incomplete upgrading found empirically has remained

something of a puzzle.1


2.   Heterogeneous Workforce

     Now assume one firm faces a limited set of potential workers, again with

a uniform (0,1) quality distribution and alternative wages a(q). Let r                      be   the

ratio of vacancies to potential workers per period.


The firm's problem can now be written

                          H
           max ir =   I        [v(q)       —
                                               a(q)]    dq        subject to H — L =   r.
           H,L        L



here H and L are, respectively, the highest and lowest quality of workers the

firm hires, and the simplified form of the constraint follows from the

convention that q is "measured" so as to have a uniform distribution. The

firm's problem can be written more simply by substituting out the constraint:


                                       H
                          max r =    I           [v(q)       —   a(q)]   dq.
                           H         H-r


If H0 is the firm's optimal2 value of H, H0 satisfies


                          v(H0) -                 =               -
                                    v(H0-r)            a(H0)          a(H0-r)
This is very similar to the first—order—condition for the firm in section 1:

equality of slopes over the range from H0—r to H0 replaces equality of slopes



                                                 14
at the single quality q.

       Now suppose that the firm is constrained -                              or     chooses —    to   pay the same

wage to all workers (in this job category).3 The firm's problem becomes


                            H
       max ii =         I [v(q)-W]               dq         subject to          H - L =      r   and a(H) < W.
      W,H,L             L


Since v'(q) is always positive, the last constraint holds as an equality.


Again substituting out the constraints, we have

                                                        H
                                     max ir =
                                      H
                                                       fH-r        [v(q)     — a(H)J
                                                                                     dq



The first — and second —               order         conditions are


                                          v(H) — v(H—r) =               r   a'(H)
and


                                     v'(H) —         v'(H—r) —      r   a't(H) < 0.



      A natural question is whether the standard—rate rule has predictable

effects on the quality of labor which a firm hires. The simplest way of

answering this question is to formulate a slightly more general wage setting

policy. Let the wage paid to workers of quality q be a weighted average of

the   flexible wage and standard—wage regimes; i.e., a a(H) +                                     (1—a) a(q). The

firm's   problem is
                                                 H
                        max r =              I        [v(q)    —
                                                                   (1—a)     a(q)J dq — ara(H)
                         H                   H-r


The first—order condition is


                  =   v(H)      -
                                    v(H-r)    -
                                                     (1-a)    [a(H) -       a(H-r)J    -   a ra'(H)      0.




                                                               5
Increases in a can then be interpreted as moves from a flexible—wage to a

standard—rate policy. Differentiating the first—order condition with respect

to a and H, and setting the result equal to zero yields:

                                 dH -
                                            — _______
                                              ________
                                 da



The denominator must be negative if the initial equilibrium maximized profits.

The   numerator equals a(H) — a(H-r)    —   ra'(H).   Since [a(H) —   a(H-r)]/r   is the

slope   of the chord joining H and H-r while a'(H) is the slope        of the tangent

at   H, this expression is positive when a(q) is concave and negative         when a(q)

is convex. Therefore, labor quality is increased by moves toward a standard

rate policy when a(q) is concave and reduced when a(q) is convex.4

        The intuition behind this result is similar to that offered by Weiss

and Landau (1984, p. 483) for a related problem. When a(q) is concave

(convex) an increase (reduction) in q represents a move toward a q where

the frequency distribution of alternative wages is denser, and so (for

fixed r) a more homogeneous workforce is being chosen. It is intuitively

sensible that a firm which pays all workers (in a job category) the same

wage as its best worker will move toward recruiting a more homogeneous

workforce.

      Under the assumption that alternative (market) wages are an exact

function of quality, the a(q) function is just the cumulative distribution

function of the market wage, but with the wage plotted on the vertical axis.

If wages follow a unimodal distribution, a(q) will be concave at "low" values

of q and convex at "high" values. For a symmetric distribution such as the

normal the change from concave to convex will occur at q=.5; if the median

exceeds the mode (as would be true, for example, for a lognormal


                                             6
distribution), the change from concave to convex will occur at q < .5, and

a(q) will be convex for most of its range.

         Wage distributions for individual occupations in particular metropolitan

areas are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Area Wage Surveys.

While AWS excludes small establishments, it is in other respects an ideal

source of data for blue collar wages, offering both local-market detail and

reasonably narrow occupations.

         The AWS contains data for 30 separate plant occupations such as

maintenance electrician, tool and die maker, boiler tender, tractor—truck

driver, and shipping packer. Using the surveys for the 10 largest SMSAs

studied by AWS in 1980, there were 27J4 city—occupations (30 times 10, minus 26

not reported due to too—small sample size). For each occupation, the wage

rate at the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the wage distribution is

available. If the wage distribution is symmetric, W(75)—W(50)=W(50)—W(25),

where W(p) is the wage rate at the pth percentile. This implies that



                                       —
                                           W(75)+W(25)
                                            2 W(50)


is a simple measure of skewness, with S=1 if the distribution is symmetric.

If W(q) is ("predominantly") concave, S is less than one, while S is greater

than     one   if W(q) is ("predominantly") convex.

         Of the 2711 city-occupation observations, S was less than 1.0 in 1140 —-

i.e.,    in almost exactly half of the cases. Using an alternative measure ——

the     ratio of mean to median wage —— produced a nearly identical result (1143

values below 1.0) Thus, there is no evidence that strong positive or negative

skewness of within—occupation wage distributions is the rule.




                                              7
      If wage distributions are unimodal and more or less symmetric, so that

a(q) switches from concave to convex near the median, the analysis of this

section implies that standard—rate policies move firms toward the middle of

the quality distribution. Firms initially hiring low quality workers face a

locally concave a(q) function and raise q, while those hiring high quality

workers face (locally) convex a(q) and reduce q.


3.   Unions

     While Freeman and Medoff (198) have argued that the standard rate is an

empirically important part of unionism, the preceding section does not really

characterize union wage setting. Perhaps the most satisfactory simple

characterization is that unions impose both a minimum wage constraint and a

standard rate rule. Formally, the firm's problem is

                H
      max     f [v(q)-WJ dq subject to H - L =    r,   a(H) — W, and W > W.
     W,H,L    L


There are two cases to consider, depending on whether the final constraint is

binding.

     (1) If the final constraint holds as an equality, the constraints

determine the choice variables: W =   W,   a(H)    Wu determines H, and L     H—r.

The highest-quality worker is paid his alternative wage, but the standard—rate

policy allows the remaining workers to earn more than their alternative wage.

There may be quality upgrading (H>H0) but it does not result in elimination of

a wage premium for being unionized.

     (2) If the constraint W > W does not hold as an equality, the firm

pays more than the union-mandated wage but maintains the standard rate policy.

This case seems empirically unlikely but is not impossible. The model

of section 2 would be appropriate here. Once again, workers whose quality

is less than the highest receive more than their alternative wage.

                                       8
       Thus, to the question "why doesn't employers' workforce—upgrading in

response to unionization eliminate any true wage differential?" an answer

is "standard rate policies prevent it."

       Compared with those working for flexible wage nonunion employers (who

earn their alternative wage), union members earn a wage premium because all

those with q < H are earning a(H) instead of a(q). Union workers receive

a standard rate a(I-i) which in general exceeds their alternative wage a(q)

so that the average wage premium beyond wages available elsewhere is

                                                       H
                          N =   a(H)   —   (1/r)   f       a(q)   dq.
                                                   H-r


To get a rough sense of the magnitudes involved, suppose a nonunion employer

has a within—job wage spread of 20 percent5 and that alternative wages are

uniformly distributed (a(q) is linear) in this region. A union establishment

which ended up with the same quality distribution of workers would pay its

best worker his alternative wage but its worst worker 20 percent more

than he could get elsewhere; on average, this firm's workers would have

M =   .10, more or less in line with empirical estimates of the union wage
effect.

      When a union organizes many firms in the same labor market and

negotiates the same standard rate at different firms, the effect may be

more dramatic. If, for example, half the workers are organized and the

wage is "taken out of competition" across firms, the least—qualified union

worker would earn the same as someone fifty percentile points higher in the

quality distribution. Notice that no reshuffling of workers across firms

eliminates this (perhaps very substantial) differential. This suggests an

alternative explanation for the proposition that union wage effects will be



                                             9
higher as the proportion organized is increased——increasing the share of the

market which is organized and achieving rate standardization across firms

increases the disparity of qualities of worker receiving the union wage,

and hence the true differential.

     A further implication of the model is a comparison of those working

for nonunion standard—rate employers to those in the union sector. The

expression for M presented above holds for each type of firm. The

difference is that the union employer must pay a higher wage, and thus

obtaius higher q workers——i.e., N is evaluated at a greater H in the union

firm. The consequent effect on M is given by


                     — = a'(H)
                     dM            —   (1/r)    a(H) — a(H—r)]



As noted above, this expression is negative when a(q) is concave and positive

when a(q) is convex. Since standard rates are more common among larger

employers, who hire higher quality labor (Brown and Medoff, 19814), a concave—

then—convex a(q) function would mean that workers at large unionized employers

receive a premium compared to workers at large standard—rate nonunionized

employers. However, the union—nonunion differential for large employers

should be smaller than the union—nonunion differential for smaller employers

(whose nonunion sector follows flexible wage rather than standard—rate

policies). Most available evidence supports this prediction (Freeman and

Medoff, 19814.)


1L   Conclusions

     The model presented in this paper shows how an employer who introduces a

standard rate policy would alter the quality of labor employed, and it argues




                                               10
that standard—rating explains the apparent inability of employers to take full

advantage of the upgrading opportunity which a union wage floor would seem to

present.

     Three possible directions for future work are to attempt a general—

equilibrium analysis, to introduce imperfections in firms' knowledge of worker

quality, and to make the size of the firm (i.e. ,   the   number of vacancies

and/or the size of the available worker pool) endogenous in the long run.

I would expect the very simple relationship between standard rating and labor

quality would be complicated by these extensions; whether it would be altered

in a fundamental way is less certain. The effect of standard rating on a

unionized firm's attempt to upgrade would also be complicated by such

extensions, but I would expect the fundamental point to survive.

     I have begun to work on the third generalization, by allowing the firm to

hire as many or as few workers as it finds profitable, while maintaining the

same general structure to the problem in other respects.6 I have not

established a simple analytic relationship between the quality of labor hired

in the flexible—rate and standard rate environments. However, for the case

where a(q) and v(q) are both quadratic, a large number of numerical examples

have failed to uncover a counterexample to the result in section 2, that

standard rates increase the quality of labor hired if and only if a(q) is

concave. (These examples are discussed in the Appendix.) Of course, the firm

finds it profitable to hire fewer workers, so it increases L and reduces H,

and profits are lower in the standard rate environment. If one is willing to

assume fixed capital costs per worker, such costs can be accommodated in a(q)

(and in W), and the model then characterizes long run behavior.




                                      11
                                   FOOTNOTES

1.   For example, Pencavel (1981) gives three possible explanations: (1)

     studies which find a union wage premium have controlled inadequately for

     worker quality; (2) employers are not free to hire the best labor

     available at the union wage; (3) if the employer upgrades, unions will

     simply negotiate a wage which represents a premium over the new workers'

     opportunity wage. The first explanation is less convincing now that

     studies which compare particular workers who change union status are

     available. The second explanation applies to referral unions, but most

     unions   (e.g. in manufacturing) are not referral unions. The third
     explanation requires that firms avoid hiring the best applicants for fear

     that attracting better applicants will stimulate further wage-raising.

     This seems implausible ——   especially   in the case of multi—employer

     contracts, where the individual employer would have an upgrading

     incentive even if the employer group did not. Mincer (19814, p. 3214)

     argues that screening costs and "technological constraints" limit firms'

     ability to upgrade enough to eliminate the union wage premium.

2.   This formulation assumes the firm opts for a single range of worker

     quality; it excludes, for example, hiring both low— and high—q workers

     but not offering high enough wages to in—between quality workers to

     attract them. The obvious motivation for this assumption is analytical

     convenience.

3.   In this paper, I take the decision to pay standard rates as given. A

     more general model would explain why some firms not constrained by

     union contracts opt for standard—rate policies. One way of achieving
     such generality is to postulate a fixed per—worker cost of administering

     a flexible—wage system, identified with administrative costs (or morale

     costs if workers prefer standard rates). Comparisons of flexible—wage

     and standard—rate firms presented below could then be interpreted as

     illustrating differences between firms whose wage policies differ

     because of different costs of a flexible-wage system. My reason for

     not putting greater emphasis on this approach is the belief that a

     really satisfactory model of why some firms choose standard—rate policies

     would require introducing costs of ascertaining worker quality (and

     effort), which greatly complicates the analysis. The most similar

     paper in the existing literature (Weiss and Landau, 1984) also takes

     the standard—rate decision as exogenous.

4.   This conclusion does depend to some extent on the assumption that the

     pool of potential workers is given. An alternative assumption would

     be this pool P can be expanded by "advertising costs" C(P), and the firm

     hires r/P of the pool, where P is now a choice variable. (Measuring P

     so that C(1) = 0 leaves the model in the text as a special case.) In

     such a model, the effect of standard rates on average quality (or

     average alternative wage) is quite complicated. First, holding P

     fixed, increasing a changes H as described in the text. Second, holding

     H fixed, increasing a increases P. The intuition here is that increasing

     a increases the incentive to hire "more similar" workers, which can be

     done by expanding P. This increase in P raises L (since L = H—rIP), raising average

     quality. Third, the interaction between H and P is ambiguous in sign.

5.   Buckley (1985) reports that the average within—establishment, within—job

     spread in nonunion establishments was 25% for the median blue—collar
     occupation in his study. This overstates the true size of the spread

     to the extent that some of it reflects a pure—seniority differential for

     which all workers eventually qualify, and because it excludes non—union

     establishments paying all workers the same wage.

6.   See also footnote 4 for a discussion of allowing the size of the

     available worker pool to vary, holding the number of workers to be

     hired constant.
                                      REFERENCES


Brown, Charles, and Medoff, James. "The Employer Size Wage Effect," xeroxecl,
     19814.

Buckley, John. "Wage Differences Among Workers in the Same Job and
     Establishment,"     Monthly Labor Review, vol. 108, no. 3, March 1985, pp.

     11—16.

Cox, John. "Time and Incentive Pay Practices in Urban Areas," Monthly Labor

     Review, vol. 914,   no. 12, December 1971, pp. 53—56.

Freeman, Richard and Medoff, James. What Do Unions Do? (New York: Basic

     Books, 19814)

Mincer, Jacob. "The Economics of Wage Floors", in Ronald Ehrenberg, ed.,

     Research in Labor Economics, vol. 6 (Greenwich CT: JAI Press, 19814), pp.

     311—333.

Pencavel, John. Review of Labor Unions and the Inequality of Earned Income,

     by John Pettengill, Journal of Economic Literature vol. 18, no. 14,

     December 1981, pp. 1636—1637.

Pettengill, John. Labor Unions and the Inequality of Earned Income (New York:

    North Holland, 1980).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Area Wage Survey, B.L.S. Bulletin No. 3000,

     1980—81.

Weiss, Andrew and Landau, Henry. "Wages, Hiring Standards, and Firm Size,"

    Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 2, no. 14, October 19814, pp. 1477—1499.
                                                                  Appendix

           This appendix summarizes numerical solutions to the firm's
choice of labor quality problem when the firm has no constraint

on the number of workers it must hire.

           Both a(q) and v(q) are assumed to be quadratic functions:

                      a(q) = a2q2                  +
                                                        a1q       +
                                                                       a0
                      v(q) =          v2q2         +
                                                        v1q       +
                                                                       v0.

If we normalize v(q) so that v(0) =                                                  0       and v(1) = 1, this implies

v0
     =   0   and v2 =             1—v1.                Since v' (q) >   > 0 and v' (1)   0, v' (0) = v1

=
     2v2     +
                 v1
                       =
                               2—v1    > 0, so v1 < 2. Similarly, a'(O) = a1 > 0 and
a'(l) =          2a2       +
                                a1 > 0,            so a2 > — a1/2.
           Further             restrictions on the aTs can be derived from the
requirement that L and H lie between zero and one in the

flexible-wage equilibrium. The firm's problem is

                                           H
                      max ir =          I [v(q)               —
                                                                      a(q)]      dq.
                      H,L              L


The first—order conditions are

                                                            v(H) — a(I-I) = 0

                                                            v(L)       —
                                                                            a(L)         =    0


This means that L and H are the two solutions to the quadratic

equation v(q) —                   a(q)         =       0.    Letting b =                      a—v1,   I =   0,1,2, these
solutions are
                                                                             ÷   r
                                                                       2b2
where


                                 r —
                                       b1
                                         2 — ii
                                                  b0b21
                                                          1/2

        Assume for now that b2 > 0. Then the two roots will be real
and distinct if and only if b0 < b12/4b2. Both roots are
positive and distinct if and only if b1 < 0 and r < —b1, which
in turn implies b0 > 0.            Finally, the larger root is less than
one if and only if —b1+r < 2b2, which can be manipulated to show

b0 .>   -b1—b2.        Moreover, since r > 0, b2 must be greater than
—
    b1/2.
        The second—order condition for the problem is that

                                  vt(H) —         a'(H)      < 0

                                  v'(L) —         a'(L)      > 0


This means that v'(L) —            a'(L)      —   [v'(I-i)   —     a'(H)l   =   2 (a2—v2) (H—L)

> 0, or a2—v2 = b2 > 0, as asserted earlier.

        Collecting results, we have

                   = 0
             V0
             o <       v1 < 2
                   =
                        1—v1

             o <       a1 < v1   (The latter since b1 =                a1—v1     < 0)
             a2 > v2 + (v1—a1          )/2.       (Since b2 > —b1/2)

             a0 < (a1-v1)2/[(a2-v2)]
             a0 > 0 and a0 > (v1—a1) + (v2—a2) (either could be binding).

        Let N(v1) be the number of values of                           to be considered.

Evenly—spaced alternatives in the interval from zero to two were
chosen:


                                                  2
                                    v1 (i) =    2i/[N(v1 )1•

For each v1(i), N(a1) values of a1 were chosen, according to the
rule


                                a1 (j)         v1 (i)/[N(a1) +   1]

Given v1 and a1, N(a2) values of a2 were chosen according to the
rule


                                           +
                a2(k) = 1-v1                   (v1-a1)/{2k/[N(a2)+1J}
Placing the index k in the denominator is a somewhat ad hoc

response to the fact that no true upper bound on a2 could be

derived. Finally, given v1, a1, and a2, N(a0) values of a0 were
chosen according to the rule



               a0() =                          max (0, v1-a1 ÷    v2-a2)


                                r     -              1   (a1-v1)2
                            +   L1
                                          N(a2÷1)
                                                     ]

In addition to finding the solution to the firm's problem in the
flexible—wage case, the solution to the standard—rate problem was
also determined for each set of parameters. Here, the firm seeks
to


                        H                                    H
          max v =   f [v(q)—a(H)1               dq   =   .1 v(q)dq    —   (H—L)a(H).
          H,L       L                                    L



       The first—order conditions for this problem are



                                                 3
                   v(H) — a(H)        —
                                               (H—L) a'(H) =             0

                           —v(L) + a(H)              =   0


Rewriting the second equation as

                 -[v(H)-a(H)J +                v(H)-v(L)     =   0


Adding this to the first equation gives

                   v(H)—v(L) — (H—L) a'(H) =                         0


In the quadratic case, this is


           v2(H2-L2) +    v1
                                 (H-L) - (H—L) (2a2H+a1 )                        =0

or


              (H—L) [v2(H+L) + v1               —                        =   0
                                                    (2a2H+a1)]

Since H—L > 0, the term in brackets is zero, and this is a linear
equation which can be solved for L:

                    L =    —If   +
                                     (2a2H+a1—v1)/v2

This can be substituted into the first first-order condition to
obtain a quadratic equation in H alone.

     In the first set of experiments, I chose five values for v1,
a1, and a2, and three values for a0 according to the above rules.
There were therefore 3.53 = 375 sets of parameters. When this

produced very few negative values of a2, the procedure was
revised to allow nine values of v1, running from 1.1 to 1.9, with
the same number of values (but, obviously, different numerical

values) of a1, a2, and a0 as before.                 In no case did average


                                          14
quality (measured by either q or a(q)) rise when a2 was positive

or   fall   when a2 was negative.




                                    5
