                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      LEVERAGING MONOPOLY POWER BY DEGRADING INTEROPERABILITY:
            THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM COMPUTER MARKETS

                                        Christos Genakos
                                         Kai-Uwe Kühn
                                        John Van Reenen

                                       Working Paper 17172
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17172


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2011




We would like to thank Tim Besley, Cristina Caffarra, Francesco Caselli, Sofronis Clerides, Peter
Davis, Ying Fan, Jeremy Fox, Georg von Graevenitz, Ryan Kellogg, Christopher Knittel, Mark McCabe,
Aviv Nevo, Pierre Regibeau, Bob Stillman, Michael Whinston and participants at seminars at AEA,
CEPR, Cyprus, FTC, LSE, Mannheim, Michigan, MIT, Pennsylvania and the NBER for helpful comments.
Financial support has come from the ESRC Centre for Economic Performance. In the past Kühn and
Van Reenen have acted in a consultancy role for Sun Microsystems. This paper represents the view
of the authors and not the European Commission or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
usual disclaimer applies.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Christos Genakos, Kai-Uwe Kühn, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Leveraging Monopoly Power by Degrading Interoperability: Theory and Evidence from Computer
Markets
Christos Genakos, Kai-Uwe Kühn, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 17172
June 2011
JEL No. D43,L1,L2,O3

                                            ABSTRACT

When will a monopolist have incentives to foreclose a complementary market by degrading compatibility/
interoperability of his products with those of rivals? We develop a framework where leveraging extracts
more rents from the monopoly market by “restoring” second degree price discrimination. In a random
coefficient model with complements we derive a policy test for when incentives to reduce rival quality
will hold. Our application is to Microsoft’s strategic incentives to leverage market power from personal
computer to server operating systems. We estimate a structural random coefficients demand system
which allows for complements (PCs and servers). Our estimates suggest that there were incentives
to reduce interoperability which were particularly strong at the turn of the 21st Century.


Christos Genakos                                     John Van Reenen
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Athens University of Economics and Business          London School of Economics
76 Patission Str.                                    Centre for Economic Performance
Athens, 10434                                        Houghton Street
GREECE                                               London WC2A 2AE
cgenakos@aueb.gr                                     UNITED KINGDOM
                                                     and NBER
Kai-Uwe Kühn                                         j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
258 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
kukuhn@umich.edu
                                           1.   I #

Many antitrust cases revolve around compatibility issues (called “interoperability” in software

markets). For example, the European Microsoft case focused on the question of whether Mi-

crosoft reduced interoperability between its personal computer (PC) operating system - Win-

dows, a near monopoly product - and rival server operating systems (a complementary market)

to drive rivals out of the workgroup server market. Microsoft’s share of workgroup server oper-

ating systems rose substantially from 20% at the start of 1996 to near 60% in 2001 (see Figure

1) and the European Commission (2004) argued that at least some of this increase was due to

a strategy of making rival server operating systems work poorly with Windows. The possibility

of such leveraging of market power from the PC to the server market was suggested by Bill

Gates in a 1997 internal e-mail: “What we’re trying to do is to use our server control to do

new protocols and lock out Sun and Oracle specifically....the symmetry that we have between the

client operating system and the server operating system is a huge advantage for us”. Microsoft

eventually lost the case leading to the largest fines in 50 years of EU anti-trust history.1

    Statements like those in Bill Gates’ e-mail could just be management rhetoric. Indeed,

the rationality of such foreclosure strategies has been strongly challenged in the past by the

“Chicago School” critique of leverage theory (e.g. Bork, 1978). For example, suppose one

firm has a monopoly for one product but competes with other firms in a market for a second

product, which is used by customers in fixed proportions with the first. The Chicago School

observed that the monopolist in the first market did not have to monopolize the second market

to extract monopoly rents. The monopolist will even benefit from the presence of other firms

in this second market when there is product differentiation.2 Following the Chicago tradition,

there has been much work on trying to derive efficiency explanations for many practices that


   1
     The initial interoperability complaint began in 1998 after beta versions of Windows 2000 were released.
In 2004, the EU ordered Microsoft to pay 497 million for the abuse and supply interoperability information.
In 2008, the EU fined Microsoft an additional 899 million for failure to comply with the earlier decision. See
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Microsoft_competition_case.
   2
     For a formal statement of this point, see Whinston (1990), Proposition 3.


                                                      2
were previously seen as anti-competitive.3

       More recently, studies of exclusive dealing (Bernheim and Whinston, 1998) and tying4 have

shown that rational foreclosure in markets for complements is possible in well specified models.5

Most of these models have the feature that exclusionary strategies are not necessarily profitable

in the short run. However, such strategies through their impact on investment, learning by

doing, etc., can make current competitors less effective in the future, making the exclusionary

strategy profitable in the long run.

       This paper makes several contributions. We propose a new theory of foreclosure through

interoperability degradation and apply it to the market for PCs and servers. The theory suggests

a relatively straightforward policy-relevant test for foreclosure incentives that can be used in

many contexts. To implement the test we develop a structural econometric approach using

detailed market level data (quarterly data from the US PC and server markets between 1996

and 2001), which requires extending a random coefficient model to allow for complementary

products. We find strong and robust incentives for Microsoft to degrade interoperability.6

       In our theory, the reduction of competition in the complementary (server) market allows

the PC monopolist to more effectively price discriminate between customers with heterogeneous

demand. If customers with high elasticity of demand for PCs also have low willingness to pay

for servers, server purchases can be used for second degree price discrimination. A monopolist

both of PC and server operating systems would lower the price for the PC operating system and

extract surplus from customers with inelastic PC demand by charging higher server operating

system prices. Competition on the server market will limit the ability to price discriminate in

this way. By reducing interoperability, the monopolist can reduce competition on the server

   3
      For example, Bowman (1957), Adams and Yellen (1976), Schmalensee (1984), McAfee, McMillan and Whin-
ston (1989).
    4
      See Whinston (1990), Farrell and Katz (2000), Carlton and Waldman (2002) among others.
    5
      See Rey and Tirole (2007) for a comprehensive review of this literature and Whinston (2001) for an informal
survey in relation to some aspects of the U.S. vs. Microsoft case.
    6
      Hence, our static motivation complements dynamic theories, for example those based on applications network
effects, that have been shown to generate anti-competitive incentives to extend monopoly (e.g. Carlton and
Waldman, 2002). These dynamic effects would only make our static foreclosure incentives stronger.


                                                       3
market, re-establishing the ability to price discriminate.

       Although the incentive can exist in theory, whether it is relevant in practice depends on

the interplay between two effects. The PC operating system monopolist benefits from reducing

interoperability because he gains share in the server market. But because interoperability lowers

the quality of rival servers, some customers will purchase fewer PCs, and this reduces his profits

from the PC operating system monopoly. Our test quantifies the magnitude of this difference.

       For the argument we are making, modelling the heterogeneity between buyers is essential

for generating foreclosure incentives. Modelling customer heterogeneity in a flexible way is

also a central feature of recent approaches for estimating demand systems in differentiated

product markets. We therefore first develop the theory on the basis of a discrete choice model

with random coefficients as used in demand estimations by Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995,

henceforth BLP). We extend this approach to allowing complementarity between two markets

and compare our results to those from existing approaches such as Gentzkow (2007) and Song

and Chintagunta (2006). We show theoretically and empirically how different assumptions on

complementarity will affect foreclosure incentives. For example, we show how overly strong

restrictions on the assumed form of complementarity (e.g. not allowing a PC only purchase)

can cause the econometrician to underestimate the scope for foreclosure.

       One caveat to our approach is that although we can test whether there is a foreclosure

incentive, our methodology cannot unequivocally resolve the question of whether foreclosure

occurs and how much of the change in market shares was due to interoperability constraints.7

       The paper is structured in the following way. Section 2 gives the basic idea and section 3

presents the core theoretical results relating foreclosure incentives to price discrimination. Sec-

tion 4 details the econometrics, section 5 the data, section 6 the results and section 7 concludes.

   7
    Demonstrating that foreclosure took place through interoperability degradation requires a more in-depth
market investigation. In particular, we cannot separately identify whether the introduction of a new Microsoft
operating system only enhanced the quality of Microsoft servers relative to others, or whether the decreases in
interoperability also decreased the effective quality of rival server operating systems. In the anti-trust case, the
European Commission (2004) claimed that changes in Windows technology did seriously reduce interoperability.
The evidence in this paper is consistent with the claim that Microsoft had an incentive to do this.


                                                         4
In the Appendices we give more details of proofs (A), data (B), estimation techniques (C and

E), derivations (D) and robustness (E).


                                         2.   T B  A'#(               

Our basic approach is to measure, at any point in time, the incentives for a monopolist in a

primary market to reduce the quality of a rival in a complementary market through changes in

the interoperability features of its monopoly product. In our application we examine whether

Microsoft had an incentive to degrade interoperability between its PC operating system and

rival server operating systems in order to foreclose competition in the server operating system

market. In this section we give an overview of how we identify this incentive.


2.1.    The Test for Foreclosure Incentives. To outline our approach, we first introduce

some notation that will be maintained for the rest of the paper. There are J different types of

PCs offered in the market. A buyer of PC j has to pay the price p̂j for the hardware and ω for

the operating system of the monopolist.8 We observe the vector of PC prices pj = p̂j + ω · 1

with element pj = p̂j +ω. For servers we observe the corresponding vector of hardware/software

total system prices pk = p̂k + ω k with element pk = p̂k + ωk , where p̂k is the hardware price

of server k and ωk is the price for the operating system running on that server.9 We use

the notation ωk = ωM when the server product k uses the PC monopolist’s server operating

system. We parameterize the degree of interoperability of the operating system of server k with

the monopolist’s PC operating system as ak ∈ [0, 1]. We set ak = 1 for all servers that run the

server operating system of the monopolist and ak = a ≤ 1 for servers with competing operating

systems.

    Given the price vectors we can define demand functions for total demand for PCs, q(pj , pk , a),

and the total demand for the monopolist’s server operating system as qM (pj , pk , a). Total profits
    8
      Over our sample period Apple, Linux and others had less than 5% of the PC market, so that Microsoft could
be considered the monopoly supplier. We therefore do not use subscripts for PC operating system prices. We use
“M” as the subscript when we refer to prices and quantities of sales of the monopolist’s server operating system.
    9
      Note that we treat two servers with different operating system as different server products even if the hardware
is identical.


                                                          5
of the monopolist are given by:


                      Π(pj , pk , a) = (ω − c)q(pj , pk , a) + (ω M − cM )qM (pj , pk , a),    (1)


where c and cM are the corresponding marginal costs for the monopolist’s PC and server oper-

ating system respectively.10

      We are interested in the incentive of the monopolist to decrease the interoperability param-

eter a. By the envelope theorem, there will be such an incentive if:

                                                                                 
                           dq(pj , pk , a)                   dqM (pj , pk , a) 
                   (ω − c)                       + (ωM − cM )                          <0    (2)
                               da            ω,ωM                    da             ω,ωM


The demand derivatives with respect to the interoperability parameter are total derivatives of

the respective output measures holding the monopolist’s operating system prices constant. This

derivative contains the direct effect of interoperability on demand as well as the impact of the

price responses to a change in interoperability by all rival software and hardware producers.

Total demand for PCs will increase with greater interoperability because of complementarity

between PCs and servers. Greater interoperability means that some customers start purchasing

more PCs as the monopolist’s rival servers have become more attractive. At the same time we

expect the demand for the monopolist’s server operating system, qM , to decrease when interop-

erability increases because some customers will switch to a rival server operating system. The

relative impact on server and PC operating system demand from interoperability degradation

will therefore be critical to the incentives to foreclose. Rearranging terms we obtain that there

is an incentive to decrease interoperability at the margin if:
                                                                      
                                                         dq(pj ,pk ,a) 
                                       ωM − cM               da        
                                                                        ω,ω
                                               >−                            M
                                                                                               (3)
                                        ω−c             dqM (pj ,pk ,a) 
                                                             da         
                                                                         ω,ω   M



On the left hand side of equation (3) we have the “relative margin effect”. Interoperability
 10
      The marginal cost can be thought of as being very close to zero in software markets.


                                                        6
degradation will only be profitable if the margin on the server operating system of the monopolist

(ωM − cM ) sufficiently exceeds the margin on the PC operating system (ω − c). We call the

expression on the right hand side of (3) the “relative output effect” as it measures the

relative impact of a change in interoperability on demand for the PC operating system (the

numerator increases with interoperability) and the monopolist’s server operating system (the

denominator decreases with interoperability) respectively.

       Our estimation approach is designed to verify whether the strict inequality (3) holds in the

data. Why is this a good test for foreclosure incentives when one might expect an optimal

choice of interoperability by the monopolist to lead to a strict equality? First, it is costly

to change operating systems to reduce the degree of interoperability and there are time lags

between the design of the less interoperable software and its diffusion on the market. Second,

non-Microsoft server operating system vendors such as Novell and Linux sought to overcome the

reduction in interoperability through a variety of measures such as developing “bridge” products,

redesigning their own software, reverse engineering, etc. Third, there are many reasons why

it will be impossible for a monopolist to reduce all interoperability to zero (i.e. making rival

server operating systems non-functional). One reason is that there are different server market

segments. For example, in European Commission (2004) it was claimed that Microsoft had

an incentive to exclude rivals in workgroup server markets (the market which we focus on),

but not in the markets for web servers or enterprise servers.11 The protocols that achieve

interoperability for web servers may, however, provide some interoperability with workgroup

servers thus preventing full interoperability degradation. This means the monopolist would want

to reduce quality of the server rivals further if he could. Finally, since the late 1990s, anti-trust

action in the US and EU may have slowed down Microsoft’s desire to reduce interoperability.

All these reasons suggest that in the presence of foreclosure incentives we should find a strict

incentive to foreclose at the margin, which is why we focus our analysis on estimating the
  11
    Enterprise servers are high-end corporate servers that manage vast amounts of “mission critical” data in
large corporations. They need very high levels of security and typically use custom written written software.
Web servers host the web-sites of companies and are also used for e-commerce.


                                                     7
relative margin and output effects.



2.2.    Measuring the Relative Margin Effect. The margins on PC and server operating

systems are very hard to observe directly. For our econometric estimations we only have prices

of PCs and servers bought inclusive of an operating system. While there do exist some list

prices of operating systems that allow us to infer an order of magnitude, we have to estimate

the operating system margins from the data. For this estimation we therefore have to impose a

specific model of price setting. Given the complementarity between software and hardware as

well as between PCs and server, the move order in price setting is important for determining the

pricing incentives for the monopolist. We assume that the hardware and software companies

set their prices simultaneously so that the price the software company charges is directly added

to whatever price the hardware company charges for the computer. This assumption seems

consistent with what we observe in the market as Microsoft effectively controlled the price of

the software paid by end users through licensing arrangements.12 Maximizing equation (1) with

respect to the PC operating system price ω and the monopolist’s server operating system price

ωM yields the first order conditions:


                                                ∂q              ∂qM
                                  q + (ω − c)      + (ωM − cM )     =0                                       (4)
                                                ∂ω               ∂ω
                                                ∂q              ∂qM
                               qM + (ω − c)        + (ωM − cM )     =0                                       (5)
                                               ∂ωM              ∂ωM
            ∂q 1
Denoting    ∂ω q   = εω as the semi-elasticity of the impact of a change in operating system price

(ω) on quantity demanded (q), we can solve equations (4) and (5) for the PC monopolist’s profit

margins:

    PC monopolist’s operating system margin:

  12
     Our assumption greatly simplifies the analysis of the monopolist’s problem. While the optimal software price
does depend on the expected prices for the hardware, we do not have to solve for the pricing policies of the
hardware producers to analyze relative margin effect. If the software company would move first setting prices
and the hardware company second, the software company would have to take into account the price reactions of
the hardware company.


                                                       8
                                                                       
                                                             q M εM
                                                  1    1−     q εM
                                                                   ω
                                                                  ωM    
                                (ω − c) = −                 εω M εM                                 (6)
                                                 εω 1 −            ω
                                                              εω εM
                                                                  ωM


PC monopolist’s server operating system margin:
                                                                            
                                                                   q εωM
                                                  1        1−    qM εω
                             (ωM − cM ) = −                                                          (7)
                                                 εM              εω M εM
                                                  ωM        1−    εω εM
                                                                        ω
                                                                       ωM



There are four relevant semi-elasticities: the own-price elasticity of the operating systems of

PCs (εω ), the own-price elasticity of the monopolist’s server operating system (εM
                                                                                  ω M ), the cross

price elasticity of the monopolist’s servers with respect to PC operating system prices (εM
                                                                                          ω )

and the cross price elasticity of PCs with respect to the monopolist’s server operating system

prices (εωM ). The semi-elasticities that determine the right hand side of these two equations

can be estimated from PC and server sales and price data. The operating systems margins

and the relative margin effect can therefore be inferred from estimating the parameters of an

appropriate demand system.

   A first remark on equations (6) and (7) is that the price cost margins differ from the standard

single product monopoly margins due to the ratios of cross- to own-price elasticities of PC and
                                    εω M          εM
server operating system demands,     εω    and   εM
                                                   ω
                                                       . In general, mark-ups will be affected both by
                                                  ωM

the degree of competition and by the degree of complementarity. As a benchmark case, suppose

that PCs and servers are perfect complements which means that customers buy servers and

PCs in fixed proportions (i.e. exactly w PCs for every server purchased). With competition
                                                                                 
between different server operating systems we should generally expect εMω
                                                                            < wεM 
                                                                                  ωM : the

demand response of the monopolist’s server operating system should be greater for an increase

in the server operating system price (ωM ) than the PC operating system price (ω), because

the latter leads to a price increase for all servers and therefore does not lead to substitution

between servers due to relative price changes. In the limit, as the server operating system
                                                                        εM
market becomes perfectly competitive, i.e. εM
                                            ωM → −∞ and                εM
                                                                         ω
                                                                             → 0, the PC operating system
                                                                        ωM



                                                   9
margin of the monopolist goes to the single product monopoly margin, i.e. (ω − c) → − ε1ω . At

the same time the server operating system margin goes to zero, i.e. (ωM − cM ) → 0. Hence
                              εM
generally, we would expect   εM
                               ω
                                   to decrease as competition in the market for server operating
                              ωM

systems increases. A further implication of this discussion is that a naive estimation of PC

operating system margins that ignored the complementarity between PCs and servers (as the

current literature typically does) will systematically generate incorrect results for estimated

margins. Generally, we would expect operating system margins to be over-stated by the failure

to recognize this complementarity. This could be why estimates of PC operating system margins

on the basis of elasticities appear to be much higher than their actual empirical values (e.g.

Werden, 2001, Schmalensee, 2000 and Reddy et al, 2001).



2.3.   Measuring the Relative Output Effect. While the direct impact of a uniform

quality reduction of all rivals on demand can be deduced directly from the demand estimates,

the total output effect needs to take into account the pricing reactions of rival server operating

system and hardware producers. To measure this indirect effect of a quality change on relative

output we impose the assumption of profit maximizing behavior also for all rival software and

hardware companies. A server with lower quality will command lower prices in equilibrium.

Furthermore, if PC demand is reduced as a result of lower server qualities, PC hardware sellers

will also partly accommodate by reducing their prices in order to increase demand. These

equilibrium price adjustments are crucial to measure the size of the relative output effect. We

therefore compute the equilibrium pricing response of each hardware and software producer

to a common change of quality in non-Microsoft servers given the estimated demand function

assuming a Nash equilibrium in prices. These price responses can then be used to compute

the relevant demand derivatives to determine the relative output effect (see Appendix D for

details).

   To check the robustness of our results we also estimate reduced form equations for PC

server operating systems that depend only on quality indices and the estimated price cost

                                                10
margins of the monopolist. The derivatives of this reduced form demand with respect to the

quality indices can then be used directly to calculate the relative output effect. This approach

avoids the strong structural assumptions we have to make in the first approach, but has more

ambiguities of interpretation. We show that the qualitative conclusions of the two approaches

are essentially the same (see Section 7 and Appendix F for details).



                 3.    T M   D (                         T    F #

In this section we develop the theory of foreclosure and show how different types of unobserved

heterogeneity (i.e. unobserved by both the researcher and the firms) map into foreclosure

incentives. The theoretical mechanisms that generate foreclosure incentives are all based on

theories in which competition in the server market interferes with a (privately) optimal price

discrimination strategy by the PC monopolist. By (partially) foreclosing the server market,

the monopolist can increase rent extraction by using the price of the PC and server operating

systems to target different types of customers. In this section we first develop the demand

structure that we use in the estimation and then discuss the theoretical results on foreclosure.

The latter allow us to interpret the differences in results we generate from the different estimated

demand models.



3.1.    The Model of Demand. We model individual demand as a discrete choice of “work-

group” purchases. A buyer i of type w has demand for a PC workgroup which consists of w

PCs and one server. We assume that each buyer can connect his workgroup to at most one

server.13 As before, there are J producers of PCs and K producers of servers indexed by j and

  13
     Assuming that the purchase decisions are only about the setup of a whole “workgroup” implies some impor-
tant abstractions from reality. If server systems are used for serving one workgroup we effectively assume that
the whole system is scalable by the factor 1/w. Effectively, we are capturing all potential effects of pre-existing
stocks of servers and PCs (together with their operating systems) by the distribution of ǫijk in equation (8). Since
we are assuming that this distribution is invariant over time, we are implicitly assuming that (modulo some time
trend) the distribution of stocks of computers is essentially invariant. Also note that scalability of workgroups
implies that we are not allowing for any difference in firm size directly. All such differences will be incorporated
into the distribution of the ǫijk and the parameters (β i , γ i , λi ) including a (heterogenous) constant. The idea is
to make the relationship between size and purchases as little dependent on functional form as possible.


                                                          11
k respectively14 . The index j = 0 refers to a purchase that does not include PCs while k = 0

refers to an option that does not include a server. A buyer i with workgroup size w who buys

the PCs from producer j and the server from producer k has conditional indirect utility:


                               
                                                             1
                uijk (wi ) = wi xj β i + ak yk γ i − λi [pj + pk ] + ξj + ξ k + ξ jk + ǫijk                    (8)
                                                             wi

The total price for the workgroup is given by wi pj + pk 15 and the income sensitivity of utility

of buyer i is measured by λi . The characteristics of PC j are captured by the vector xj and the

characteristics of server hardware software k are represented by the vector yk . The vectors β i

and γ i represent the marginal value of these characteristics to buyer i. We normalize quality by

assuming that the interoperability parameter a = 1 whenever server producer k has the Windows

operating system installed. We assume that ak = a ≤ 1 is the same for all non-Microsoft servers.

In the case of j = 0, (xj , pj ) is the null vector, while in the case of k = 0, (yk , pk ) is the null

vector. These represent “workgroup” purchase without a server or without PCs respectively.

The models we estimate differ in whether these choices are allowed, which captures different

assumptions about the degree of complementarity. The terms ξ j and ξ k represent unobserved

quality characteristics of the PC and server respectively, while ξ jk represents an interaction

effect between a specific PC and server type.

       The term ǫijk represents a buyer specific shock to utility for the particular workgroup se-

lected. Assumptions on the distribution of this term among customers will model the degree of

horizontal product differentiation between different workgroup offerings. Given that we make

ǫijk workgroup specific, the variables ξ jk and ǫijk capture all of the potential complementarities

between the PCs and the servers in a workgroup. In the empirical section we generally assume

  14
      For notationally simplicity we are associating one producer with one PC or server hardware type. In the
empirical work we, of course, allow for multi-product firms.
   15
      We can allow for two part tariffs by having pk take the form pk (w) = pk1 + wpk2 . This can allow for typical
pricing structures in which there is a fixed price for the server operating system and a pricing component based on
the number of users (i.e. w “Client Access Licences” have to be purchased). We can accommodate such pricing
without any problems in our approach. All that is really important for the pricing structure is that there is some
fixed component to the pricing of the monopolist’s server operating system. For simplicity we will exposit all of
the analysis below ignoring licenses based on client user numbers.


                                                        12
that ξ jk = 0 except for one model version in which ξ jk is a common shift variable for utility

whenever a buyer consumes PCs and servers together.

       Following BLP, we allow random coefficients on the parameter vector θ i = (β i , γ i , λi ) as

well as heterogeneity in the size of work groups wi (captured by a random coefficient on the

server price, λSi ≡ λi /wi ). We derive demand from the above utility function in the standard

way (see Appendix A), the key assumptions being that ǫijk comes from a double exponential

distribution and that (θi , wi ) are drawn from a multivariate normal distribution. We can then

calculate market shares, sij for buyer i of PC j as:


                                                 K
                                      δ j +µij                    eδk +µik
                             sij = e                        J      K     δj +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                                                             (9)
                                                 k=0
                                                       1+   j=1    k=0 e

and for servers as:


                                                  J
                                     δ k +µik                     eδj +µij
                            sik = e                         J      K    δ j +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                                                            (10)
                                                 j=1   1+   j=1    k=0 e

where the mean utilities are:


                          δ j = xj β − λP C pj + ξ Pj C ; δ k = ak yk γ − λS pk + ξSk                       (11)


and the “individual effects” are:


                       µij = σP C xj ν Pi C + σPp C pj ν PipC ; µik = σ S yk ν Si + σSp pk ν Sip


The (ν Pi C , ν PipC , ν Si , ν Sip ) is a vector of the normalized individual effects on the parameters and

(σ P C , σPp C , σS , σ Sp ) is the vector of standard deviations of these effects in the population. We

assume that the vector of normalized individual effects is drawn from a multivariate normal

distribution with zero mean and an identity covariance matrix.16 Notice that the individual
  16
    The choice of this distribution is ad hoc. Although the multivariate normal is the most popular choice (e.g.
BLP; Nevo, 2001), other possibilities have also been explored (e.g., Petrin, 2002). There is no evidence that the
choice of this assumption affects the estimated coefficients in any fundamental way.


                                                            13
effects, µij and µik , depend on the interaction of customer specific preferences and product

characteristics.


3.2.     Implications of customer heterogeneity for incentives to degrade interoper-

abilty. With this additional structure on demand we can gain more insight into what generates

strictly positive server operating system margins and therefore incentives to foreclose. The sign

of the relative margin effect is determined by the sign of the server margin in equation (7),

which in turn depends only on:


                                         
                     q εω M     1            q(θ, w) qM (θ, w)
               1−           =−                      −          [ε̄ω − εω (θ, w)] dP (θ)dΥ(w)   (12)
                    qM εω      εω               q      qM

where “the aggregate elasticity of demand” is:


                                        ε̄ω =     εω (θ, w)dP (θ)dΥ(w)


and P (θ) and Υ(w) are the population distribution functions of θ and w.17

    It follows that the price cost margin on servers will be positive if the own price semi-
                                                                                             
elasticity of the PC operating system, −εω , is positively correlated with q(θ,w)
                                                                              q   − qM (θ,w)
                                                                                      qM      .

This means that on average buyers with more elastic demand for PCs (a more negative εω )

than the aggregate elasticity of demand (ε̄ω ) have higher market shares in PC purchases than

in server purchases from the monopolist. Several things follow. First, the server margin will

be zero if there is no heterogeneity. Then a monopolist does best by setting the price of the

server at marginal cost and extracting all surplus through the PC operating system price. In

this case there is no incentive to foreclose rival servers. The monopolist maximizes the value

of the market by having buyers use this highest value server and thus sets the price of its own

server to marginal cost. This is possible because all rent can be extracted through the PC price

when there is no heterogeneity.

 17
      The derivation of (12) can be found in Appendix A.2, equation (33).


                                                       14
Proposition 1. If there is no demand heterogeneity in the parameter vector (θ, w), then the

“one monopoly profit” theory holds. The PC operating system monopolist sells the server

operating system at marginal cost and extracts all rents with the PC price. The monopolist

has no incentive to degrade interoperability.


   Proof.     See Appendix A.3

   In order to generate foreclosure incentives it must therefore be the case that the optimal

extraction of surplus for the monopolist involves making a margin on the server product. In

that case, competition among server operating systems reduces the margin that can be earned

on servers and thus restricts the ability of the PC monopolist to extract the maximal rent

that can be generated from that monopoly. By limiting interoperability with rival servers, the

monopolist can reduce the quality of the server rival and “restore” the margin on its own server.

In the following sub-sections we explain what kind of heterogeneities generate such incentives

and what kind of heterogeneities work against this effect.


3.3.   Imperfect Complementarity. Second degree price discrimination incentives that

lead to foreclosure require sorting by customers with low PC demand elasticities into buy-

ing the PC monopolist’s server operating system, and by customers with high PC demand

elasticities into not buying the server. Our central model generates this feature by making the

assumption that buyers do not need to buy a server in order to gain value from a workgroup

of PCs. However, servers are complements to PCs in the sense that they only have value when

they are consumed with PCs. We call this the imperfect complementarity case. To see how this

setting naturally generates foreclosure incentives let us simplify the argument by assuming a

very limited type of heterogeneity: buyers have different marginal valuations of server quality

γ i , which can be either γ̄ or 0. We also assume that there is no other heterogeneity across

consumers with respect to the server product. In particular, there is no horizontal product

differentiation with respect to using a server (i.e. ǫijk = ǫij for all k). For simplicity we analyze

the model in which there is only one brand of PC and one brand of server with the monopolist’s

                                                 15
server operating system. The latter assumption has no impact on the results.

   The basic logic of proposition 2 (below) can then be easily understood from equation (12).

Suppose the server operating system was priced at marginal cost cM < γ̄yM as in the no-

heterogeneity case. Then the market share in server sales of customers from the pool with

γ i = γ̄ is 1 and that of customers with γ i = 0 is zero. At the same time the share of the γ i = 0
                                                                          
group in PC sales is strictly positive. It follows that q(γq i ) − MqM i is strictly decreasing in
                                                                   q (γ )


γ i . In other words, low γ customers have a higher share in PC sales than in server sales. At the

same time, at any given prices for PCs and servers, the high γ customers have lower elasticity of

demand for PCs because they gain more from buying the workgroup. This means that there is a

positive correlation between the elasticity of demand of the type γ and the relative importance

of that type in PC sales. By equation (12) this implies that the server price will be strictly

greater than zero.

   Now consider that there is competition on the server operating system market. By standard

Bertrand arguments, competition between the two server products will compete down the price

of the lower quality product to no more than marginal cost, and the higher quality firm can

extract (at most) the additional value provided by its higher quality. If the rival’s server

product does not have too much higher quality it will extract all of the quality improvement

over the monopolist’s product in the server price. This means that a monopolist with the lower

quality server will generate the same profit as setting the server price at marginal cost without

competition and setting the conditionally optimal PC price. Fully foreclosing the competitor

is therefore optimal even if the competitor has arbitrarily better quality than the monopolist.

Similarly, for a rival firm with lower quality the monopolist cannot extract the full value of its

own server quality but only the improvement over the quality of the rival. Hence, reducing the

quality of the rival slightly will increase the ability to extract surplus. From this we obtain

proposition 2:


Proposition 2. Suppose that all heterogeneity between buyers is captured by ǫijk = ǫij and

                                                16
γ i ∈ {0, γ̄}. Then a pure monopolist sets the server operating system price strictly above

marginal cost. Then there exists ȳk > yM , such that for all yk ∈ (yM , ȳk ) it is optimal for

the monopolist to foreclose a competitor by fully degrading the quality of a competing server

operating system.


   Proof.     See Appendix A.3

   Proposition 2 holds because competition limits the ability of the PC operating system mo-

nopolist to optimally extract surplus. If customers with high elasticity of PC demand sort away

from servers, then server sales can be used as a second degree price discrimination device, al-

lowing the monopolist to extract more surplus from high server value/ low elasticity customers.

This effect is necessary to generate a positive server margin for the PC monopolist.

   Note that even where this foreclosure effect exists, it is not always the case that there

are marginal incentives to foreclose. For example in the above model there are no marginal

incentives to foreclose when the rival has higher quality. A small reduction in the quality has

no effect on the profits of the monopolist in that case. Only a reduction below the quality

of the incumbent will increase profits. In more general models there can even be a negative

marginal incentive to foreclose when there are global incentives to foreclose. This arises from

a vertical product differentiation effect. Locally a small increase in the quality of a higher

quality rival can lead to higher profits for the monopolist by relaxing price competition as in

a Shaked and Sutton (1992) style product differentiation model. Nevertheless, there may be

incentives to dramatically reduce quality of the rival in order to increase profits even further.

Our focus in the empirical analysis of the marginal incentives to foreclose may therefore lead to

an underestimation of the true foreclosure incentives.


3.4.   The cases of Strong Complementarity and Free Complementarity. To test the

robustness of the results from our central model we also look at a “strong” complementarity

model in which it is assumed that PCs can only be used with a server. In this case, the

mechanism of the previous sub-section cannot generate foreclosure incentives because buyers

                                               17
with low valuation of sever services cannot substitute into pure PC workgroups. Nevertheless

one can generate foreclosure incentives from a closely related mechanism. Suppose that initially

the PC operating system monopolist has a competitor in the server operating system market

that has lower quality. Although customers need a server with their PCs, those customers

with low marginal valuation of server quality have an incentive to substitute away to the lower

quality server and combine it with PCs. Then the monopolist can again use the PC and server

prices to discriminate between customers with different marginal valuations for servers. There

will be a cost in such price discrimination because the monopolist loses the margin from selling

his product, but if the gains from price discrimination are large enough, the presence of the

lower quality rival server producer will strictly increase profits by enabling price discrimination.

Suppose now that a competing high quality server supplier is added to the market (and assume

as before that the server product is homogenous to that of the monopolist up to the quality

differential). By the same argument as in the previous sub-section, this will reduce the profit

extraction possibility of the monopolist. The monopolist will have an incentive to reduce the

quality of the new rival server product below its own quality to reestablish the ability to extract

rent through second degree price discrimination.


Proposition 3. Suppose that all heterogeneity between buyers is captured by ǫijk = ǫij and

γ i ∈ {γ, γ̄}, γ̄ > γ > 0. Let φ be the proportion of the buyers with γ i = γ, and assume that

the PC operating system monopolist faces a lower quality server product that is competitively

supplied. Then there exists φ̂ > 0, such that for all φ < φ̂, the monopolist will set his server

operating system price strictly above marginal cost. Furthermore, there exists ȳk̂ > yM , such

that for all yk̂ ∈ (yM , ȳk̂ ) the monopolist will degrade the quality of server competitor k̂ as long

as interoperability can be specifically degraded for k̂ only.


   Proof.      See Appendix A.3

   It follows from proposition 3 that, relative to a model in which there is the option not to

buy the server operating system, there will be much less scope for foreclosure in this strong

                                                  18
complementarity case. The reason is that it is harder to generate a positive margin on the

server because price discrimination is costly. It involves supplying the γ buyers with a lower

quality product in order to extract more from the γ̄ buyers. Hence, the relative margin effect

will tend to be smaller. We should therefore expect lower foreclosure incentives in a model with

strong complementarity.

   We also estimate a polar case in which customers may both choose to only buy PCs or only

a server in addition to the combination of servers and PCs (“free complementarity”). The idea

is that there may be firms that keep their PC workgroups in place but purchase new servers. In

this case second degree price discrimination will be less powerful because customers who buy a

server can now come from both a group with low PC demand elasticity and no demand for PCs

at all. We would therefore expect a smaller server margin and a smaller overall relative margin

effect in such a model (which is what we find empirically).


3.5.   Some Types of Heterogeneity Reduce Foreclosure Incentives. Our theoretical

framework is flexible enough to allow the data to reveal whether or not there are foreclosure

incentives. However, it is worthwhile to note that the model does not even impose positive

server margins. Some types of heterogeneity that we allow for in our model will induce the

monopolist to implicitly subsidize server sales through a negative server margin. In that case,

foreclosure of a more efficient server rival will not be profitable.

   To see how this can arise, consider the strong complementarity model but allow for hetero-

geneity in the size of the workgroup w. In particular we assume that there are two possible

workgroup sizes w and ŵ and no other heterogeneity. For any (ω, ωM ) define the two per PC
                                                                                         
system prices Ω(w) = ω + w1 ωM and Ω(ŵ) = ω + ŵ1 ωM , where Ω(ŵ) = Ω(w) + ω M ŵ1 − w1 .

The smaller work group systematically pays a higher per unit price because there are increasing

returns with respect to the server purchase. Given that the elasticity of demand in a logit model

is increasing in the price, this means that the smaller workgroup buyer will have a higher elas-

ticity of demand at these prices as long as ωM is strictly positive. This means that the relative

                                                 19
market share in the PC market is smaller for the buyer with the higher elasticity of demand,

implying a negative correlation between elasticity of demand and relative market share in the

PC market. By equation (12) this implies that the server price will be set below the marginal

cost of the server.

   It is therefore perfectly possible for our model to generate positive or negative margins on the

server operating system. Whether we find foreclosure incentives in the server operating system

market is therefore entirely an empirical issue. Since the different effects we have discussed

will depend, as we have shown, on the type of complementarity we assume, we have estimated

different models of complementarity to explore the robustness of the results.


                            4.   E (  M  ' S  '

4.1.      Baseline Model. The baseline model of demand follows directly from theory and can

be empirically implemented in the standard fashion of BLP demand models. In the baseline

model of imperfect complementarity we allow customers to select either w PCs or a “workgroup”

of w PCs and one server. The indirect utility of the outside option is ui00 = ξ P0 C +ξ S0 +σP0 C ν Pi0C +

σS0 ν Si0 + ǫi00 , where the price of the outside good is normalized to zero. Since relative levels

of utility cannot be identified, the mean utility of one good has to be normalized to zero. As

is customary, we normalize ξ 0 to zero. The terms in ν i0 accounts for the outside alternatives’

unobserved variance.

   To connect the empirical framework with the theoretical model, we model the interoperabil-

ity parameter (a) as a multiplicative effect that customers derive from having a Microsoft (M)

server:

                             δ k = yk γ 1 + γ 2 M + γ 3 (Myk ) − λS pk + ξ k                         (13)


where M is a dummy variable equal to one if the server runs a Microsoft operating system and

zero otherwise. In this way, the interoperability parameter is captured by a combination of the

estimated coefficients and therefore we can calculate the “relative output effect” in one step

(see Appendix D for details). Given this parameterization, the relationship between the mean

                                                   20
utility for servers in equation (11) and the estimates is that γ 3 = γ(1 − a) and γ 1 = aγ, where

0 ≤ a ≤ 1 is the interoperability parameter.18 If there were no interoperability limitations

between Microsoft and non-Microsoft operating systems (a = 1), then γ 3 , the coefficient on the

interaction variable in equation (13), would be estimated as zero.


4.2.    Estimation. Our estimation strategy closely follows the spirit of the BLP estimation

algorithm, but modifies it so that “multiple product categories” (i.e. PCs and servers) can be

accommodated. In essence, the algorithm minimizes a nonlinear GMM function that is the

product of instrumental variables and a structural error term. This error term, defined as the

unobserved product characteristics, ξ = (ξ Pj C , ξ Sk ), is obtained through the inversion of the

market share equations after aggregating appropriately the individual customer’s preferences.

However, the presence of multiple product categories means that we need to compute the

unobserved term, ξ, via a category-by-category contraction mapping procedure (for a detailed

description of the algorithm followed see Appendix C).

    Implementing the contraction mapping for PCs and servers is consistent with BLP, but a

concern is that feedback loops between the two categories could alter the parameter estimates.

There is no theoretical proof we know of for a contraction mapping for random coefficient models

with complements, but we made two empirical checks on the results involving further iterations

of the algorithm across the two product categories (see Appendix C). These both lead to very

similar results to the ones presented here (details available from authors).

    The weighting matrix in the GMM function was computed using a two-step procedure. To

minimize the GMM function we used both the Nelder-Mead nonderivative search method and

the faster Quasi-Newton gradient method based on an analytic gradient.19 We combine all these

methods to verify that we reached a global instead of a local minimum.

  18
     We allow γ 2 to be freely estimated as it could reflect the higher (or lower) quality of Windows compared
to other operating systems. Alternatively, γ 2 could also reflect interoperability limitations. We examine this
possibility in a robustness exercise.
  19
     In all contraction mappings, we defined a strict tolerance level: for the first hundred iterations the tolerance
level is set to 10E-8, while after every 50 iterations the tolerance level increases by an order of ten.


                                                         21
       Standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity are calculated taking into consideration the

additional variance introduced by the simulation.20 In our benchmark specification we draw a

sample of 150 customers, but we also experiment with more draws in our robustness section.

Confidence intervals for nonlinear functions of the parameters (e.g., relative output and relative

margin effects) were computed by using a parametric bootstrap. We drew repeatedly (2,000

draws) from the estimated joint distribution of parameters. For each draw we computed the

desired quantity, thus generating a bootstrap distribution.


4.3.      Identification and instrumental variables. Identification of the population mo-

ment condition is based on an assumption and a vector of instrumental variables. Following

BLP we assume that the unobserved product level errors are uncorrelated with the observed

product characteristics. We can therefore use functions of observed computer and server charac-

teristics (in particular sums of characteristics for the firm across all its products and sums of the

characteristics of competing firms). Given the previous exogeneity assumption, characteristics

of other products will be correlated with price, since the markup for each model will depend on

the distance from its nearest competitors. To be precise, for both PCs and servers we use the

number of products produced by the firm and the number produced by its rivals, as well as the

sum of various characteristics (PCs: speed, RAM, hard drive; servers: RAM, rack optimized,

number of racks, number of models running Unix) of own and rival models.21

       We also examine the robustness of our results by varying the type of instruments used.

First, we experimented using alternative combinations of computer characteristics. Second, we

use hedonic price series of computer inputs, such as semi-conductor chips, which are classic cost

shifters. The results are robust to these two alternative sets of instruments, but they were less

powerful in the first stage. Finally, we followed Hausman (1996) and Hausman et al (1994) and
  20
     We do not correct for correlation in the disturbance term of a given model across time because it turns out
to be very small.Two features of our approach appear to account for this finding: First, firm fixed effects are
included in the estimation. Second, there is a high turnover of products, with each brand model observation
having a very short lifecycle compared to other durables like autos.
  21
     All PC instruments were calculated separately for desktops and laptops following the spirit of the Bresnahan,
Stern and Trajtenberg (1997) study of the PC market.


                                                       22
used model-level prices in other countries (such as Canada, Europe or Japan) as alternative

instruments. These instruments were powerful in the first stage, but there was evidence from

the diagnostic tests that they were invalid (see Genakos, 2004 and Van Reenen, 2004, for more

discussion).

   Finally, one important limitation of using aggregate data is that we cannot separate true

complementarity (or substitutability) of goods from correlation in customers’ preferences (see

Gentzkow, 2007). Observing that firms that buy PCs also buy servers might be evidence that

the two product categories in question are complementary. It might also reflect the fact that

unobservable tastes for the goods are correlated - that some firms just have a greater need for

“computing power”. However, notice that for our purposes such a distinction does not make a

major difference to the theoretical results - so long as there is a correlation between customers’

heterogeneous preferences for PCs and their probability of buying servers, the incentive to

foreclose can exist.


4.4.   Alternative approaches to modeling complementarity. Gentzkow (2007) and

Song and Chintagunta (2006) also consider empirical oligopolistic models that allow comple-

mentarity across product categories. Gentzkow (2007) was the first to introduce a complemen-

tarity parameter in a discrete setting. By observing individual purchase level data, he is able to

model the correlation in demand between on-line and off-line versions of the Washington Post in

a flexible way that allows for rich substitution patterns. Song and Chintagunta (2006), extend

Gentzkow by allowing for a common complementarity/substitution parameter across product

categories and applying it on aggregate data.

   Our baseline model is more restrictive in that complementarity between PCs and servers

is built in rather than estimated. This choice was driven both by our understanding of how

the market for “workgroup” purchases operates (firms buy servers not to use them on a stand

alone basis but to coordinate and organize PCs). In our baseline model customers are assumed

to buy either a PC, a bundle of a server and PC or the outside good. We also analyze two

                                                23
alternative empirical models: (i) one that assumes “strong” complementarity between the two

product categories: i.e. firms buy either a bundle or nothing, and (ii) a more general model

that allows the data to determine the degree of complementarity or substitutability between

the two products.

   Under “strong complementarity”, we write our previous model of market shares as:


                                           K
                                δ j +µij                    eδk +µik
                         sij = e                      J      K     δj +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                                             (14)
                                           k=1
                                                 1+   j=1    k=1 e

where the outside summation is from 1 to K instead of 0 to K. Similarly, for server market

share the formula is:


                                            J
                                                            eδj +µij
                         sik = eδk +µik               J      K    δ j +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                                             (15)
                                           j=1   1+   j=1    k=1 e

The rest of the assumptions and estimation details remain the same as before. Note that this

assumption restricts the data more in favor of rejecting any degradation incentives as discussed

in the theory sub-section above.

   Under the “free complementarity” model a bundle, indicated by (j, k), can include either a

server, or a workgroup of PCs, or both. Denote dP C as an indicator variable that takes the value

of one if any PC is purchased and zero otherwise; similarly we define dS to be the indicator for

servers. Each customer i, maximizes utility by choosing at each point in time, t, the bundle of

products, (j, k), with the highest utility, where utility is given by:



                          uijk = δ j + µij + δ k + µik + Γ(dP C , dS ) + ǫijk                (16)


This is identical to the baseline except we have included an additional term, Γ(dP C , dS ), that

it is not affected by a choice of particular brand once (dP C , dS ) is given and does not vary

across customers. This utility structure allows us to model complementarity or substitution at

the level of the good, i.e. PC or server, via a "free" parameter, ΓP C,S , that captures the extra

                                                      24
utility that a customer obtains from consuming these two products together over and above

the utility derived from each product independently. When ΓP C,S is positive we call PCs and

servers complements (and if negative substitutes). This model borrows directly from the work of

Gentzkow (2007), who was the first to introduce a similar parameter in a discrete setting. Our

utility model is more general in that we allow for random coefficients on the model characteristics

and prices (Gentzkow does not have price variation in his data). More importantly, our model

is designed to be estimated with aggregate market level data. We identify the ΓP C,S parameter

in the standard way, by using aggregate time series variation in server prices (in the PC demand

equation) and time series variation in PCs prices (in the server demand equation).22 Further

model and estimation details are given in Appendix E.


                                                   5.    D 

Full details of the databases are in Appendix B, but we describe them briefly here. Quarterly

data on quantities and prices between 1996Q1 and 2001Q1 was taken from the PC Quarterly

Tracker and the Server Quarterly Tracker, two industry censuses conducted by International

Data Corporation (IDC). The Trackers gather information from the major hardware vendors,

component manufacturers and various channel distributors and contains information on model-

level revenues and transaction prices.23 Unfortunately, the information on computer character-

istics is somewhat limited in IDC, so we matched more detailed PC and server characteristics

from several industry datasources and trade magazines. We concentrate on the top fourteen

computer hardware producers with sales to large businesses (over 500 employees) in the US

market to match each observation with more detailed product characteristics.24 We focus on
  22
     Song and Chintagunta (2006) also build on Gentzkow to allow for a common complementarity/substitution
parameter and apply it on store level data for detergents and softeners. We differ from Song and Chintagunta
in three ways: (i) we specify a different brand and consumer part of the utility that is closer to the original
BLP specification, (ii) we use a different set of instruments to address the issue of price endogeneity and (iii) we
implement a more robust estimation method.
  23
     Various datasets from IDC have been used in the literature (Davis and Huse, 2009; Foncel and Ivaldi, 2005;
Van Reenen, 2006; Pakes, 2003; Genakos, 2004).
  24
     These manufacturers (in alphabetical order) are: Acer, Compaq, Dell, Digital, Fujitsu, Gateway, Hewlett-
Packard, IBM, NEC, Packard Bell, Sony, Sun, Tandem and Toshiba. Apple was excluded due to the fact that
we were unable to match more detail characteristics in the way its processors were recorded by IDC.


                                                        25
large businesses as these are the main customers who clearly face a choice to use servers (see

Genakos, 2004, for an analysis of other consumer segments).

       For PCs the unit of observation is distinguished into form factor (desktop vs. laptop),

vendor (e.g. Dell), model (e.g. Optiplex), processor type (e.g. Pentium II) and processor speed

(e.g. 266 MHZ) specific. In terms of characteristics we also know RAM (memory), monitor size

and whether there was a CD-ROM or Ethernet card included. A key PC characteristic is the

performance “benchmark” which is a score assigned to each processor-speed combination based

on technical and performance characteristics.25

       Similarly, for servers a unit of observation is defined as a manufacturer and family/model-

type. We also distinguish by operating system, since (unlike PCs) many servers run non-

Windows operating systems (we distinguish six other categories: Netware, Unix, Linux, VMS,

OS390/400 and a residual category). For servers key characteristics are also RAM, the number

of rack slots,26 whether the server was rack optimized (racks were an innovation that enhanced

server flexibility), motherboard type (e.g. Symmetric Parallel Processing - SMP), and chip type

(CISC, RISC or IA32). Appendix B contains more details on the construction of our datasets.

       Potential market size is tied down by assuming that firms will not buy more than one new

PC for every worker per year. The total number of employees in large businesses is taken from

the US Bureau of Labour Statistics. Results based on different assumptions about the potential

market size are also reported.

       Table A1 provides sales weighted means of the basic variables for PCs that are used in

the specifications below. These variables include quantity (in actual units), price (in $1,000),

benchmark (in units of 1,000), memory (in units of 100MB)as well as identifiers for desktop,

CD-ROM and Ethernet card. Similarly, Table A2 provides sales weighted means of the basic

variables that are used for servers. These variables include quantity (in actual units), price (in

  25
     Benchmarks were obtained from the CPU Scorecard (www.cpuscorecard.com). Bajari and Benkard (2005)
were the first to use this variable.
  26
     Rack mounted servers were designed to fit into 19 inch racks. They allow multiple machines to be clustered
or managed in a single location and enhance scalability.


                                                      26
$1,000), memory (in units of 100MB), as well as identifiers for rack optimized, motherboard

type, each operating system used and number of racks. The choice of variables was guided by

technological innovation taking place during the late 1990s, but also developments and trends

in related markets (e.g. Ethernet for internet use or CD-ROM for multimedia).


       Table A1 shows that there was a remarkable pace of quality improvement over this time

period. Core computer characteristics have improved dramatically exhibiting average quarterly

growth of 12% for “benchmark” and RAM. New components such as the Ethernet cards that

were installed in only 19% of new PCs at the start of the period were standard in 52% of

PCs by 2001. CD-ROM were installed in 80% of new PCs in 1996 but were ubiquitous in 2001.

Furthermore, technological progress is accompanied by rapidly falling prices. The sales-weighted

average price of PCs fell by 40% over our sample period (from $2,550 to under $1,500).27


       Similar trends hold for the server market. Core characteristics, such as RAM, exhibit an

average quarterly growth of 12% over the sample period, the proportion of servers using rack-

optimization rose from practically zero at the start of the period to 40% by the end. The average

price of servers fell by half during the same period (from $13,523 to $6,471). More importantly,

for our purposes, is the dramatic rise of Windows on the server from 20% at the start of the

sample to 57% by the end. As also seen in Figure 1, this increase in Windows’ market share

comes mainly from the decline of Novell’s Netware (down from 38% at the start of the sample

to 14% by the end) and, to a lesser extent of the various flavors of Unix (down from 24% to

18%). The only other operating system to have grown is open source Linux, although at the

end of the period it had under 10% of the market.28



  27
     There is an extensive empirical literature using hedonic regressions that documents the dramatic declines in
the quality adjusted price of personal computers. See, for example, Berndt and Rappaport (2001) and Pakes
(2003).
  28
     Even Linux’s limited success, despite being offered at a zero price, is mainly confined to server functions
at the “edge” of the workgroup such as web-serving rather than the core workgroup task of file and print and
directory services (see European Commission, 2004, for more discussion). Web servers have been considered
outside the relevant market in the European Commission decision.


                                                       27
                                                6.    R #

6.1.      Main Results. We first turn to the demand estimates from a simple logit model (Table

1 for PCs and Table 2 for servers) and the full random coefficients model (Table 3), before

discussing their implications in terms of the theoretical model. The simple logit model (i.e.

µij = µik = 0) is used to examine the importance of instrumenting the price and to test

the different sets of instrumental variables discussed in the previous section for each product

category separately. Table 1 reports the results for PCs obtained from regressing ln(sjt )−ln(s0t )

on prices, brand characteristics and firm dummies. The first two columns include a full set of

time dummies, whereas the last four columns include only a time trend (a restriction that is not

statistically rejected). Column (1) reports OLS results: the coefficient on price is negative and

significant as expected, but rather small in magnitude. Many coefficients have their expected

signs - more recent generations of chips are highly valued as is an Ethernet card or CD-ROM

drive. But a key performance metric, RAM, has a negative and significant coefficient, although

the other quality measure, performance “benchmark”, has the expected positive and significant

coefficient. Furthermore, the final row of Table 1 shows that the vast majority of products

(85.5%) are predicted to have inelastic demands, which is clearly unsatisfactory.

       Column (2) of Table 1 uses sums of the number of products and their observed characteristics

offered by each firm and its rivals as instrumental variables. Treating price as endogenous

greatly improves the model - the coefficient on price becomes much more negative and most

other coefficients have now the expected signs.29 Most importantly, under 1% of models now

have inelastic demands. Columns (3) and (4) report the same comparison between the OLS

and IV results when we include a time trend instead of a full set of time dummies. Again, as

we move from OLS to IV results, the coefficient on price becomes much more negative leaving

no products with inelastic demands and all the other coefficients on PC characteristics have

the expected sign. For example, both benchmark and RAM have now positive and significant
  29
    The only exception is monitor size which we would expect to have a positive coefficient whereas it has a small
negative coefficient. This is likely to arise from the introduction of more advanced and thinner monitors of the
same size introduced in 1999-2001. These are not recorded separately in the data.


                                                       28
coefficients and virtually all products have now elastic demands. In terms of diagnostics, the

first stage results (reported in full in Table A3) indicate that the instruments have power: the

F-statistic of the joint significance of the excluded instruments is 9 in column (2) and 27 in

column (4). In the last two columns we restrict the number of instruments dropping hard

disks in column (3) and also speed in column (4). Focusing on a sub-set of the more powerful

instruments further improves our results. In the last column, for example, the first stage F-test

is 41, moving the price coefficient further away from zero, leaving no PC with inelastic demand.


   Table 2 reports similar results from the simple logit model for the server data. In columns

(1) and (2) the OLS and IV results are again reported based on regressions that include a full set

of time dummies, whereas the latter four columns include instead a time trend (a statistically

acceptable restriction). The price terms are significant, but with a much lower point estimate

than PCs. Consistent with the PC results, the coefficient on server price falls substantially

moving from OLS to IV (e.g. from -0.040 in column (3) to -0.179 in column (4)).


   Columns (4)-(6) of Table 2 experiment with different instrument sets (first stages are re-

ported in full in Table A4). Empirically, the most powerful set of instruments were the number

of models by the firm, the number of models produced by rivals firms and the sum of RAM by

rivals (used in columns (2) and (6)). We use these instruments in all columns and also include

the official series for quality-adjusted prices for semi-conductors and for hard-disks (two key

inputs for servers) in columns (4) and (5). In addition, column (5) includes sums of rivals’ char-

acteristics (rack-optimized servers, numbers of racks and use of Unix). Although the parameter

estimates are reasonably stable across the experiments, the F-test of excluded instruments in-

dicates that the parsimonious IV set of column (6) is preferred, with a F-statistic of 12.9. In

these preferred estimates we find that RAM, the number of racks (an indicator of scalability)

and type of chip appear to be significantly highly valued by customers. Most importantly, the

estimated proportion of inelastic model demands in the final row falls from over 80% in column

(3) to 22% in column (6). Notice also that the coefficient on the interaction of Windows and

                                               29
RAM is always positive and significant in the IV results which is consistent with the idea of

some interoperability constraints.30

       A sense-check on the results is to use the fact that the implied workgroup size (the number

of PCs per server) can be estimated from the ratio of the price coefficients in the PC equation to

those in the server equations. In the IV specifications, the implied workgroup size ranges from

10.6 in column (9) to 18.9 in column (2) which are plausible sizes of workgroups (e.g. Euro-

pean Commission, 2004; International Data Corporation, 1998). Our estimates of PC hardware

brand-level elasticities are within the typical range of those estimated in the literature, but

are relatively inelastic probably because we focus on large firms rather than on households.31

One diagnostic problem is that the Hansen-Sargan test of over-identification restrictions reject

throughout Tables 1 and 2, a common problem in this literature. There is some improve-

ment as we move to the preferred more parsimonious specifications, but it is a concern for the

instruments.

       Results from the baseline random coefficients model are reported in column (1) of Table 3.

The first two panels (A and B) report the mean coefficients for PCs and servers respectively.

Almost all mean coefficients are significant and have the expected sign. The lower rows (C and

D) report the results for the random coefficients. We allow random coefficients only on price

and one other basic characteristic in our baseline specification - performance benchmark for PCs

and RAM for servers.32 Our results indicate that there is significant heterogeneity in the price

coefficient for PCs and servers. For PCs, the random coefficient for the performance benchmark

has a large value and although insignificant in column (1) is significantly different from zero in

the other columns (see below). The robust finding of heterogeneity in the PC price coefficient

  30
     We also estimated models allowing other server characteristics to interact with the Microsoft dummy. These
produced similar evidence that these characteristics were less highly valued when used with a non-Microsoft
server. The other interactions were not significant, however, so we use the RAM interaction as our preferred
specification.
  31
     For various estimates of computer demand elastcities see Foncel and Ivaldi (2005), Goeree (2008), Hendel
(1999), Ivaldi and Lorincz (2008) or Stavins (1997).
  32
     We also estimated models allowing a random coefficient on the interaction of RAM with Microsoft. This was
insignificant and the implied overall effects were similar so we keep to the simpler formulation here.


                                                      30
is important for our theory as this drives the desire to price discriminate which, according to

the model, underlies the incentive to foreclose the server market.

       As a cross-check on the plausibility of the estimates it is important that the implied hardware

margins from the baseline model seem realistic for both PCs and servers. Assuming multi-

product firms and Nash-Bertrand competition in prices for PC and server hardware firms, our

derived median margin is 16% for PCs and 34% for servers. This is in line with industry

reports at the time that put the gross profit margins of the main PC manufacturers in the

range of 10%-20% and for server vendors in the range of 25%-54%.33 Furthermore, the implied

mean workgroup size of 10.2 (the ratio of the mean coefficients on PC vs. server prices) is also

reasonable.

       Figure 2 plots the calculated relative output and operating system margin effects based on

these coefficients (together with the 90% confidence interval).34 Server operating system margins

are higher than PC operating system margins (as indicated by relative margins well in excess of

unity). Note that the operating system margin differences are similar to some crude industry

estimates.35 The higher margin on servers than PC operating systems reflects both greater

customer sensitivity to PC prices, but more interestingly the finding that there is significant

heterogeneity in the effects of price on demand across customers. According to proposition 2

this heterogeneity creates incentives for the PC monopolist to use the server market as a price

discrimination device by charging a positive server margin. The positive value of the relative

output effect indicates that reducing interoperability has a cost to Microsoft which is the loss of

PC demand (due to complementarity). The shaded area in Figure 2 indicates where we estimate

that Microsoft has significant incentives to degrade interoperability.
  33
      See International Data Corporation (1999a,b). The numbers are also consistent with other results in the
literature. For example, Goeree (2008), using a different quarterly US data set for 1996-1998, reports a median
margin of 19% for PCs from her preferred model, whereas ours is 16%.
   34
      Figure A1 in the Appendix plots the calculated relative output and margin effects together with the 95%
confidence interval.
   35
      Large businesses will enjoy more discounts than individuals, so we cannot simply look at list prices. IDC
(1999, Table 1) estimate server operating environment revenues for Windows as $1,390m million and license
shipments for Windows NT were as 1,814 (Table 4). This implies a “transaction price” for a Windows server
operating system (including CALs) as $766. Similar caluclations for PC operating systems are around $40,
suggesting a relative margin 19 to 1 similar to Figure 1.


                                                      31
   Four key findings stand out in Figure 2. First, looking at the period as a whole, the relative

margin effect exceeds the output effect from the end of 1996 onwards indicating incentives to

degrade interoperability. Second, the two effects trend in opposite directions with the relative

output effect decreasing and the relative margin steadily increasing. By the end of our sample

period in 2001, the difference between the two effects takes its largest value with the relative

margin effect clearly dominating the relative output effect. Third, the two lines diverge around

the end of 1999 and beginning of 2000. These dates coincide with the release of the new

Microsoft operating system (Windows 2000). The European anti-trust case hinged precisely

on industry reports that Windows 2000 contained interoperability limitations that were much

more severe than any previous version on Windows (European Commission, 2004). Fourth,

the relative output effect is very small and very close to zero from 1999 onwards. This means

that foreclosure inducing activities would have had cost Microsoft very little in terms of lost

PC operating system sales. As we will show later these four findings are robust to alternative

empirical models of complementarity and a battery of robustness tests.

   The increase in the relative server-PC margin is mainly driven by the increase in the absolute

value of the PC own price elasticity. This is likely to be caused by the increasing “commodifica-

tion” of PCs over this time period linked to the increasing entry of large numbers of PC brands

by low cost manufacturers (e.g. Dell and Acer) as the industry matured and cheaper produc-

tion sites in Asia became available. The relative output effect is declining primarily because

the aggregate number of servers sold was rising faster than the number of PCs, which is related

to the move away from mainframes to client-server computing (see Bresnahan and Greenstein,

1999). Thus, a marginal change in interoperabilty had a smaller effect on loss of PC quantity

(relative to the gain in servers) in 2001 than in 1996.



6.2.   Alternative empirical models of complementarity. We now move to the two

alternative models discussed in sub-section 3.4. The first (strong complementarity) restricts the

form of complementarity in the baseline model and the second (free complementarity) relaxes

                                               32
it.


      Strong Complementarity. Under strong complementarity customers can only buy the

PC-server bundle or the outside good, i.e. they cannot purchase a standalone PC as in the

baseline empirical model of the previous sub-section. Column (2) of Table 3 presents the

simplest version of strong complementarity where we assume random coefficients on PC prices,

the PC performance benchmark, and servers’ prices. The mean coefficients are estimated more

precisely than in the baseline model of column (1) and there seems to be significant heterogeneity

in both price (and performance benchmark) for PCs but not in servers. Columns (3) and (4)

of Table 3 add progressively more random coefficients. The estimated mean coefficients retain

their magnitude and significance and again there appears to be significant heterogeneity for the

PC price and characteristics (column (4) also suggests some heterogeneity on the constant for

servers).

      Figure 3 plots the calculated relative margin and output effects and confidence interval

based on the estimated results from column (4) of Table 3. Consistent with the theory (see

Proposition 3) the relative margin is smaller than in the baseline case. This is because it is

harder to generate a positive margin on the server because price discrimination is more costly.

Ruling out the possibility of customers switching into PC-only purchases limits the scope for

using servers as a price discrimination device to extract rents from the PC market. Nevertheless,

even in this restricted model, after mid 1998 significant incentives to degrade interoperability

still exist as the relative output effect remains low.


      Free Complementarity. Our most general model is presented in the last column of Table

3 where we allow customers to purchase standalone servers (as well as standalone PCs, bundles

of PCs and servers or the outside good), and let complementarity to be freely estimated through

the parameter ΓP C,S . The estimated ΓP C,S parameter is positive and significant, confirming

our previous assumption and intuition that PCs and servers are complements. The mean and

random coefficients all exhibit similar patterns to the baseline results with evidence of significant

                                                 33
heterogeneity in price (for servers and PCs) and significant heterogeneity in customers’ valuation

of PC quality (benchmark) but not server quality (RAM). Figure 4 plots the relative output

and margin effects and their confidence interval. Again, the relative margin is somewhat lower

than under the baseline model of column (1) which is consistent with Proposition 3. This is

because second degree price discrimination is less powerful because customers who buy servers

now come from a group with both low PC demand elasticity and no demand for PCs at all.

Nevertheless, we still find incentives to degrade interoperability towards the end of the sample

period. Relative output effects remain small. Given that this is a much more demanding

specification, the consistency of results with our baseline case is reassuring.36


                                             7.   R#       

Table 4 reports various robustness tests of the baseline model (reproduced in column (1) and

in Figure 5A to ease comparisons) to gauge the sensitivity of the results to changes in our

assumptions. We show that the basic qualitative result that there were incentives to degrade

interoperability is robust. First, we vary the number of random draws following the Monte

Carlo evidence from Berry, Linton and Pakes (2004) for the BLP model. In column (2) we

increase the number of draws to 500 (from 150 in the baseline model). The estimated results

are very similar to our baseline specification, the only exception being that the PC benchmark

now has a significant random coefficient. Unsurprisingly, the calculated relative output and

margin effects in Figure 5B exhibit the same pattern as in Figure 5A.

       In column (3) and (4) of Table 4 we make different assumptions about the potential market

size. In column (3) we assume that firms will only make a purchase decision to give all employees

a computer every two years, essentially reducing the potential market size by half. In column

(4) we assume that the potential market size is asymmetric, whereby firms purchase a PC every

year whereas they purchase a server bundle every two years. In both experiments the estimated
  36
    The reason why we do not use this model as our baseline is because estimation of the free complementarity
was significantly slower to converge and more sensitive to starting values (causing convergence problems). Since
identification of both the random coefficients and the ΓP C,S parameter come solely from time variation, these
problems are hardly surprising given the limited time span of our data.


                                                      34
coefficients are hardly changed and Figures 5C and 5D are similar.

   In columns (5) and (6) of Table 4 we reduce the number of instruments used for both the

PCs and servers. On the one hand, using the most powerful instruments increases the absolute

value of the coefficients. For example, the mean coefficient on PC price increases from -3.301 in

the baseline model to -3.622 and -5.598 in columns (5) and (6) respectively. On the other hand,

using fewer instruments means that we are reducing the number of identifying restrictions and

this is reflected in higher standard errors. As a result very few coefficients are significant in

column (6). Despite these differences, Figures 5E and 5F reveal a qualitative similar picture as

before.

   In the final two columns of Table 4 we experiment using different random coefficients. In

column (7), we add a random coefficient on the constant in both equations. The estimated

coefficients indicate no significant heterogeneity for the outside good at the 5% level for either

PCs or servers. In column (8) we reduce the number of estimated random coefficients by

allowing only a random coefficient on server price. As before, both the estimated coefficients

and calculated effects in Figures 5G and 5H look similar to our baseline specification: at the

beginning of our sample the relative output effect dominates the relative margin effect, but by

the end of 2000 the ordering is clearly reversed indicating strong incentives from Microsoft’s

perspective to reduce interoperability.

   So far, to measure the relative output effect we relied heavily on our structural demand

model to compute the equilibrium pricing response of each hardware and software producer

to a common change of quality in non-Microsoft servers. As a final robustness test we also

consider an alternative approach to estimating the relative output effect, which considers only

the “reduced form” residual demand equations for Microsoft servers and PCs. Since these will

be a function of non-Microsoft quality (and other variables), we can use the coefficients on these

to calculate the output effects of degradation directly. Appendix F gives the details and shows

that relative margins continue to lie far above the relative output effect. The relative output

                                               35
effect is 4 or less, far below the mean relative margin estimated at around 20 in Figure 2. So

even this simpler, less structural approach, suggests strong incentives for Microsoft to reduce

interoperability.


                                       8.   C # 

In this paper we examine the incentives for a monopolist to degrade interoperability in order to

monopolize a complementary market. These type of concerns are very common in foreclosure

cases such as the European Commission’s landmark 2004 Decision against Microsoft. Structural

econometric approaches to examining the plausibility of such foreclosure claims have generally

been unavailable. This paper seeks to provide such a framework, developing both a new theory

and a structural econometric method based upon this theory.

   In our model, the incentive to reduce rival quality in a secondary market comes from the

desire to more effectively extract rents from the primary market that are limited inter alia by the

inability to price discriminate. We detail a general model of heterogeneous demand and derived

empirically tractable conditions under which a monopolist would have incentives to degrade

interoperability. We then implement our method in the PC and server market, estimating

demand parameters with random coefficients and allowing for complementarity. According to

our results it seemed that Microsoft had incentives to decrease interoperability at the turn of

the 21st century. In our view, the combination of theory with strong micro-foundations and

detailed demand estimation advances our ability to confront complex issues of market abuse.

   There are many limitations to what we have done and many areas for improvement. First,

our model is static, whereas it is likely that dynamic incentives are also important in foreclosure

(e.g. Carlton and Waldman, 2002). An important challenge is how to effectively confront

such dynamic theoretical models with econometric evidence (see, for example, Lee, 2010). In

the context of the Microsoft case, it is likely that the dynamic effects would strengthen the

incentive to foreclose as the European Commission (2004) argued. Second, we have used only

market-level data but detailed micro-information on the demand for different types of PCs and

                                                36
servers could lead to improvements in efficiency (see Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen, 2011, for

examples of such detailed IT data). Although we have gone some of the way in the direction

of endogenising one characteristic choice (interoperability decisions) there is still a long way to

go.

                                         R    
 [1] Abel, J., Berndt, E. and White, C. (2007) “Price Indices for Microsoft’s Personal Computer
     Software Products” in Berndt, E. and Hulten, C. (eds) Hard to Measure Goods and Services,
     Chicago: Chicago University Press.
 [2] Adams, W. and Yellen, J. (1976) “Commodity Bundling and the Burden of Monopoly”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 475 — 498.
 [3] Angrist, Josh and Stephen Pischke (2009) Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton:
     Princeton University Press
 [4] Bajari, P. and L. Benkard (2005) “Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous Customers and
     Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach”, Journal of Political Economy,
     113 (6), 1239-1276.
 [5] Bernheim, D. and Whinston, M. (1998) “Exclusive Dealing”, Journal of Political Economy,
     106(1), 64-103.
 [6] Berndt, E., and Rappaport (2001) “Price and Quality of Desktop and Mobile Personal
     Computers: a Quarter Century Overview”, American Economic Review, 91(2), 268-71.
 [7] Berry, S., Levinson, J., and Pakes, A. (1995) “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium”,
     Econometrica, 63, 841-90.
 [8] Berry, S., Linton, O., and Pakes, A. (2004) “Limit Theorems for Estimating the Parameters
     of Differentiated Product Demand Systems”, Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 613-654.
 [9] Bloom, N., Draca, M. and Van Reenen, J. (2011) “Trade Induced Technical Change”,
     Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper no. 1000.
[10] Bork, R. (1978) The Antitrust Paradox, New York: Free Press
[11] Bowman, W. (1957) “Tying Arrangements and the Leverage Problem” Yale Law Journal
     67, 19-36

[12] Bresnahan, T., S. Stern and M. Trajtenberg (1997) “Market Segmentation and the Sources
     of Rents from Innovation: Personal Computers in the late 1980s”, RAND Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 28, S17-S44.

[13] Bresnahan, T. and Greenstein, S. (1999) “Technological Competition and the Structure of
     the Computer Industry” Journal of Industrial Economics, pp. 1-40.
[14] Carlton, D. and Waldman (2002), “The Strategic Use of Tying to Preserve and Create
     Market Power in Evolving Industries”, RAND Journal of Economics, 33 (2), 194-220.
[15] Davis, P. and Huse. C. (2009) “Estimating the Co-ordinated Effects of Mergers”, mimeo,
     Stockholm School of Economics.

                                                37
[16] European Commission (2004) “Commission Decision of 23.04.04 relating to the Case
     COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft”
[17] Farrell, J. and Katz (2000) “Innovation, Rent Extraction and Integration in Systems”
     Journal of Industrial Economics, 48(4), 413-432
[18] Foncel, J. and M. Ivaldi (2005) “Operating System Prices in the Home PC Market”, Journal
     of Industrial Economics, 53(2), 265-297.
[19] Genakos, C. (2004) “Differential Merger Effects: The Case of the Personal Computer
     Industry”, mimeo, London Business School.
[20] Gentzkow, M. (2007) “Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity: Online
     Newspapers”, American Economic Review, 97(3), 713-744.
[21] Goeree, A. S. (2008) “Limited Information and Advertising in the US Personal Computer
     Industry”, Econometrica, 76(5) 1017-1074.
[22] Hausman J. A., G. Leonard and J. D. Zona (1994) “Competitive Analysis with Differenti-
     ated Products”, Annales D’ Economie at de statistique, 34, 159-180.
[23] Hausman J. A. (1996). “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competi-
     tion” in T. F. Bresnahan and R. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods. Chicago:
     National Bureau of Economic Research.
[24] Hendel, Igal (1999) “Estimating Multiple Discrete Choice Models: an Application to Com-
     puterization Returns”, Review of Economic Studies, 66(2), 423-446.
[25] International Data Corporation (1998) IDC Server Market Methodology, Database Struc-
     ture and Definitions IDC Report No. 15909R.
[26] International Data Corporation (1999a) Server Operating Environment and Platform Re-
     port.
[27] International Data Corporation (1999b) Client Operating Environments: 1999 Worldwide
     markets and trends IDC Report No. 19477.
[28] Ivaldi, M. and S. Lörincz (2008) “Implementation Relevant Market Tests in Antitrust
     Policy: Applications to Computer Servers”, Review of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
[29] Lee, R. (2010) “Dynamic Demand Estimation in Platform and Two Sided Markets”, New
     York University mimeo.
[30] McAfee, J., McMillan, J. and Whinston, M. (1989) “Multiproduct Monopoly, Commodity
     Bundling, and Correlation of Values”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104 (2) 371-383.
[31] Nelder, J. A. and R. Mead (1965) “A Simplex Method for Function Minimization”, Com-
     puter Journal, 7, 308-313.
[32] Nevo, A. (2001) “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry”, Econo-
     metrica, 69, 307-342.
[33] Nevo, A. (2003) “New Products, Quality Changes and Welfare Measures Computed from
     Estimated Demand Systems” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2), 266-275.
[34] Oyer, P (1998) “Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on Busi-
     ness Seasonality”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 149-185.

                                             38
[35] Pakes, A. (2003) “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indices with an Application to PC’s”,
     American Economic Review, 93 (5), 1578-1596.
[36] Petrin A. (2002) “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan”,
     Journal of Political Economy, 110, 705-729.
[37] Reddy, B., Evans, D., Nichols, A. and Schmalensee, R. (2001) “A Monopolist would still
     charge more for Windows: A Comment on Werden”, Review of Industrial Organization,
     18, 263-268.
[38] Rey, P. and Tirole, J. (2007) “A Primer on Foreclosure”, Handbook of Industrial Organi-
     zation Volume III, Armstrong, M. and Porter, R. (eds) 2145-2220.
[39] Schmalensee, R. (1984) “Gaussian demand and commodity bundling”, Journal of Business,
     57(1) 211-30.
[40] Schmalensee, R. (2000) “Anti-trust issues in Schumpeterian Industries” American Eco-
     nomic Review, 90, 192-196.
[41] Song, I. and Chintagunta, P. (2006) “Measuring cross-category price effects with aggregate
     store data” Management Science, 52 (10) 1594-1609.
[42] Shaked, A. and Sutton, J. (1992) “Relaxing price competition through product differenti-
     ation” Review of Economic Studies, 49 (1), 3-13.
[43] Stavins, J. (1997) “Estimating Demand elasticities in a differentiated product industry:
     The Personal Computer market” Journal of Economics and Business, 49, 347-36
[44] Van Reenen, J. (2004) “Is there a market for workgroup servers?”, Centre for Economic
     Performance Discussion Paper No.650.
[45] Van Reenen, J. (2006) “The Growth of Network Computing: Quality adjusted price changes
     for network servers” Economic Journal, 116, F29-F44
[46] Werden, G. (2001) “Microsoft’s pricing of Windows and the economics of derived demand
     monopoly” Review of Industrial Organization, 18, 357-262.
[47] Whinston, M. (1990) “Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion”, American Economic Review,
     80(4) 837-59
[48] Whinston, M. (2001) “Exclusivity and Tying in U.S. v. Microsoft: What We Know and
     Don’t Know” Journal of Economic Perspectives (15), Spring, 63-80.




                                              39
                                             Appendices
                                            A. P
A.1. Deriving market shares. To derive the market shares for an individual i we follow
BLP and allow random coefficients on the parameter vector θi = (β i , γ i , λi ) as well as hetero-
geneity in the size of work groups wi . The latter can be captured by a random coefficient on
the server price λSi ≡ λi /wi . We derive demand from the above utility function in the standard
way.
    First, define the set of realizations of the unobserved variables that lead to the choice of a
given system jk across all types of customers as:

             Bjk (xj , yk , pj , pk , a, w) = {θi , ξ j , ξ k , ǫijk |uijk (w)  uilm (w), for all l, m}

Using the population distribution function dP (θ), we can aggregate demands to generate the
probability that a buyer of workgroup size w will purchase system jk as:


                           sjk (w) =                                 dP (θ, ξ j , ξ k , ǫijk | w)          (17)
                                         Bjk (xj ,yk ,pj ,pk ,a,w)


where sjk is the probability of buying a PC-server bundle      jk. The total demand for PCs of
type j from users of system jk is then given by qjk      = L   wsjk (w)dΥ(w), where Υ(w) is the
population distribution of workgroup sizes and L wdΥ(w) is the maximum number of PCs
that could possibly be sold to all buyers of all types. This means that L is the maximal number
of potential workgroups (market size). To generate the demand for a PC of type j, we aggregate
these demands across all server options to qj = L wsj (w)dΥ(w), where sj (w) = K     k=0 sjk (w).
The demand for server k from users of system jk is analogously given by qk = L sk (w)dΥ(w)
where sk = Jj=0 sjk .37 The demand for PC operating systems is then given by aggregating over
                     
all PC sales: q = L ws(w)dΥ(w), where s = Jj=1 sj . Let M be the set of server sellers k that
run the server operating system sold by the same firm as the PC operating      system. Then the
demand for server operating systems for firm M is given by qM = L           k∈M sk (w)dΥ(w) and
                                         S
                                                K
the demand for all servers is given by q = L        k=1 sk (w)dΥ(w). We will assume in everything
that follows that ǫijk comes from a double exponential distribution, so that conditional on θi ,
sjk (θi ) has the familiar logit form. For PCs this is given by
                                              K
                                                                      eδk +µik
                            sij = eδj +µij                  J          K     δj +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                                                           (18)
                                             k=0
                                                 1+         j=1        k=0 e

and for servers this is given by
                                              J
                                                                      eδj +µij
                            sik = eδk +µik                  J          K    δ j +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                                                           (19)
                                             j=1   1+       j=1        k=0 e

  37
    Note that we are summing up from 0 to J here, because we allow for the possibility that a buyer has an
existing PC work group and simply adds a server. This possibility is allowed in some of our estimations and not
in others.


                                                           40
Own price elasticity for PC operating system


                                              q(θ i )
                                  εω = −              wλs00 (θ i )dP (θ)                      (20)
                                                q
whereas, own price elasticity for monopolist’s server operating system is

                                            qM (θi )
                            εM
                             ωM = −                  λ[1 − sM (θi )]dP (θ)                    (21)
                                             qM

Cross price elasticity for PC operating system with respect to monopolist’s server operating
system price


                                       qM       qM (θi )
                            εωM = −                      wλs00 (θi )dP (θ)                    (22)
                                        q        qM
and the cross price elasticity for monopolist’s server operating system with respect to PC oper-
ating system price is


                                              q(θi )
                                  εM
                                   ω =−              wλs00 (θi )dP (θ)                        (23)
                                                q


A.2.   Derivation of individual specific elasticities.

                                                          J      K
                                    1            ∂        j=1    k=0 sjk (θ i )
                    εω (θ i ) =          wL(θi )
                                  q(θi )                        ∂ω
                                                               J     K
                                                                                          
                                                                           δ j +δ k
                                    1             ∂             j=1   k=0 e
                             =           wL(θi )                  J     K
                                  q(θi )         ∂ω 1 +           j=1   k=0 e
                                                                               δ j +δ k

                             = −λs00 (θ i )                                                   (24)

and

                                                                J      K
                                      1             ∂ j=1 k=0 sjk (θi )
                        εωM (θi ) =         wL(θi )                                           (25)
                                    q(θ i )                ∂ωM
                                                  qM (θi )
                                  = −wλs00 (θi )                                              (26)
                                                    q(θi )



                                                                J
                                      1             ∂           j=1    k∈M   sjk (θ i )
                       εM
                        ω (θi )   =          M(θi )
                                    qM (θi )                          ∂ωM
                                  = −wλs00 (θi )                                              (27)

                                                     41
                                                               J
                                      1             ∂          j=1        k∈M   sjk (θi )
                      εM
                       ωM (θi )   =          L(θi )
                                    qM (θi )                          ∂ωM
                                  = −λ            sk (θ i )                                                     (28)
                                            k∈M
                                             /


To generate the aggregate elasticities we simply need to add up the frequency-weighted indi-
vidual elasticities:

                                          q(θ i )
                              εω =                εω (θi )dP (θ)
                                            q
                                            q(θi )
                                      = −           wλs00 (θi )dP (θ)                                           (29)
                                                q



                                       q(θ i )
                          εω M    =            εωM (θi )dP (θ)
                                         q
                                      qM        qM (θi )
                                  = −                    wλs00 (θ i )dP (θ)                                     (30)
                                       q         qM



                                          q(θi ) M
                             εM
                              ω       =         ε (θi )dP (θ)
                                            q ω
                                            q(θ i )
                                      = −           wλs00 (θ i )dP (θ)                                          (31)
                                               q



                                      qM (θi ) M
                          εM
                           ωM     =           ε (θi )dP (θ)
                                       qM ωM
                                        qM (θi )
                                  = −            λ[1 − sM (θ i )]dP (θ)                                         (32)
                                          qM

We can then determine the sign of ωM and ω by noting that
                                           
                   q                    q(θ i ) qM (θi )
                     εω − εω =                  −          [wαs00 (θi )] dP (θ)                                 (33)
                  qM M                    q         qM
                                         
                                           q(θ i ) qM (θi )
                                  = −             −           [εω (θi )] dP (θ)
                                              q       qM
                                      
                                        q(θ i ) qM (θi )
                                  =             −          [ε̄ω − εω (θ i )] dP (θ)
                                          q         qM

                                                           q(θi )       qM (θi )
                                                                                     
where the last equality comes from subtracting −               q      −    qM            ε̄dP (θ) = 0 from the second
                                
line, where ε̄ =    εω (θi )dP (θ) .


                                                   42
     For ω, the price of PC operating systems we obtain that it is proportional to:

                                                                                      
          qM M                            M(θ i ) − qM (θi ) qM (θi ) qM (θ i ) q(θi )
             ε − εM      =    αws00 (θi )                            +                   dP (θ)
           q ω    ωM
                                          wM(θi ) − q(θi ) qM           q(θi ) q
                                                
                             qM                   q(θ i ) qM (θi )
                           −       αws00 (θ i )          −         dP (θ)                         (34)
                              q                     q      qM

A.3. Proofs of Theoretical Propositions. Proof of Proposition 1: Note first that
εω (θ, w) = ε̄ω when there is no heterogeneity. It follows that the expression in (12) is zero and
the price cost margin on the server operating system must be zero for any set of PCs and servers
offered in the market. But then by (2) the impact of an increase in the quality of a rival server
                             dq(pj ,pk ,a)
operating system is (ω − c)      da        |ω,ωM > 0. The inequality is strict since there will be some
buyers who substitute from buying no workgroup at all to buying a workgroup with the server
operating system of the rival when the server operating system quality of the rival is increased.
Hence, a quality increase in a rival server operating system can only increase the profits of the
PC operating system monopolist. QED.
    For proposition 2 we specialize the model to having one brand of PC and one brand of
server, each with an operating system provided by the monopolist. We also assume that (beyond
differences in γ), there is no heterogeneity in the marginal valuation of a server product, i.e.
ǫijk = ǫij0 for all k.
    Proof of Proposition 2: We first show that q(γ)             qM (γ)
                                                           q − q M is strictly decreasing in γ and
that −εω (γ) is also strictly decreasing. This establishes that in the absence of a rival server
product ωM > cM . We then show that if there is a firm with a higher (but not too high) server
quality in the market, the monopolist will always want to foreclose it. First note that:
     
 1       ∂q(γ)/∂γ ∂qM (γ)/∂γ            wqM (γ) − sM (γ)q(γ) qM (γ)(1 − sM (γ))
                 −                 =                        −                                             (35)
yM           q       qM                          q                  qM
                                        qM (γ) − sM (γ) q(γ)
                                                         w     qM (γ)(1 − sM (γ))
                                   <                         −
                                                qM                    qM
                                        qM (γ)(1 − sM (γ)) − sM (γ)( q(γ)
                                                                      w − qM (γ)) − qM (γ)(1 − sM (γ))
                                   =
                                                                       qM
                                        −sM (γ)( q(γ)
                                                  w − qM (γ))
                                   =                          <0
                                                  qM

where the first inequality follows from the fact that q/w > qM , since all buyers of servers buy
w PCs, but there are some buyers of PCs who do not buy servers. The next equality follows
by expanding qM (γ) − sM (γ) q(γ)                                           q(γ)
                                w and the last inequality follows because ( w − qM (γ)) > 0 by
the same argument we used for q/w > qM . Now note that

                                                                 1
                       −εω (γ) = λs00 = λ                                    λ      ,
                                                             βxj −λpj +γyM − w pM
                                            1 + eβxj −λpj   +e

which is decreasing in γ. It follows that q(γ) qM (γ)
                                            q − qM and −εω (γ) move in the same direction in
γ, which implies by (12) that ωM > cM . Now consider a server rival k entering the market. We

                                                   43
only consider equilibria in which firms set prices no lower than marginal cost. First consider the
case ayk < yM . Suppose for contradiction that 0 < γayk − wλ pk < γyM − wλ pM . Then the buyer
only purchases the server M and locally the offering of rival k does not matter for the price
incentives of the monopolist, so that M is at a monopoly optimum. In that case k would have
an incentive to set pk below − wλ γ[yM − ayk ] + pM as long as this is strictly positive. Otherwise
the quality is too low to affect the monopolist. If (pj , pM ) are not optimal in the monopoly
case, then there is an incentive to slightly change pM and pj , so that this would not be an
                                            λ
equilibrium either. Now suppose γayk − w      pk > γyM − wλ pM ≥ 0. Then there exists ε such that
                                    ′     w
the monopolist can undercut to pM = λ [γyM − γayk ] + pk − ε > 0. At this price the surplus
gained from the server purchase is virtually unchanged for any buyer purchasing the server, so
that PC demand is unchanged. But now the monopolist gains a margin of γyM −γayk +pk −ε on
the server sales as well. Hence, there is a profitable deviation as long as pk > −w (γyM − γayk ).
Hence, in equilibrium, pM = w[γyM − γayk ]. It follows that decreasing a strictly increases pM =
γw[yM − ayk ] as long as the quality of the new producer is high enough to impose a competitive
constraint. Now consider the case ayk > yM . If pk > wγ[ayk − yM ] + pM then k makes no
sale but can always make a sale by charging wγ[ayk − yM ] + pM − ε. This will be profitable if
pM > −wγ(ayk − yM ). Hence, in equilibrium pk ≤ wγ[ayk − yM ] and pM = 0.
   Now let φ be the proportion of buyers with γ = 0 and let p∗j be the non-discriminatory price
that maximizes (pj − c)(φq(0) + (1 − φ)q(γ)). Suppose that the monopolist sets pj = p∗j and
pM = 0. Then the best response of k is to set k as to solve:

                                             max              pk q(γ, pk , p∗j )
                                     pk ∈[0, w
                                             λ
                                               γ[yM −ayk ]]


                                                                                             ∂q
Since pk ≤ w  λ γ[ayk − yM ], there exists ȳk > yM such that for all yk < ȳk and a, q + pk ∂pk > 0.
Hence for quality differences that are not too large firm k will set the maximal feasible price.
This implies that the net benefit of a buyer from the server is given by w     λ γyM . Hence, setting
p∗j is a best response and the profits for the monopolist are the same as if setting a single price.
Since the best response functions are contractions on the relevant domain, this equilibrium is
unique. We have earlier shown that the monopolist makes higher profits by price discriminating
(namely setting a positive margin on the server), it follows that profits are reduced in this
equilibrium. Note that slightly reducing quality of k does not lead to higher profits. Only when
ayk < yM do profits increase. It follows that a = 0 is the optimal choice of interoperability if
yk < ȳk .
    Proof of Proposition 3: We assume that the competitive server product will be offered at
a price of zero. The buyer will therefore get a rent from buying the competitive server product
equal to γ i yk . Since yM > yk , the PC operating system monopolist can, at given price pj ,
charge any server price below w λ γ[yM − yk ] and sell to all buyers who purchase a server. Note
that whenever the server price is below this benchmark, the buyers only care about the total
system price pj + pwM . Any candidate equilibrium in which the monopolist makes all the server
sales can therefore be induced setting pM = wλ γ[yM − yk ]. Let p∗j be the price of the PCs in
such a candidate equilibrium. It solves the first order condition

                                                                         ∂Dγ
                            (pj + w
                                  λ γ[yM − yk ] − c − cM )φ ∂pj + φDγ
                            w                                          ∂D
                   +(pj +   λ γ[yM   − yk ] − c − cM )(1 − φ) ∂pjγ̄ + (1 − φ)Dγ̄ = 0


Since γ̄ customers have a rent that exceeds that of γ customers by (γ̄ − γ)yk , it follows that

                                                       44
−εω (γ) > −εω (γ̄). And hence,

                             w                               ∂Dγ̄
                     (pj +     γ[yM − yk ] − c − cM )(1 − φ)      + (1 − φ)Dγ̄ > 0.
                             λ                               ∂pj

The monopolist could therefore gain profits on γ̄ customers by increasing the price above pM =
w                   ∗∗          w              w
λ γ[yM −ayk ]. Let pM (pj ) ∈ ( λ γ[yM −yk ], λ γ̄[yM −yk ]] be the price that maximizes π γ̄ (pj , pM ) =
(pj + pM − c − cM )Dγ̄ (pj , pM ) for given pj . Then by setting the price to p∗∗   ∗
                                                                                M (pj ) the monopolist
gains from γ̄ types and looses margin on γ types for a net effect of:

                                p∗∗  ∗
                                 M (pj )       ∂πγ̄ (pj , ξ)       w
                    (1 − φ)                                  dξ − ( γ[yM − yk ] − cM )φDγ                  (36)
                               w
                               λ
                                 γ[yM −ayk ]     ∂pM               λ

                     w
Since p∗∗    ∗
         M (pj ) > λ γ[yM − yk ] for all φ, it follows that (36) strictly exceeds zero for φ small
enough. Since this also holds for lower pj , the monopolist will in equilibrium leave γ types to
buy lower quality servers in order to better price discriminate between γ and γ̄ types.
    Now introduce a server competitor with yk̂ > yM . Note that the monopolist would not
be able to make a server sale in equilibrium at any price pM above w           λ γ[yM − yk ] because γ
consumers would not buy, and firm k̂ would sufficiently reduce the price to make all the sales
since it has higher quality. But then the rent from the server purchase of a γ̄ producer is strictly
larger than ayk . This implies that an increase in pj would increase profits for the monopolist
from γ̄ consumers. Hence, the monopolist can reduce pM by dpM and increase pj by dpj , leave
the profits on the γ consumers unchanged, and increase profits on the γ̄ consumers. Hence,
pM = 0 in equilibrium and pk̂ ≤ wλ γ̄[yk̂ − yM ], leaving a rent of at least w     λ γ̄yM . The optimal
pj that maximizes profits when the M server is offered at 0 prices and a uniform price is set.
Call this price p̂j . This must be equal to p∗j + wλ γ[yM − yk ]. As in the proof of proposition 2 it
will now be true that there exists ȳk̂ such that p̂k = w λ γ̄[yk̂ − yM ] for all yk̂ ∈ (yM , yk̂ ) if p̂j is
charged. Furthermore, the net rent left from the server at the price p̂k is the same as the rent
if the product k̂ were not around. It follows by the same arguments as those of proposition 2
that the monopolist will want to fully exclude all firms k̂ with quality levels yk̂ ∈ (yM , ȳk̂ ).


                                    B. D  A44 5
As noted in the Data section, quarterly data on quantities and prices38 between 1995Q1 and
2001Q1 was taken from the PC and Server quarterly trackers conducted by International Data
Corporation’s (IDC). The PC tracker provided disaggregation by manufacturer, model name,
form factor,39 chip type (e.g. 5th Generation) and processor speed bandwidth (e.g. 200-300
MHz). Similarly the server tracker provides disaggregation by manufacturer, model name,
chip type (Risc, Cisc, Intel) and operating system. Basic characteristics are also available on
CPU numbers, CPU capacity, whether the server was “rack optimized” and the number of
racks. In order to obtain more detailed product characteristics, we matched each observation
in the IDC dataset with information from trade sources such as the Datasources catalogue and
  38
     Prices are defined by IDC as "the average end-user (street) price paid for a typical system configured with
chassis, motherboard, memory, storage, video display and any other components that are part of an "average
configuration for the specific model, vendor, channel or segment". Prices were deflated using the Consumer Price
Index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
  39
     Form factor means whether the PC is a desktop, notebook or ultra portable. The last two categories were
merged into one.


                                                        45
various computer magazines.40 In order to be consistent with the IDC definition of price, we
assigned the characteristics of the median model per IDC observation if more than two models
were available. The justification for this choice is that we preferred to keep the transaction
prices of IDC, rather than substitute them with the list prices published in the magazines. An
alternative approach followed by Pakes (2003) would be to list all the available products by IDC
observation with their prices taken from the magazines, and their sales computed by splitting
the IDC quantity equally among the observations. Although, clearly, both approaches adopt
some ad hoc assumptions, qualitatively the results would probably be similar. Both list and
transaction prices experienced a dramatic fall over this period and the increase in the number
and variety of PCs offered would have been even more amplified with the latter approach.
    For PCs, instead of using the seventeen processor type dummies and the speed of each
chip as separate characteristics, we merge them using CPU “benchmarks” for each computer.
CPU benchmarks were obtained from The CPU Scorecard (www.cpuscorecard.com). They are
essentially numbers assigned to each processor-speed combination based on technical and per-
formance characteristics. Our final unit of observation is defined as a manufacturer (e.g. Dell),
model (e.g. Optiplex), form factor (e.g. desktop), processor type (e.g. Pentium II) and pro-
cessor speed (e.g. 266 MHZ) combination with additional information on other characteristics
such as the RAM, hard disk, modem/Ethernet, CD-ROM and monitor size.
    Similarly, for servers, a unit of observation is defined as a manufacturer and family/model-
type. We also distinguish by operating system, since (unlike PCs) many servers run non-
Windows operating systems. These server operating systems are divided into six non-Windows
categories: Netware, Unix, Linux, VMS, OS390/400 and a residual. For servers, key character-
istics are also RAM, the number of rack slots41 , whether the server was rack optimized (racks
were an innovation that enhanced server flexibility), motherboard type (e.g. Symmetric Parallel
Processing - SMP), and chip type (CISC, RISC or IA32). For more discussion of the datasets
and characteristics see International Data Corporation (1998, 1999a,b) and Van Reenen (2004,
2006).
    The PC data allows us to distinguish by end user. Since servers are very rarely purchased
by customers and small firms, we condition on PCs purchased by firms with over 500 employees.
Results were robust to changing this size threshold (see Genakos, 2004, for separate estimation
by customer type).
    Given the aggregate nature of our data, we assume that the total market size is given by the
total number of employees in large businesses is taken from the Bureau of Labour Statistics.
Results based on different assumptions about the potential market size are also reported in the
robustness section.

                                C. E(  A'( D  
In this section we describe in detail the algorithm followed for the estimation of the baseline
model.
     Define  θ ≡ (σP C , σS , σPp C , σSp ), the vector of non-linear parameters, i.e., the random co-
efficients on characteristics and price for PCs and servers. Let r be the set of variables that
we are allowing non-linear parameters (e.g. xj , yk , pj , pk ). Let δ = (δ j , δ k ), ξ = (ξ Pj C , ξ Sk ),
                  
ν i = ν Pi C , ν Si and µi = (µij , µik ).
     Our iterative procedure is as follows:
     Step 0: Draw the idiosyncratic taste terms ν i (these draws remain constant throughout
the estimation procedure) and starting values for         θ.
  40
     The magazines included PC Magazine, PC Week, PC World, Computer Retail Week, Byte.com, Computer
User, NetworkWorld, Computer World, Computer Reseller News, InfoWorld, Edge: Work-Group Computing
Report and Computer Shopper.
  41
     Rack mounted servers were designed to fit into 19 inch racks. They allow multiple machines to be clustered
or managed in a single location and enhance scalability.


                                                      46
    Step 1. Given (r, θ), calculate µi .
    Step 2. Given (δ, µi ), calculate individual customer product market shares for PCs and
servers and aggregate to get market shares for each brand. We use a smooth simulator by
integrating the logit errors analytically.
    Step 3. Given  θ, we need to numerically compute the mean valuations, δ, that equate the
observed to the predicted brand market shares. Due to complementarity between the PCs and
servers, we compute each product category’s mean valuation conditional on the other category’s
mean valuation. Specifically, it consists of the following sequentially iterative substeps:
         Substep 3.0 Make an initial guess on δ and set δ old = δ.
         Substep 3.1 Compute δ j given δ k using BLP’s contraction mapping. Update δ.
         Substep 3.2 Compute δ k given δ j using BLP’s contraction mapping and update δ.
         Substep 3.3 Check if δ old = updated δ. If yes, go to step 4. Otherwise, set δ old = δ
and go to substep 3.1.
    Step 4. Given δ, calculate ξ and form the GMM.
    Step 5. Minimize a quadratic form of the residuals and update.
    We also estimated two other variants of this algorithm. The first one reiterates one additional
time substeps 3.1 and 3.2 to make sure that there is no feedback from PCs to server mean
valuations. This variant takes slightly more computational time and its impact was negligible
in the results. The second variant instead of updating the mean valuations for each product
category in substeps 3.1 and 3.2, always uses the initial estimates (taken from the simple logit
IV regression). This variant takes more computational time, but it is more robust to starting
values and is the one that we mainly used.


 D.    C #  '    6 #4#  ,    6 ( '                                                  
                                            
There is an incentive to decrease interoperability at the margin if:
                                                                          
                                                           dq(pj ,pk ,a) 
                                        ω M − cM               da        
                                                                          ω,ω
                                                 >−                               M
                                          ω−c             dqM (pj ,pk ,a) 
                                                               da         
                                                                            ω,ω     M



where the left hand side is the relative margin, whereas the right hand side is the relative output
effect.
    In our baseline specification, individual PC and server market shares are given by:


                        K
                                         eδk +µik                           eVij        eVij (1 + Wik )
      sij = eδj +µij              J       K     δj +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                    =     1         =
                             1+   j=1     k=0 e                         1+Wik + Wij
                                                                                      1 + Wij + Wij Wik
                       k=0


                       J
                                        eδj +µij                                   eVik            eVik Wij
    sik = eδk +µik                J      K    δ j +µij +δ k +µik
                                                                    =    1                  =
                       j=1   1+   j=1    k=0 e                          Wij       + 1 + Wik   1 + Wij + Wij Wik

where Vij = δ j + µij ,Vik = δ k + µik , Wij = Jj=1 eVij , Wik = K k=1 e
                                                                         Vik . To get the aggregate
                                      1    ns               1   ns
PC and server market shares sj = ns i=1 sij and sk = ns i=1 sik , where ns is the number of
drawn individuals. Finally, remember that pj = p̂j + ω and for servers pk = p̂k + ωk .

                                                         47
    In order to calculate the relative output effect, note that this derivative contains the direct
effect of interoperability on demand as well as the impact of the price responses to a change in
interoperability by all rival software producers and all hardware producers. In other words, the
nominator of the relative output effect is given by:


                                            J
              dq(pj , pk , a)                    dsj
                                  =                  LP C =
                  da                       j=1
                                                 da
                                            J                                                   
                                                     ∂sj   ∂sj ∂ p̂j   ∂sj ∂ p̂k   ∂sj ∂ωk
                                  =                      +           +           +                   LP C   (37)
                                                     ∂a    ∂ p̂j ∂a    ∂ p̂k ∂a    ∂ωk ∂a
                                           j=1


where the first term inside the parenthesis is the direct effect, the second term is the indirect
PC hardware effect, the third term is the indirect server hardware effect, and the last one is the
indirect server non-Microsoft software effect.
   Similarly the denominator of the relative output effect is given by:


                                                K
              dqM (pj , pk , a)              dsk
                                       =         LS =
                    da                       da
                                         k=1
                                          K                                        
                                              ∂sk ∂sk ∂ p̂j     ∂sk ∂ p̂k   ∂sk ∂ωk
                                       =           +          +           +           LS                    (38)
                                               ∂a    ∂ p̂j ∂a   ∂ p̂k ∂a    ∂ωk ∂a
                                            k=1


Each term inside the parenthesis in (37) is given below:

                                                                                   K
               ∂sj   1            ns    ∂sij   1            ns                         k eVik
                                                                                   k=1 γ
                   =                         =                    sij
               ∂a    ns           i=1    ∂a    ns           i=1         (1 + Wik ) [1 + Wij (1 + Wik )]

where γk = γ (RAMk ∗ (1 − M)).


             ∂sj         1         ns      ∂sij
                     =                           =
             ∂ p̂j       ns        i=1     ∂ p̂j
                         1         ns
                     =                     sij (1 − sij )(λP C + σPp C ν PipC )
                         ns        i=1
             ∂sj         1         ns      ∂sij
                     =                           =
             ∂ p̂k       ns        i=1     ∂ p̂k
                         1         ns                                                  eVik
                     =                     sij (λP C + σPp C ν PipC )
                         ns        i=1                                   (1 + Wik ) (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )
            ∂sj          1         ns      ∂sij
                     =                          =
            ∂ωk          ns        i=1     ∂ωk
                         1         ns                                                  eVik
                     =                     sij (λP C + σPp C ν PipC )
                         ns        i=1                                   (1 + Wik ) (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

                                                             48
Finally, we calculate the derivatives of prices w.r.t. a numerically using the pricing function of
the supply side for hardware (PC and server) and non-Microsoft software producers assuming
a Nash-Bertrand equilibrium.

    Specifically, assume that each of the F multiproduct PC hardware firms has a portfolio, Γf ,
of the j = 1, ..., J different products in the PC market. Then the profit function of firm f can
be expressed as


                                  Πf =           (pj − mcj ) Msj (p),
                                          j∈Γf

where sj (p) is the predicted market share of brand j, which depends on the prices of all other
brands, M is the market size and mcj is the constant marginal cost of production. Assuming
that there exists a pure-strategy Bertrand-Nash equilibrium in prices, and that all prices that
support it are strictly positive, then the price pj of any product produced by firm f must satisfy
the first-order condition


                                                               ∂sr (p)
                               sj (p) +          (pr − mcr )           =0
                                          r∈Γf                  ∂pj

This system of J equations can be inverted to solve for the marginal costs. Define,



             
             
              −∂sj (p)/∂pr , if j and r are produced by the same firm (j, r = 1, ..., J),
     ∆jr   =
             
                    0,                              otherwise,


then we can write the above FOC in vector notation as:




                          s(p) − ∆(p)(p − mc) = 0
                                            p = mc + ∆(p)−1 s(p).

Given our demand estimates, we calculate the estimated markup. We then compute numerically
the derivatives ∂ p̂j / ∂a using “Richardson’s extrapolation”. We follow the same methodology
to calculate the derivatives ∂ p̂k / ∂a and ∂ωk / ∂a.

   To calculate the relative margin


                         q                  q       J     K   ∂sj 1          J     J     ∂sj 1
           ωM − cM      qM εωM − εω        qM (     j=1   k=1 ∂pk sj ) − (   j=1   j=1   ∂pj sj )
                   =    qM M     M
                                      =    qM       K     J   ∂sk 1          K     K     ∂sk 1
            ω−c          q εω − εωM         q (     k=1   j=1 ∂pj sk ) − (   k=1   k=1   ∂pk sk )


                                                    49
where the derivatives for the PCs are:

                                  ∂sj     1       ns ∂sij
      own price semi-elasticity     :  =
                                  ∂pj     ns      i=1 ∂pj
                                   1     ns
                                =            sij (1 − sij )(λP C + σPp C ν ip )
                                  ns     i=1
                                  ∂sj      1      ns ∂sij
 cross PC price semi-elasticity :      =
                                  ∂pd     ns      i=1 ∂pd
                                     1     ns
                                = −            sij sid (λP C + σPp C ν ip )
                                    ns     i=1
                                  ∂sj      1      ns ∂sij
cross PC-server semi-elasticity :      =
                                  ∂pk     ns      i=1 ∂pk

                                   1     ns                                          eVik
                                =            sij (λP C + σ Pp C ν ip )
                                  ns     i=1                           (1 + Wik ) (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

Similarly, the derivatives for the servers are:

                                            ∂sk     1       ns ∂sik          1     ns
      own price semi-elasticity     :           =                     =                sik (1 − sik )(λS + σSp ν Sip )
                                            ∂pk    ns       i=1 ∂pk        ns      i=1
                                            ∂sk      1       ns ∂sik           1      ns
 cross PC price semi-elasticity     :           =                       =−                sik sim (λS + σSp ν Sip )
                                            ∂pm     ns       i=1 ∂pm           ns     i=1
                                            ∂sk     1       ns ∂sik
cross PC-server semi-elasticity     :           =                    =
                                            ∂pj    ns       i=1 ∂pj

                                            1     ns                                     eVij
                                    =                  sik (λS + σSp ν Sip )
                                            ns    i=1                        Wij (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

To compute the gradient of the objective function, we need the derivatives of the mean value
δ = (δ j , δ k ) with respect to the non-linear parameters 
                                                           θ ≡ (σ, σS , σp , σ Sp ):

                                                                                 −1                       
              ∂δ 1       ∂δ 1                 ∂s1        ∂s1      ∂s1        ∂s1              ∂s1       ∂s1
                   ...                        ∂δ 1 ...            ∂δ 1 ...
                                                                                                  ...
             ∂
               θ1        ∂
                          θH                           ∂δJ                 ∂δ K           ∂
                                                                                               θ1       ∂
                                                                                                         θH    
                                                                                                          
             ∂δ J
                   ...   ∂δ J               ∂sJ        ∂sJ      ∂sJ        ∂sJ            ∂sJ
                                                                                                  ...   ∂sJ    
             ∂
               θ1        ∂
                          θH                ∂δ 1 ...   ∂δJ      ∂δ 1 ...   ∂δ K           ∂
                                                                                               θ1       ∂
                                                                                                         θH    
  Dδ =                          = −                                                                       
            ∂δ 1        ∂δ 1               ∂s1        ∂s1      ∂s1        ∂s1            ∂s1       ∂s1    
                 ...                       ∂δ1 ...             ∂δ 1 ...                      ...          
            ∂
              θ1         ∂
                          θH                           ∂δJ                 ∂δK
                                                                                            ∂
                                                                                               θ1       ∂
                                                                                                         θH    
             ∂δ K        ∂δ K                ∂sK         ∂sK      ∂sK        ∂sK              ∂sK       ∂sK
             ∂
              θ1
                  ...
                         ∂
                          θH                 ∂δ1 ...     ∂δJ      ∂δ 1 ...   ∂δK              ∂
                                                                                               θ1
                                                                                                  ...
                                                                                                        ∂
                                                                                                         θH


where θi , i = 1, ..., H denotes the i’s element of the vector 
                                                                θ, which contains the non-linear
parameters of the model. Given the smooth simulator used for the market shares, the above
derivatives are as follows. The derivatives for the PCs w.r.t the mean valuations are:




                                                         50
            ∂sj               1     ns    ∂sij   1        ns
                      =                        =                  sij (1 − sij )
            ∂δ j              ns    i=1   ∂δj    ns       i=1
            ∂sj               1     ns    ∂sij     1         ns
                      =                        =−                     sij sid
            ∂δ d              ns    i=1   ∂δd     ns         i=1

            ∂sj               1     ns    ∂sij   1        ns                          eVik
                      =                        =                  sij
            ∂δk               ns    i=1   ∂δ k   ns       i=1           (1 + Wik ) (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

The derivatives for the servers w.r.t the mean valuations are:



              ∂sk              1         ns    ∂sik   1          ns
                          =                         =                  sik (1 − sik )
              ∂δ k             ns        i=1   ∂δ k   ns         i=1
              ∂sk              1         ns    ∂sik     1          ns
                          =                         =−                      sik sim
              ∂δ m             ns        i=1   ∂δ m    ns          i=1
              ∂sk              1         ns    ∂sik     1         ns                        eVij
                          =                         =−                      sik
               ∂δ j            ns        i=1   ∂δ j    ns         i=1             Wij (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

The derivatives for the PCs w.r.t the non-linear parameters are:


                                                                                                          
            ∂sj               1     ns    ∂sij   1        ns                             J
                      =                        =              sij xj vi −                      sid xd vi
             ∂σ               ns    i=1   ∂σ     ns       i=1                            d=1
                                                                                                              
            ∂sj               1     ns    ∂sij   1        ns                              J
                      =                        =              sij pj vip −                        sid pd vip
            ∂σp               ns    i=1   ∂σp    ns       i=1                             d=1
                                                                                       K    Vik y v S
            ∂sj               1           ∂sij   1                                     m=1 e
                                    ns                      ns                                   m i
                      =                        =                  sij
            ∂σ S              ns    i=1   ∂σ S   ns         i=1         (1 + Wik ) (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )
                                                                                       K    Vik p v S
            ∂sj               1     ns    ∂sij   1          ns                         m=1 e     m ip
                      =                        =                  sij
            ∂σ Sp             ns    i=1      S
                                          ∂σ p   ns         i=1         (1 + Wik ) (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

The derivatives for the servers w.r.t the non-linear parameters are:


                                                                                                                  
             ∂sk               1     ns       ∂sik   1       ns          S                    K
                      =                            =             sik yk vih −                     sim yd viS
             ∂σS               ns    i=1      ∂σ S   ns      i=1                              m=1
                                                                                                                  
             ∂sk               1     ns       ∂sik   1       ns          S                    K           S
                      =                            =             sik pk vip −                     sim pd vip
             ∂σSp              ns    i=1      ∂σpS   ns      i=1                              m=1
                                                                                      J    Vij
              ∂sk              1     ns       ∂sik   1       ns                       d=1 e xd vi
                      =                            =                  sik
              ∂σ               ns    i=1       ∂σ    ns      i=1            Wij (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )
                                                                                      J    Vij
             ∂sk               1              ∂sik   1                                d=1 e pd vip
                                     ns                      ns
                      =                            =                  sik
             ∂σp               ns    i=1      ∂σ p   ns      i=1            Wij (1 + Wij + Wij Wik )

                                                          51
We also calculated the standard errors based on this Jacobian.


             E. E(       “ (4 (   ” ( 
Since utilities are defined over bundles of models across categories, the model cannot be directly
taken to aggregate data. We need to derive marginal probabilities of purchase in each category
and the conditional (on purchase) models choice probabilities. To derive these probabilities, we
need to assume that the error term, ǫijkt , is logit i.i.d. distributed across bundles, customers and
time. Given this assumption on the error term, for each customer define Wij ≡ Jj=1 exp(δ j +
µij ), the inclusive value for PCs, and WiS ≡ K    k=1 exp(δ k + µik ), the inclusive value for servers.
Then, using the result derived in Song and Chintagunta (2006), the marginal probability for
purchasing a PC is given by:

                                                         Wij Wik eΓP C,S + Wij
                      Pr(dP C = 1| xj , yk , i) =                                                       (39)
                                                    Wij Wik eΓP C,S + Wij + Wik + 1

This follows because

                                                WP C (eΓ(dP C ,dS ) WS + eΓ(dP C ,0) )
          Pr(dP C = 1| x, i) =
                                   WP C (eΓ(dP C ,dS ) WS + eΓ(dP C ,0) ) + (eΓ(0,dS ) WS + eΓ(0,0) )
and we normalize gP C = gS = 0.
   The conditional brand choice probability for PC j is given by:
                                                                    exp(Vij )
                                  Pr( j| dP C = 1, xj , yk , i) =             ,                         (40)
                                                                      Wij

The unconditional brand choice probability is obtained by multiplication:

              Pr( j = 1| xj , yk , i) = Pr( dP C = 1| xj , yk , i) ∗ Pr( j| dP C = 1, xj , yk , i).     (41)

Market shares for each product, sj (and sk ), are obtained by aggregating over customers and
their vectors of unobservable tastes.
    The estimation of this model follows a similar logic to the one estimated in the main text.
The only major difference now is that we have an additional non-linear parameter apart from
the random coefficients. Define θ2 ≡ (σP C , σ S , σPp C , σSp ) then   θ ≡ (θ2 , ΓP C,S ) is now the vector
of non-linear parameters, i.e. the random coefficients on characteristics and price for PCs and
servers and the complementarity parameter. Let r be the set of variables that we                are allowing
                                                                                                         
                                                                              PC S
non-linear parameters (e.g. xj , yk , pj , pk ). Let δ = (δ j , δ k ), ξ = (ξ j , ξ k ), ν i = ν i , ν Si and
                                                                                                 P C

µi = (µij , µik ).
    Our iterative procedure is as follows:
    Step 0: Draw the idiosyncratic taste terms ν i (these draws remain constant throughout
the estimation procedure) and starting values for      θ.
    Step 1. Given (r, θ2 ), calculate µi .
    Step 2. Given (δ, µi ), calculate the conditional probabilities of equation (40) for PCs and
servers.
    Step 3. Given (δ, µi , ΓP C,S ) calculate the marginal probabilities of equation (39) for PCs
and servers.
    Step 4. Calculate the unconditional brand probabilities of equation (41) and aggregate to
get the market shares for each brand.

                                                       52
    Step 5. Given   θ, we need to numerically compute the mean valuations, δ, that equate the
observed to the predicted brand market shares. Due to complementarity between the PCs and
servers, we compute each product category’s mean valuation conditional on the other category’s
mean valuation. Specifically, it consists of the following sequentially iterative substeps:
         Substep 5.0 Make an initial guess on δ and set δ old = δ.
         Substep 5.1 Compute δ j given δ k using BLP’s contraction mapping. Update δ.
         Substep 5.2 Compute δ k given δ j and update δ.
         Substep 5.3 Check if δ old = updated δ. If yes, go to step 4. Otherwise, set δ old = δ
and go to substep 5.1.
    Step 6. Given δ, calculate ξ and form the GMM.
    Step 7. Minimize a quadratic form of the residuals and update.
    We also estimated two other variants of this algorithm. The first one reiterates one additional
time substeps 5.1 and 5.2 to make sure that there is no feedback from PCs to server mean
valuations. This variant takes slightly more computational time. The second variant, instead
of updating the mean valuations for each product category in substeps 5.1 and 5.2, always
uses the initial estimates (taken from the simple logit IV regression). This variant takes more
computational time, but it is more robust to starting values. To minimize the GMM function we
used both the Nelder-Mead nonderivative search method, and the faster Quasi-Newton gradient
method based on an analytic gradient. We combine all these methods to verify that we reached
a global instead of a local minimum. Standard errors are based on the same analytic Jacobian,
and are corrected for heteroskedasticity taking also into consideration the additional variance
introduced by the simulation.


F.   E(  '    6 #4#   #'                     #   (                    44 
                                                                    dq(pj ,pk ,a) 
                                                                                  
                                                                        da        
                                                                                      ω,ω M
As an alternative way to estimate the relative output effect, −    dqM (pj ,pk ,a) 
                                                                                                , we resort to a
                                                                                   
                                                                        da         
                                                                                          ω,ωM
method that makes as little assumptions as possible about the maximization behavior of rivals
to Microsoft in the server market. In essence, we estimate the residual demand functions for
Microsoft’s PC operating system demand q and server operating system demand qM . This
means that we are looking at the demands when all other players in the market are setting
their equilibrium prices. This residual demand function will depend on the characteristics of
PCs that are sold, as well as the PC operating system, the characteristics of Microsoft and
non-Microsoft servers. We consider a “reduced form” estimation of PC and server quantities,
as well as on the operating system prices of Microsoft ω and ωM . Note that the derivatives of
residual demand with respect to interoperability a corresponds precisely to the derivatives we
need to calculate the relative output effect.
    One worry is that changes in interoperability are fairly infrequent and hard to observe.
However, given the assumption that server characteristics enter the indirect utility function
linearly, the ratio of the derivatives is the same for any common marginal change in a given
quality characteristics of rival servers. We can therefore exploit the quality variation in rival
servers to identify the relative output effect. A further complication is that the number of
observations to identify the relevant parameters is much lower than for our demand estimation,
because we cannot exploit any cross-sectional variation in our data. For that reason we construct
quality indices (following Nevo, 2003) for rival servers, Microsoft servers, and PCs in order to
reduce the number of parameters to be estimated. We thus obtain estimating equations:

          qt = λP1 C I(y kt,k∈M ) + λP2 C I(y kt,k∈M     PC       PC       PC           PC
                                                  / ) + λ3 ω M + λ4 ω t + λ5 I(xt ) + ς t                   (42)

            qM = λM                 M
                  1 I(y kt,k∈M ) + λ2 I(y kt,k∈M
                                                     M        M        M            M
                                              / ) + λ3 ω M + λ4 ω t + λ5 I(xt ) + ς t                       (43)

                                                53
where I(y kt,k∈M ) is an index of quality of servers running Microsoft server OS, I(y kt,k∈M
                                                                                          / ) is
an index of quality of servers running non-Microsoft servers OS, and I(x) is an index of PC
quality. Since ωt and ω M are essentially unobservable, we replace them with the implied values
from equations (6) and (7) evaluated at our estimated demand parameters.42
   Given that variation in any quality characteristic will generate the same ratio of quantity
changes, this will be true for variation in a quality index as well. We can therefore identify
the relative output effect from the coefficients on the rival server quality index, λM       PC
                                                                                     2 and λ2 .
Hence, we estimate the relative output effect of interoperability as:
                                                         
                                             dq(pj ,pk ,a) 
                                                           
                                                 da         ω,ω              λP2 C
                                        −                        M
                                                                        =−                                     (44)
                                            dqM (pj ,pk ,a) 
                                                 da                         λM
                                                                              2
                                                                ω,ω M

The results for our residual demand estimations are presented in Table A5. The first column
reports a regression of the quantity of Microsoft server operating systems sold against non-
Microsoft server quality (as proxied by server memory43 ), a time trend and a seasonal dummy
for the winter quarter.44
    Microsoft server quality, PC quality45 , Microsoft server operating system prices and the
PC Windows operating system price (see equation (42)). The signs of the coefficient is in line
with expectations: non-Microsoft server quality is negatively and significantly correlated with
Microsoft sales. Column (2) repeats the exercise for PCs and shows that higher non-Microsoft
server quality is positively associated with PC demand, although the standard error is large.
The implied interoperability effect is shown in the bottom row as 3.454, which is far below the
relative margins in the Figures (at least at the end of the period). For example, in Figure 2,
the relative margin effect is around 20.
    Since the quality variable is potentially endogenous we instrument it with its own lagged
values in columns (3) and (4)46 . This strengthens the results, with the coefficient on rival quality
rising (in absolute value) for servers and falling closer to zero for PCs. This suggests that a
degradation strategy would have low cost for Microsoft in terms of lost PC sales. The relative
output effect is only 0.28 for the IV specification.
    We include a host of other controls in the last two columns - Microsoft’s own server quality,
operating system quality, PC operating system prices and Microsoft’s server operating system
price. The coefficients remain correctly signed and the implied relative output effect remains
below 4. Unsurprisingly, given the low degrees of freedom in the time series, the standard errors
are large.
    Overall, the “reduced form” results in Table A5 are consistent with the more structural
approach taken in the body of the paper. On average the relative output effect is small and
certainly much smaller than the increase in margins from reducing interoperability.




  42
     For PC operating systems we also experimented with using the quality adjusted price index of Abel et al
(2007).
  43
     This was found to be the most important characteristic in the analysis of server demand in Van Reenen (2004).
We experimented with other measures of server quality such as speed, but these did not give any significant extra
explanatory power in the regressions.
  44
     Demand is unusually high in this quarter because it coincides with the end of the fiscal year. Performance
bonuses are usually based on end of fiscal year sales, so this generates a bump in sales (see Oyer, 1998, for
systematic evidence on this effect).
  45
     We build a quality index of PCs based on our estimates of Table 3 following Nevo (2003).
  46
     The instrument has power in the first stage with an F-statistic of over 10 as shown at the base of the columns.


                                                           54
                          TABLE 1 - RESULTS FOR SIMPLE LOGIT FOR PC MARKET SHARE
                                            (1)                 (2)                    (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
Estimation method                          OLS                   IV                   OLS                IV                IV                IV
Dependent variable                     ln(Sjt)-ln(S0t)     ln(Sjt)-ln(S0t)        ln(Sjt)-ln(S0t)   ln(Sjt)-ln(S0t)   ln(Sjt)-ln(S0t)   ln(Sjt)-ln(S0t)

Price                                   -0.336***          -1.400***              -0.404***         -2.085***         -2.275***         -2.488***
                                         (0.037)             (0.281)               (0.037)           (0.204)            (0.239)          (0.258)
Benchmark                               0.305***            0.953***              0.388***          1.153***           1.239***         1.336***
                                         (0.108)             (0.211)               (0.095)           (0.160)            (0.180)          (0.190)
RAM                                     -0.458***             0.339               -0.333***         0.920***           1.062***         1.221***
                                         (0.101)             (0.246)               (0.105)           (0.220)            (0.239)          (0.262)
CD-ROM                                   0.226**            0.257**                 0.188*           0.278**            0.288**          0.299**
                                         (0.095)             (0.112)               (0.096)           (0.130)            (0.136)          (0.143)
Ethernet                                  0.140*            0.354***                 0.105          0.463***           0.504***         0.549***
                                         (0.077)             (0.103)               (0.077)           (0.109)            (0.116)          (0.123)
Desktop                                 0.375***             -0.406*              0.273***          -0.908***         -1.042***         -1.192***
                                         (0.070)             (0.213)               (0.071)           (0.169)            (0.193)          (0.208)
5th Generation                          1.068***            1.814***              0.894***          2.520***           2.704***         2.911***
                                         (0.244)             (0.364)               (0.229)           (0.379)            (0.410)          (0.432)
6th Generation                          0.889***            2.314***              0.954***          3.652***           3.957***         4.299***
                                         (0.268)             (0.496)               (0.252)           (0.472)            (0.523)          (0.556)
7th Generation                          1.112***            2.037***              1.084***          3.087***           3.313***         3.568***
                                         (0.395)             (0.526)               (0.385)           (0.561)            (0.595)          (0.626)
Monitor Size                            -0.066***          -0.086***              -0.066***         -0.097***         -0.101***         -0.105***
                                         (0.008)             (0.009)               (0.008)           (0.010)            (0.010)          (0.011)
Trend                                                                             -0.051***         -0.368***         -0.404***         -0.444***
                                                                                   (0.013)           (0.041)            (0.047)          (0.051)
Time Dummies (21)                           yes                 yes                    no               no                 no               no

Overidentification test                                      60.383                                   65.425            50.836            27.114
                                                             [0.000]                                  [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]
 st
1 Stage F-test                                                 8.8                                     27.21             30.40            40.620
                                                             [0.000]                                  [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]

Own Price Elasticities
Mean                                      -0.73                -3.04                 -0.88              -4.52             -4.94             -5.40
Standard deviation                        0.31                  1.28                 0.37               1.90               2.07             2.27
Median                                    -0.68                -2.83                 -0.82              -4.21             -4.60             -5.03
% inelastic demands                      85.51%               0.70%                 71.44%             0.03%             0.00%             0.00%
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC Tracker data corresponding to sales and prices of PC models for large business customers
matched to more detailed PC characteristics from several industry datasources and trade magazines, US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: Demand estimates from a simple logit model based on 3,305 observations. “Benchmark” are numbers assigned to each processor-speed
combination based on technical and performance characteristics. "Generation" dummies indicate common technological characteristics shared among
central processing units. All regressions include a full set of nine hardware vendor dummies. Columns (2) and (4) use BLP-type instruments: the number
of the same form factor own-firm products, the number of the same form factor products produced by rival firms, the sum of the values of the same
characteristics (speed, RAM and hard disk) of other products of the same form factor offered by the same firm and the sum of values of the same
characteristics of all same factor products offered by rival firms. In the last two columns, we restrict the number of instruments dropping hard disks in
column (3) and also speed in column (4). Full first stage results can be found in Table A3 of the Appendix. The Hansen-Sargan test of overidentification
and the first-stage Angrist-Pischke (2009) F test of excluded instruments with the p-values in square parentheses below are reported. Robust standard
errors are reported in parenthesis below coefficients: *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.




                                                                             55
                      TABLE 2 - RESULTS FOR SIMPLE LOGIT FOR SERVER MARKET SHARE
                                               (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
Estimation method                             OLS                IV                OLS                 IV                IV                 IV
Dependent variable                       ln(Skt)-ln(S0t)    ln(Skt)-ln(S0t)    ln(Skt)-ln(S0t)   ln(Skt)-ln(S0t)    ln(Skt)-ln(S0t)    ln(Skt)-ln(S0t)
Price                                     -0.040***         -0.075***          -0.040***          -0.179***         -0.201***          -0.234***
                                            (0.003)           (0.020)           (0.003)            (0.031)            (0.035)           (0.041)
RAM                                          0.002             0.031*             0.002           0.116***           0.133***          0.161***
                                            (0.007)           (0.019)           (0.008)            (0.032)            (0.036)           (0.042)
Windows                                   -0.861***         -0.567***          -0.867***            0.305               0.484           0.766**
                                            (0.113)           (0.196)           (0.114)            (0.282)            (0.310)           (0.357)
Windows × RAM                                0.013             0.025*             0.012           0.060***           0.068***          0.079***
                                            (0.011)           (0.014)           (0.011)            (0.023)            (0.025)           (0.029)
Symmetric Parallel Processor               0.474***          0.705***          0.474***           1.388***           1.528***          1.748***
                                            (0.081)           (0.156)           (0.081)            (0.224)            (0.246)           (0.284)
Rack Optimized                             0.455***           0.337**          0.458***             -0.005             -0.076            -0.187
                                            (0.110)           (0.134)           (0.110)            (0.182)            (0.197)           (0.225)
Number of Racks                             -0.009              0.006             -0.008           0.051**            0.060**          0.074***
                                            (0.010)           (0.013)           (0.010)            (0.022)            (0.024)           (0.028)
Linux                                        0.037              0.542             -0.033          1.995***           2.307***          2.795***
                                            (0.413)           (0.484)           (0.392)            (0.605)            (0.647)           (0.715)
Unix                                      -0.675***             0.351          -0.681***          3.393***           4.019***          5.000***
                                            (0.166)           (0.589)           (0.168)            (0.907)            (1.000)           (1.176)
OS390/400                                 -1.750***            -0.711          -1.717***           2.390**           3.020***          4.008***
                                            (0.204)           (0.611)           (0.204)            (0.936)            (1.037)           (1.218)
VMS                                       -1.961***         -1.620***          -2.009***            -0.610             -0.396            -0.059
                                            (0.255)           (0.330)           (0.257)            (0.574)            (0.639)           (0.734)
Other OS                                  -2.088***           -1.094*          -2.070***           1.874**            2.480**          3.429***
                                            (0.222)           (0.596)           (0.222)            (0.900)            (0.992)           (1.163)
Trend                                                                          -0.030***          -0.144***         -0.161***          -0.189***
                                                                                 (0.007)           (0.025)            (0.028)           (0.032)
Time Dummies (21)                              yes               yes                no                no                 no                no

Overidentification test                                       64.409                                35.389            20.061              12.03
                                                              [0.000]                               [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.002]
 st
1 Stage F-test                                                 18.53                                  5.82              8.70              12.87
                                                              [0.000]                               [0.000]           [0.000]            [0.000]

Own Price Elasticities
Mean                                         -0.63             -1.18              -0.63             -2.84              -3.18              -3.71
Standard deviation                            0.62              1.15              0.62              2.79                3.12              3.64
Median                                       -0.44             -0.83              -0.44             -2.01              -2.25              -2.62
% inelastic demands                         81.13%            57.40%             80.89%            32.02%             28.08%             22.11%
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly Server Tracker data corresponding to sales and prices of server models matched to more
detailed server characteristics from several industry datasources and trade magazines, US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: Demand estimates from a simple logit model based on 2,967 observations. All regressions include a full set of nine hardware vendor dummies.
Columns (2) and (6) use BLP-type instruments: the number of own-firm products, the number of products produced by rival firms, the sum of RAM of
products offered by rival firms. In columns (4) and (5) we also experiment with additional instruments based on server characteristics (sum of Rack and
Rack Optimized of products offered by rival firms and sum of Unix own-firm models) and input prices (quality adjusted indices for semi-conductors and
hard disks). Full first stage results can be found in Table A4 of the Appendix.The Hansen-Sargan test of overidentification and the first-stage Angrist-
Pischke (2009) F test of excluded intruments with the p-values in square parentheses below are reported. Robust standard errors are reported in
parenthesis below coefficients: *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.




                                                                          56
                         TABLE 3 - RESULTS FROM ALTERNATIVE MODELS
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
Estimation method               GMM            GMM             GMM             GMM             GMM
                                baseline       strong          strong          strong          "free"
Empirical model                  model     complementarity complementarity complementarity complementarity


PANEL A: PC - Means
Price                          -3.301***     -3.102***       -3.057***       -2.844***       -3.314***
                                (0.629)       (0.256)         (0.258)         (0.326)         (0.592)
Benchmark                        0.021         0.145           0.059           -0.401          -0.153
                                (1.243)       (0.429)         (0.477)         (0.284)         (1.176)
RAM                             0.760**      0.965***        0.973***        1.016***        0.801***
                                (0.316)       (0.232)         (0.245)         (0.296)         (0.303)
CD-ROM                          0.275**       0.268**         0.271**         0.281**         0.278**
                                (0.130)       (0.132)         (0.133)         (0.134)         (0.131)
Ethernet                       0.423***      0.426***        0.438***        0.445***        0.444***
                                (0.134)       (0.114)         (0.115)         (0.125)         (0.131)
5th Generation                 2.783***      3.056***        3.055***        3.080***        2.821***
                                (0.395)       (0.438)         (0.406)         (0.453)         (0.399)
6th Generation                 4.053***      4.496***        4.517***        4.579***        4.132***
                                (0.574)       (0.536)         (0.515)         (0.622)         (0.567)
7th Generation                 2.709***      3.258***        3.285***        3.301***        2.733***
                                (0.606)       (0.623)         (0.637)         (0.697)         (0.629)
Constant                       -3.426***       0.832           0.798           0.224         -3.368***
                                (0.708)       (0.799)         (0.644)         (0.817)         (0.704)
PANEL B: Server - Means
Price                          -0.282***      -0.231***      -0.233***        -0.256***      -0.674***
                                (0.089)        (0.039)        (0.040)          (0.046)        (0.155)
RAM                            0.173***       0.160***       0.163***         0.181***       0.208***
                                (0.057)        (0.040)        (0.041)          (0.046)        (0.066)
Windows                          0.794*        0.742**        0.755**          0.939**       1.543***
                                (0.451)        (0.346)        (0.360)          (0.401)        (0.483)
Windows × RAM                   0.077**        0.075**       0.076***         0.083***       0.133***
                                (0.034)        (0.028)        (0.028)          (0.031)        (0.039)
Symmetric Parallel Processor   1.787***       1.765***       1.777***         1.924***       2.620***
                                (0.390)        (0.278)        (0.286)          (0.322)        (0.408)
Rack Optimized                   -0.185         -0.230         -0.240           -0.318         -0.373
                                (0.234)        (0.217)        (0.220)          (0.240)        (0.273)
Number of Racks                   0.060        0.064**        0.064**         0.077***       0.140***
                                (0.039)        (0.029)        (0.028)          (0.032)        (0.034)
Constant                       -5.814***     -10.649***     -10.596***       -10.389***      -8.096***
                                (0.228)        (0.297)        (0.212)          (0.389)        (0.669)




                                                   57
                               TABLE 3 - RESULTS FROM ALTERNATIVE MODELS - cont.
                                                (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)
Estimation method                              GMM                  GMM                   GMM                   GMM                   GMM
                                              baseline            strong          strong          strong          "free"
Empirical model                                model          complementarity complementarity complementarity complementarity


PANEL C: PC - Standard Deviations
Price                        0.916**                              0.728***              0.702***              0.593***               0.902***
                              (0.363)                              (0.064)               (0.094)               (0.014)                (0.338)
Benchmark                      1.321                              1.176***              1.218***              1.484***                1.450*
                              (0.822)                              (0.170)               (0.191)               (0.026)                (0.752)
Constant                                                                                                        0.021
                                                                                                               (0.023)
PANEL D: Server - Standard Deviations
Price                        0.048**                                0.001                 0.002                 0.001                0.162***
                              (0.024)                              (0.011)               (0.013)               (0.009)                (0.042)
RAM                            0.014                                                      0.005                 0.007                  0.027
                              (0.104)                                                    (0.013)               (0.070)                (0.091)
Constant                                                                                                      0.806***
                                                                                                               (0.240)
ΓPC,S parameter                                                                                                                      2.647**
                                                                                                                                     (1.271)

GMM Objective (df)                          75.613 (10)         75.111 (12)           70.344 (10)             74.293 (8)            57.493 (9)
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics from
several industry datasources and trade magazines, US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: Column (1) presents demand estimates from the baseline model as described in subsection 4.1 in the main text based on 6,272 observations.
Parameters were estimated via a two-step GMM algorithm described in the estimation subsection 4.2. Columns (2)-(4) report demand estimates from
different specifications of the "strong complementarity" model as described in subsection 4.4 in the main text and estimated via a two-step GMM
algorithm similar to the baseline model. Column (2) presents the simplest version, where we assume a random coefficient on price and quality
benchmark for PCs and only price for servers. Columns (3) and (4) add progressively more random coefficients. Column (5) reports results from the
"free complementarity" model estimated via a two-step GMM algorithm as described in Appendix E. The freely estimated parameter ΓPC,S allows us to
model the extra utility that a customer obtains from consuming these two products together over and above the utility derived from each product
independently. This paremeter would be positive for a pair of complements and negative for a pair of substitutes. All specifications include all the
characteristics in Tables 1 and 2, i.e. for PCs: desktop, monitor size, CD-ROM, firm dummies and time trend; for servers: full set of operating system
and firm dummies and time trend. For all specifications we used BLP-type instruments corresponding to the number of the own-firm and rival
products, as well as the sum of the values of the same characteristics (PCs: speed, RAM and hard disk; servers: RAM, number of racks, racks
optimized, Unix) of other products offered by the same or rival firms. The standard errors take into account the variance introduced through the
simulation by bootstrapping the relevant component of the variance in the moment conditions. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below
coefficients: *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.




                                                                         58
                                                 TABLE 4 - ROBUSTNESS
                              (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)
Estimation method            GMM             GMM          GMM          GMM         GMM         GMM         GMM        GMM
                          baseline model sample of 500 potential mkt asymmetric   reduced     reduced     include    reduce
                                           consumers size reduced potential mkt number of number of random coef. random coef.
                                                          in half       size    instruments instruments on constant on servers
PANEL A: PC - Means
Price                      -3.301***    -2.795***    -3.002***    -3.353***    -3.622***    -5.598     -2.768***   -3.350***
                             (0.629)     (0.501)      (0.411)       (0.604)      (0.676)    (3.882)      (0.555)     (0.635)
Benchmark                     0.021       -2.503       0.070         0.088       -0.786     -1.388       -1.971*      0.020
                             (1.243)     (1.572)      (0.493)       (1.114)      (2.355)    (5.770)      (1.152)     (1.229)
RAM                         0.760**     1.088***     0.837***      0.747**       0.639*      0.244      0.753**      0.765**
                             (0.316)     (0.284)      (0.278)       (0.303)      (0.348)    (0.568)      (0.320)     (0.312)
CD-ROM                      0.275**     0.321***      0.261**      0.267**      0.304**      0.315      0.316**     0.275**
                             (0.130)     (0.140)      (0.132)       (0.129)      (0.135)    (0.193)      (0.133)     (0.131)
Ethernet                    0.423***    0.490***     0.486***      0.410***     0.403***     0.305     0.443***     0.424***
                             (0.134)     (0.134)      (0.127)       (0.130)      (0.149)    (0.228)      (0.136)     (0.132)
5th Generation              2.783***    2.955***     2.811***      2.766***     2.869***   3.128***    3.153***     2.795***
                             (0.395)     (0.461)      (0.401)       (0.391)      (0.400)    (0.547)      (0.491)     (0.394)
6th Generation              4.053***    4.517***     4.103***      4.007***     4.154***   4.296***    4.619***     4.066***
                             (0.574)     (0.607)      (0.517)       (0.558)      (0.616)    (0.547)      (0.718)     (0.569)
7th Generation              2.709***    3.034***     2.757***      2.663***     2.529***     1.858     3.005***     2.702***
                             (0.606)     (0.738)      (0.652)       (0.597)      (0.700)    (1.335)      (0.759)     (0.605)
Constant                   -3.426***    -3.528***    -2.708***    -3.451***    -3.269***    -2.402      -6.319**   -3.379***
                             (0.708)     (0.936)      (0.709)       (0.704)      (0.653)    (2.671)      (2.818)     (0.708)
PANEL B: Server - Means
Price                      -0.282***    -0.352***    -0.288***    -0.258***    -0.249***   -0.298**    -0.352***   -0.281***
                             (0.089)     (0.133)      (0.094)       (0.085)      (0.081)    (0.131)     (0.113)      (0.086)
RAM                         0.173***    0.203***     0.177***      0.162***     0.161***   0.180***     0.220**     0.174***
                             (0.057)     (0.058)      (0.052)       (0.051)      (0.045)    (0.060)     (0.096)      (0.049)
Windows                       0.794*      1.069*       0.828*        0.688       0.683**     0.888      1.342**      0.781*
                             (0.451)     (0.556)      (0.460)       (0.431)      (0.342)    (0.737)     (0.590)      (0.436)
Windows × RAM                0.077**    0.092***      0.078**      0.072**      0.074**     0.085*      0.102**     0.076**
                             (0.034)     (0.041)      (0.034)       (0.032)      (0.033)    (0.047)     (0.041)      (0.032)

                                                            59
                                                                            TABLE 4 - ROBUSTNESS - cont.
                                  (1)                                   (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
Estimation method                GMM                                  GMM                 GMM                 GMM                 GMM               GMM               GMM                 GMM
Symmetric Parallel Processor   1.787***                             2.015***            1.810***            1.698***            1.690***          1.858***          2.234***            1.773***
                                (0.390)                              (0.498)             (0.399)             (0.369)             (0.307)           (0.665)           (0.486)             (0.358)
Rack Optimized                  -0.185                                -0.266              -0.199             -0.145              -0.154            -0.208             -0.441             -0.176
                                (0.234)                              (0.267)             (0.237)             (0.223)             (0.203)           (0.329)           (0.296)             (0.227)
Number of Racks                  0.060                                0.084               0.063               0.056               0.055             0.074             0.094*              0.060
                                (0.039)                              (0.050)             (0.040)             (0.036)             (0.035)           (0.058)           (0.052)             (0.037)
Constant                      -5.814***                             -5.807***           -5.809***          -5.128***           -5.896***         -5.748***          -6.197***          -5.816***
                                (0.228)                              (0.260)             (0.228)             (0.223)             (0.294)           (0.269)           (0.566)             (0.228)
PANEL C: PC - Standard Deviations
Price                          0.916**                                0.520*            0.758***            0.955***           1.140***             2.292           0.795***            0.938***
                                (0.363)                              (0.283)             (0.273)             (0.346)            (0.413)            (1.777)           (0.270)             (0.362)
Benchmark                        1.321                               2.794**            1.610***             1.282*              1.938              2.690           2.658***              1.332
                                (0.822)                              (1.102)             (0.444)             (0.771)            (1.532)            (3.199)           (0.910)             (0.812)
Constant                                                                                                                                                              2.569
                                                                                                                                                                     (1.839)
PANEL D: Server - Standard Deviations
Price                          0.048**                               0.062**              0.048*             0.042*               0.035            0.054*            0.049*              0.049**
                                (0.024)                              (0.031)              (0.025)            (0.025)             (0.037)           (0.030)           (0.028)             (0.024)
RAM                              0.014                                0.011                0.011              0.010               0.000             0.007             0.017
                                (0.104)                              (0.090)              (0.106)            (0.103)             (0.159)           (0.312)           (0.145)
Constant                                                                                                                                                             0.930*
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.528)
GMM Objective (df)                             75.613 (10)         68.583 (10)         71.783 (10)        88.356 (10)          54.146 (5)        46.723 (3)         56.899 (8)        79.292 (12)
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics from several industry datasources and trade magazines,
US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: Demand estimates from the baseline model as described in section 4.1 in the text based on 6,272 observations. Parameters were estimated via a two-step GMM algorithm described in the
estimation subsection 4.2. We include all the characteristics in Tables 1 and 2, i.e. for PCs: desktop, monitor size, CD-ROM, firm dummies and time trend; for servers: full set of operating system and
firm dummies and time trend. In all columns (expect columns (5) and (6)) the instruments used are the same as in the baseline model in column (1). In column (2) we increase the number of draws
relative to the baseline model to 500. In column (3) we assume that firms make a purchase decision every two years. In column (4), we assume that firms purchase a PC every year, whereas a server
bundle every two years. In column (5) we reduce the number of instruments used to the ones corresponding to column (5) in Tables 1 and 2 for PCs and servers respectively. In column (6) we further
reduce the instruments used for PCs to the ones corresponding to column (6) in Table 1. In column (7) we include a random coefficient on the constant for both PCs and servers. In the last column, we
only allow for a random coefficient on price on servers. The standard errors take into account the variance introduced through the simulation by bootstrapping fifty times the relevant component of the
variance in the moment conditions. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below coefficients: *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.



                                                                                                  60
                         FIGURE 1: EVOLUTION OF MARKET SHARES FOR SOFTWARE VENDORS IN US (units)
    0.6                                                                                                                                                                         Windows


    0.5



    0.4

                                                                                                                                           Netware
    0.3


                                                                                                                                                                                         Unix
    0.2



    0.1                                                                                                                                                           Linux
                                                                                                       Other


      0
             1996Q1

                      1996Q2

                               1996Q3

                                        1996Q4

                                                 1997Q1

                                                          1997Q2

                                                                   1997Q3

                                                                            1997Q4

                                                                                     1998Q1

                                                                                              1998Q2

                                                                                                       1998Q3

                                                                                                                1998Q4

                                                                                                                         1999Q1

                                                                                                                                  1999Q2

                                                                                                                                            1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                     1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                              2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                       2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                                2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                         2000Q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001Q1
Source: International Data Corporation (IDC) Quarterly Server Tracker survey, US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: This plots the evolution of shares for different operating systems. Shares are measures in unit volumes. Other includes operating systems include IBM’s OS390/400,
Compaq’s VMS and some other smaller non-Unix operating systems.




                                                                                                        61
                                                             FIGURE 2: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (BASELINE MODEL)


180                    Statistically significant incentives to degrade                                                                                         Upper confidence band
                                                                                                                                                             for relative margin effect
                       Relative Output Effect
160
                       Relative Margin Effect
140

120

100
           Upper confidence band
           for relative output effect
 80

 60
                    Lower confidence band
                    for relative output effect                                                                                                                                                             Relative Margin Effect
 40

                                                                                                                                                               Lower confidence band
 20                                                                                                                                                          for relative margin effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Relative Output Effect
   0
           1996Q1

                      1996Q2

                               1996Q3

                                        1996Q4

                                                 1997Q1

                                                          1997Q2

                                                                   1997Q3

                                                                            1997Q4

                                                                                     1998Q1

                                                                                              1998Q2

                                                                                                       1998Q3

                                                                                                                1998Q4

                                                                                                                         1999Q1

                                                                                                                                  1999Q2

                                                                                                                                           1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                    1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                              2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                       2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                                2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                         2000Q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001Q1
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients in
column (1) of Table 3.
Notes: This plots the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D and their 90% confidence interval. The shaded area
highlights the period where the relative margin effect is statistically higher than the relative output effect, hence Microsoft had significant incentives to degrade according to our
model.

                                                                                                                         62
                                                FIGURE 3: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (STRONG COMPLEMENTARITY)

  30
                      Statistically significant incentives to degrade

                      Relative Output Effect
  25
                      Relative Margin Effect


  20
                                                                                                                                                                          Upper confidence band for
                                                                                                                                                                              relative margin effect

  15        Upper confidence band
            for relative output effect


  10                 Lower confidence band
                     for relative output effect                                                                            Lower confidence band                                                  Relative Margin Effect
                                                                                                                         for relative margin effect

    5



    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Relative Output Effect
            1996Q1

                     1996Q2

                              1996Q3

                                       1996Q4

                                                1997Q1

                                                         1997Q2

                                                                  1997Q3

                                                                           1997Q4

                                                                                    1998Q1

                                                                                             1998Q2

                                                                                                      1998Q3

                                                                                                               1998Q4

                                                                                                                         1999Q1

                                                                                                                                  1999Q2

                                                                                                                                           1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                    1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                             2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                      2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                               2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                        2000Q4
   -5
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients in
column (4) of Table 3.
Notes: This plots the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D and their 90% confidence interval. The shaded
area highlights the period where the relative margin effect is statistically higher than the relative output effect, hence Microsoft had significant incentives to degrade according
to our model.


                                                                                                                        63
                                                      FIGURE 4: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (FREE COMPLEMENTARITY)
   30
                     Statistically significant incentives to degrade

                     Relative Output Effect
   25
                     Relative Margin Effect


   20                                                                                                                                                                              Upper confidence band for
                                                                                                                                                                                     relative margin effect


                              Upper confidence band for
   15
                                relative output effect

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Relative Margin Effect
   10

               Lower confidence band for
                 relative output effect
     5                                                                                                                                                                 Lower confidence band for
                                                                                                                                                                         relative margin effect


     0                                                                                                                                                                                                      Relative Output Effect
            1996Q1

                     1996Q2

                                1996Q3

                                         1996Q4

                                                  1997Q1

                                                           1997Q2

                                                                    1997Q3

                                                                             1997Q4

                                                                                      1998Q1

                                                                                               1998Q2

                                                                                                        1998Q3

                                                                                                                 1998Q4

                                                                                                                          1999Q1

                                                                                                                                   1999Q2

                                                                                                                                            1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                     1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                              2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                        2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                                 2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                          2000Q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                   2001Q1
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients in
column (5) of Table 3.
Notes: This plots the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D and their 90% confidence interval. The shaded area
highlights the period where the relative margin effect is statistically higher than the relative output effect, hence Microsoft had significant incentives to degrade according to our
model.

                                                                                                                           64
                                                                                                 FIGURE 5: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (ROBUSTNESS)
 55                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                           Relative Output Effect                                                                                                                                                                                        Relative Output Effect
 45                        Relative Margin Effect                                                                                                                                                             20                         Relative Margin Effect

 35                                                                                                                                                                                                           15

 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
       1996Q1
                1996Q2
                         1996Q3
                                  1996Q4
                                           1997Q1
                                                    1997Q2
                                                             1997Q3
                                                                      1997Q4
                                                                               1998Q1
                                                                                        1998Q2
                                                                                                 1998Q3
                                                                                                          1998Q4
                                                                                                                   1999Q1
                                                                                                                            1999Q2
                                                                                                                                     1999Q3
                                                                                                                                               1999Q4
                                                                                                                                                         2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q2
                                                                                                                                                                             2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                       2000Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001Q1
 -5



                                    FIGURE 5A: COLUMN (1), TABLE 4                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE 5B: COLUMN (2), TABLE 4
 30                                                                                                                                                                                                           35
                         Relative Output Effect                                                                                                                                                                                       Relative Output Effect
                         Relative Margin Effect                                                                                                                                                               30                      Relative Margin Effect
 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                              25
 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               5

  0                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
       1996Q1
                1996Q2
                         1996Q3
                                  1996Q4
                                           1997Q1
                                                    1997Q2
                                                             1997Q3
                                                                      1997Q4
                                                                               1998Q1
                                                                                        1998Q2
                                                                                                 1998Q3
                                                                                                          1998Q4
                                                                                                                   1999Q1
                                                                                                                            1999Q2
                                                                                                                                     1999Q3
                                                                                                                                              1999Q4
                                                                                                                                                        2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                  2000Q2
                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                      2000Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                2001Q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1996Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1996Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1997Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1997Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1997Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1998Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1998Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1999Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1999Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1999Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1999Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -5


                                     FIGURE 5C: COLUMN (3), TABLE 4                                                                                                                                                                             FIGURE 5D: COLUMN (4), TABLE 4
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients from Table 4.
Notes: These plot the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D. When the relative margin effect lies above the relative output effect we predict
that there are incentives to degrade interoperability.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         65
                                                                                         FIGURE 5: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (ROBUSTNESS) - cont.
  40                                                                                                                                                                                                      35
                             Relative Output Effect                                                                                                                                                                                   Relative Output Effect
  35                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                             Relative Margin Effect                                                                                                                                                                                   Relative Margin Effect
  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                          25
  25
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
  15

  10                                                                                                                                                                                                      10

   5                                                                                                                                                                                                       5

   0                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
        1996Q1
                 1996Q2
                          1996Q3
                                   1996Q4
                                            1997Q1
                                                     1997Q2
                                                              1997Q3
                                                                       1997Q4
                                                                                1998Q1
                                                                                         1998Q2
                                                                                                  1998Q3
                                                                                                           1998Q4
                                                                                                                    1999Q1
                                                                                                                             1999Q2
                                                                                                                                      1999Q3
                                                                                                                                               1999Q4
                                                                                                                                                        2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                 2000Q2
                                                                                                                                                                          2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                            2001Q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1996Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1996Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1996Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1997Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1997Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1997Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1998Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1998Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1998Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1999Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1999Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1999Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1999Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001Q1
  -5



                                     FIGURE 5E: COLUMN (5), TABLE 4                                                                                                                                                                             FIGURE 5F: COLUMN (6), TABLE 4
       12                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                   Relative Output Effect                                                                                                                                                                                          Relative Output Effect
       10                          Relative Margin Effect                                                                                                                                                 50                                       Relative Margin Effect

       8                                                                                                                                                                                                  40

       6                                                                                                                                                                                                  30

       4                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

       2                                                                                                                                                                                                  10

       0                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                 1996Q1
                 1996Q2
                 1996Q3
                 1996Q4
                 1997Q1
                 1997Q2
                 1997Q3
                 1997Q4
                 1998Q1
                 1998Q2
                 1998Q3
                 1998Q4
                 1999Q1
                 1999Q2
                 1999Q3
                 1999Q4
                 2000Q1
                 2000Q2
                 2000Q3
                 2000Q4
                 2001Q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1996Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1996Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1997Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1997Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1997Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1998Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1999Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1999Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1999Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1999Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001Q1
       -2


                                    FIGURE 5G: COLUMN (7), TABLE 4                                                                                                                                                                              FIGURE 5H: COLUMN (8), TABLE 4
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients from Table 4.
Notes: These plot the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D. When the relative margin effect lies above the relative output effect we predict
that there are incentives to degrade interoperability.


                                                                                                                                                                                                     66
                                   TABLE A1 - DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR PC DATA
                No. of                    Price  Benchmark    RAM                   Monitor size
 Period                        Quantity                             CD-ROM Ethernet              Desktop
                models                  ($1000s)  (1000s)   (100MB)                  (inches)
1996Q1           104           6438.699   2.550    0.221      0.138   0.799   0.187   10.388      0.703
1996Q2           103           7823.198   2.437    0.240      0.151   0.863   0.254   11.089      0.706
1996Q3            99           8946.276   2.441    0.266      0.157   0.905   0.279   11.426      0.674
1996Q4           114           8034.009   2.437    0.294      0.178   0.889   0.236   11.845      0.628
1997Q1           129           7116.477   2.409    0.363      0.213   0.896   0.091   11.596      0.637
1997Q2           156           6806.709   2.255    0.424      0.248   0.919   0.127   11.209      0.692
1997Q3           181           6978.622   2.210    0.489      0.287   0.963   0.177   11.035      0.698
1997Q4           193           6485.918   2.123    0.531      0.321   0.931   0.217   10.626      0.709
1998Q1           204           5660.170   2.101    0.609      0.388   0.892   0.378   10.898      0.723
1998Q2           219           5452.665   2.019    0.695      0.430   0.936   0.335   11.705      0.708
1998Q3           215           6428.275   1.885    0.775      0.483   0.947   0.417   12.382      0.734
1998Q4           143          10258.830   1.896    0.914      0.595   0.884   0.453   13.447      0.749
1999Q1           131          10656.770   1.810    1.069      0.670   0.914   0.436   15.128      0.755
1999Q2           124          14062.890   1.705    1.124      0.701   0.926   0.454   16.137      0.763
1999Q3           113          15190.380   1.663    1.279      0.796   0.955   0.446   16.213      0.741
1999Q4           122          13123.920   1.619    1.487      0.938   0.973   0.401   15.757      0.727
2000Q1           152           9227.644   1.592    1.792      1.073   0.963   0.384   13.461      0.731
2000Q2           179           9047.285   1.585    2.001      1.091   0.972   0.418   13.481      0.719
2000Q3           194           9266.313   1.554    2.085      1.109   0.977   0.440   13.385      0.703
2000Q4           233           7365.650   1.555    2.206      1.110   0.986   0.513   13.453      0.707
2001Q1           197           8413.300   1.493    2.417      1.120   0.993   0.517   13.143      0.721
 ALL             3305          8357.177   1.884    1.165      0.662   0.937   0.367   13.107      0.716
Source: International Data Corporation (IDC) Quarterly PC Tracker for large business customers matched to more detailed PC characteristics from several
industry datasources and trade magazines, US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: All the entries (except model numbers and quantity) are weighted by PC model sales. "Benchmark" is a score assigned to each processor-speed
combination based on technical and performance characteristics (see CPU Scorecard: www. cpuscorecard.com).


                                                                                  67
                                         TABLE A2 - DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR SERVER DATA
                                                            Rack
              No. of                        Price    RAM            Symmetrical Number
 Period                     Quantity                       Optimize                      Windows Netware                                            Unix         Linux
              models                      ($1000s) (100MB)           Processor  of Racks
                                                              d
1996Q1         123         727.252         13.523    0.618  0.036     0.558      0.036    0.199   0.382                                            0.245         0.000
1996Q2         125         772.664         12.323    0.766  0.037     0.551      0.037    0.199   0.394                                            0.231         0.000
1996Q3         116         843.828         13.637    1.336  0.010     0.618      0.071    0.211   0.398                                            0.226         0.000
1996Q4         129         923.101         13.793    1.444  0.094     0.580      0.883    0.209   0.390                                            0.232         0.000
1997Q1         128         908.258         11.945    1.602  0.079     0.595      1.221    0.226   0.406                                            0.233         0.000
1997Q2         129         1112.605        11.671    1.671  0.103     0.684      1.808    0.229   0.398                                            0.227         0.000
1997Q3         134         1331.254         9.874    1.469  0.164     0.716      2.350    0.272   0.400                                            0.194         0.000
1997Q4         145         1322.752        10.830    1.793  0.119     0.753      2.582    0.280   0.381                                            0.224         0.000
1998Q1         153         1071.209         9.485    2.023  0.088     0.794      2.708    0.324   0.374                                            0.209         0.004
1998Q2         143         1154.790         9.113    2.222  0.057     0.779      3.115    0.336   0.365                                            0.226         0.005
1998Q3         145         1331.276         8.253    2.226  0.057     0.777      3.788    0.353   0.381                                            0.192         0.008
1998Q4         167         1523.964         7.434    2.666  0.108     0.818      3.855    0.427   0.327                                            0.171         0.012
1999Q1         151         1412.715         8.053    3.122  0.068     0.786      3.974    0.439   0.313                                            0.182         0.023
1999Q2         125         2105.560         7.942    3.267  0.079     0.871      4.135    0.440   0.306                                            0.182         0.028
1999Q3         131         2016.008         7.879    3.523  0.077     0.893      4.235    0.447   0.304                                            0.173         0.031
1999Q4         146         1840.541         7.166    3.938  0.122     0.878      4.013    0.445   0.257                                            0.188         0.060
2000Q1         150         1748.087         7.249    4.223  0.203     0.891      3.754    0.488   0.215                                            0.180         0.084
2000Q2         171         1881.368         7.115    4.478  0.329     0.886      3.527    0.539   0.169                                            0.178         0.086
2000Q3         162         2147.352         6.952    4.586  0.399     0.890      3.363    0.545   0.145                                            0.192         0.093
2000Q4         148         2270.491         6.748    4.807  0.417     0.877      3.495    0.555   0.132                                            0.193         0.094
2001Q1         146         1805.041         6.471    4.803  0.396     0.896      3.535    0.567   0.138                                            0.175         0.098
 ALL           2967        1466.206         8.556    3.174  0.181     0.808      3.134    0.414   0.281                                            0.195         0.042
Source: International Data Corporation (IDC) Quarterly Server Tracker matched to more detailed server characteristics from several industry data sources and trade magazines,
US market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: All the entries (except model numbers and quantity) are weighted by server model sales.




                                                                                   68
                               TABLE A3 - LOGIT DEMAND FOR PCs - First Stage Results
                                                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Instruments
Number of models produced by firm                              38.422***              34.248***             30.549***              36.478***
                                                                 (6.513)                (5.145)               (5.212)               (4.713)
Number of models produced by other firms                       11.180***               7.116***              4.676***              3.763***
                                                                 (3.836)                (1.167)               (1.125)               (1.115)
Sum of RAM of firm models                                         -0.100              -0.392***             -0.378***              -0.189***
                                                                 (0.168)                (0.130)               (0.130)               (0.079)
Sum RAM on rival firm’s models                                   0.285**                -0.031                -0.031               -0.065***
                                                                 (0.128)                (0.064)               (0.064)               (0.018)
Sum of speed of firm’s models                                   -0.088**                -0.014               0.051***
                                                                 (0.044)                (0.029)               (0.023)
Sum of other firms’ model speed                                -0.110***               -0.031**               -0.009
                                                                 (0.035)                (0.011)               (0.010)
Sum of hard disk space of own firm models                       2.802***               2.623***
                                                                 (0.925)                (0.872)
Sum hard disk space of other firm’s models                      1.153***               0.860***
                                                                 (0.338)                (0.210)
Notes: These are the first stage results from Table 1. The regressions include all the exogenous variables in Table 1. Column (1) corresponds to
column (2), column (2) corresponds to column (4), column (3) corresponds to column (5) and column (4) corresponds to column (6) in Table 1.
Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 1,000. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below coefficients: *significant at 10%;
**significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.




                                                                               69
                              TABLE A4 - LOGIT DEMAND FOR SERVERS - First Stage Results
                                                                           (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Instruments
Number of models produced by firm                                      -722.195               80.373**              91.446***            107.739***
                                                                       (931.887)              (39.395)               (26.849)             (25.253)
Number of models produced by other firms                               -948.912             -89.467***             -81.724***            -58.440***
                                                                       (933.217)              (23.741)               (22.473)             (18.793)
Sum RAM on rival firm’s models                                         0.031***               0.017***               0.010***             0.007***
                                                                        (0.005)                (0.006)                (0.002)              (0.002)
Quality adjusted price indices for semi-conductors                                           -3568.634            -8592.337**
                                                                                            (5156.247)             (4135.553)
Quality adjusted price indices for hard disks                                                -4989.916              -2513.099
                                                                                            (3507.393)             (3125.327)
Sum of Rack Optimized in rival firm’s models                                                  -203.671
                                                                                             (131.086)
Sum of Racks in rival firm's models                                                            -2.108
                                                                                               (5.148)
Sum of Unix of firm’s models                                                                   64.556
                                                                                             (198.946)
Notes: These are the first stage results from Table 2. The regressions include all the exogenous variables in Table 2. Column (1) corresponds to column (2),
column (2) to column (4), column (3) to column (5) and column (4) to column (6) in Table 2. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 1,000.
Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below coefficients: *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.




                                                                                   70
                                   TABLE A5 - REDUCED FORM ESTIMATES OF RESIDUAL INTEROPERABILITY EFFECT
                                                         (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)                                            (5)                        (6)
Estimation method                                       OLS             OLS                IV               IV                                            OLS                       OLS
Dependent variable                                 Quantity sold of Quantity sold of Quantity sold of Quantity sold of                               Quantity sold of           Quantity sold of
                                                   Windows servers       PCs         Windows servers       PCs                                       Windows servers                 PCs

Non-Microsoft Server quality                             -4.110**                 14.194                 -6.142**                  1.721                   -4.504               17.960
                                                          (1.804)                (17.479)                 (2.754)                 (19.950)                (2.985)              (25.760)
Other Controls                                              No                      No                      No                       No             Microsoft server Microsoft server
                                                                                                                                                    quality, PC quality, quality, PC quality,
                                                                                                                                                    PC OS price,         PC OS price,
                                                                                                                                                    Microsoft server Microsoft server
                                                                                                                                                    OS price             OS price
 st
1 Stage F-test                                                                                                         10.2
Implied relative interoperability effect                               3.454                                           0.280                                              3.987
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics from several industry datasources and trade magazines, US
market (1996Q1-2001Q1).
Notes: All equations control for a winter quarter dummy and time trend. Columns (3) and (4) treat server quality as endogenous and instrument with lagged quality. The "implied interoperability effect"
is calculated using the formula in Appendix F. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis below coefficients: *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.




                                                                                                  71
                                 FIGURE A1: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (BASELINE MODEL, 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL)
    240
                          Statistically significant incentives to degrade                                                                        Upper confidence band
    220                                                                                                                                        for relative margin effect
                          Relative Output Effect
    200
                          Relative Margin Effect
    180

    160

    140

    120

    100       Upper confidence band for
              relative output effect

     80
                       Lower confidence band for
     60                relative output effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Relative Margin Effect
     40

     20                                                                                                                                                              Lower confidence band
                                                                                                                                                                   for relative margin effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Relative Output Effect
       0
              1996Q1

                        1996Q2

                                  1996Q3

                                           1996Q4

                                                    1997Q1

                                                             1997Q2

                                                                      1997Q3

                                                                               1997Q4

                                                                                        1998Q1

                                                                                                 1998Q2

                                                                                                          1998Q3

                                                                                                                   1998Q4

                                                                                                                             1999Q1

                                                                                                                                      1999Q2

                                                                                                                                                 1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                          1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                                     2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                              2000Q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001Q1
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients in
column (1) of Table 3.
Notes: This plots the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D and their 95% confidence interval. The shaded area
highlights the period where the relative margin effect is statistically higher than the relative output effect, hence Microsoft had significant incentives to degrade according to our
model.


                                                                                                                            72
                     FIGURE A2: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (STRONG COMPLEMENTARITY, 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL)
  30
  28                     Statistically significant incentives to degrade

  26                     Relative Output Effect
  24
                         Relative Margin Effect
  22
  20
  18
                                                                                                                                                                              Upper confidence band for
  16                                                                                                                                                                            relative margin effect
  14
  12
  10
                                                                                                                                   Lower confidence band for
            Upper confidence band                                                                                                      relative margin effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Relative Margin Effect
    8
            for relative output effect
    6                                               Lower confidence band
                                                    for relative output effect
    4
    2
    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Relative Output Effect
            1996Q1

                      1996Q2

                               1996Q3

                                        1996Q4

                                                 1997Q1

                                                          1997Q2

                                                                   1997Q3

                                                                            1997Q4

                                                                                     1998Q1

                                                                                              1998Q2

                                                                                                       1998Q3

                                                                                                                1998Q4

                                                                                                                          1999Q1

                                                                                                                                      1999Q2

                                                                                                                                               1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                        1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                                 2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                          2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q4
   -2
   -4
   -6
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients in
column (4) of Table 3.
Notes: This plots the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D and their 95% confidence interval. The shaded area
highlights the period where the relative margin effect is statistically higher than the relative output effect, hence Microsoft had significant incentives to degrade according to our
model.



                                                                                                                     73
                          FIGURE A3: RELATIVE MARGIN AND OUTPUT EFFECTS (FREE COMPLEMENTARITY, 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL)

                        Statistically significant incentives to degrade
   29                   Relative Output Effect
                        Relative Margin Effect
   24
                                                                                                                                                                            Upper confidence band for
                                                                                                                                                                              relative margin effect

   19                                                      Upper confidence band
                                                          for relative output effect


   14
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Relative Margin Effect

     9

            Lower confidence band for
              relative output effect                                                                                                                                    Lower confidence band for
     4                                                                                                                                                                    relative margin effect


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Relative Output Effect
    -1
             1996Q1

                      1996Q2

                               1996Q3

                                        1996Q4

                                                 1997Q1

                                                            1997Q2

                                                                     1997Q3

                                                                              1997Q4

                                                                                       1998Q1

                                                                                                1998Q2

                                                                                                         1998Q3

                                                                                                                  1998Q4

                                                                                                                           1999Q1

                                                                                                                                    1999Q2

                                                                                                                                             1999Q3

                                                                                                                                                      1999Q4

                                                                                                                                                               2000Q1

                                                                                                                                                                          2000Q2

                                                                                                                                                                                   2000Q3

                                                                                                                                                                                            2000Q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                     2001Q1
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the IDC Quarterly PC and Server Tracker data matched to more detailed PC and Server characteristics and the estimated coefficients in
column (5) of Table 3.
Notes: This plots the evolution of calculated relative output and margin effects based on the formulas provided in Appendix D and their 95% confidence interval. The shaded area
highlights the period where the relative margin effect is statistically higher than the relative output effect, hence Microsoft had significant incentives to degrade according to our
model.




                                                                                                                           74
