NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTIVITY VOLATILITY AND THE MISALLOCATION OF RESOURCES
IN DEVELOPING ECONOMIES
Allan Collard-Wexler
John Asker
Jan De Loecker
Working Paper 17175
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17175

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

We would like to thank Dave Backus, for introducing us to the World Bank Data, and Gian Luca Clementi,
Alessandro Gavazza, Pete Klenow, Richard Rogerson, Daniel Xu, and participants in the NYU Stern
Micro Lunch and the MIT IO seminar for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Allan Collard-Wexler, John Asker, and Jan De Loecker. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Productivity Volatility and the Misallocation of Resources in Developing Economies
Allan Collard-Wexler, John Asker, and Jan De Loecker
NBER Working Paper No. 17175
June 2011
JEL No. D24,L2,O47
ABSTRACT
We investigate the role of dynamic production inputs and their associated adjustment costs in shaping
the dispersion of total factor productivity (TFP) and static measures of capital misallocation within
a country. Using data on 5,010 establishments in 33 developing countries from the World Bank’s Enterprise
Research Data, we find that countries exhibiting greater time-series volatility of productivity are also
characterized by greater cross-sectional dispersion in productivity. Volatility in TFP explains one quarter
to one third of cross-country productivity dispersion. We document a similar relationship between
productivity volatility and the dispersion of the marginal revenue product of capital (static capital misallocation).
We then use a standard model of investment with adjustment costs, parameterized using numbers calibrated
to U.S. data, to show that increasing the volatility of productivity to the level observed in these developing
economies can quantitatively replicate the observed relationship between static misallocation and volatility
observed in the data. We find that sixty-one percent of the static capital misallocation in the data is
captured by the model’s prediction. Our findings suggest that the dynamic process governing productivity
shocks is a first-order determinant of differences in misallocation and, hence, income across countries.

Allan Collard-Wexler
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
KMC-7-80
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
wexler@nyu.edu
John Asker
Stern School of Business
Department of Economics, Suite 7-79
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jasker@stern.nyu.edu

Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

It is well-documented that there exist large differences in performance, typically measured
by total factor productivity (TFP), across producers within narrowly defined industries at
any given point in time.1 In addition, the extent of this dispersion varies considerably
across countries, particularly when comparing countries at different stages of economic
development. A growing literature considers the welfare effect of this TFP dispersion. Most
prominently, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) have put forward a framework that identifies the
degree of misallocation of resources from the variation in marginal products of inputs across
producers. They find that if producers in the manufacturing sectors of India and China had
the same degree of misallocation as the manufacturing sector in the United States, output
would increase by thirty and sixty percent, respectively.2 Their conclusions are derived by
viewing the micro data on production and input choices through the lens of a static model
of the economy, coupled with parameters of production and demand for the U.S. economy.
Under this setting, optimal input choices are directly informative about the extent to which
factors of production are misallocated. Much of the work following this paper has tried to
find mechanisms to explain why TFP differences do not get eliminated by reallocation of
resources.3
In this paper, we start our analysis by establishing an empirical relationship between
the dynamic process governing changes in productivity over time and cross-sectional measures of productivity dispersion and (static) capital misallocation. Data from the World
Bank’s Enterprise Data on 5,010 establishments in 33 developing countries shows the crosssectional dispersion of TFP is correlated with the time-series volatility of TFP. We find that
countries exhibiting greater time-series volatility of productivity are also characterized by
greater cross-sectional dispersion in productivity.
After establishing this result in the data, we focus on a model that provides an economic basis for this observed link. In particular, this model examines the role of dynamic
production inputs, capital in our case, and the costs associated with adjusting those inputs
in shaping the dispersion of TFP in a given country. We construct a variant of a standard
dynamic investment model with adjustment costs where producers face a stochastic process
for their underlying (heterogeneous) productivity. We parametrize this investment model
using estimates obtained by Bloom (2009) on U.S. data. This, together with the estimated
evolution process of establishment-level productivity (obtained using our rich micro data),
allows us to compute implications for the dispersion and volatility of the marginal revenue
product of capital, the volatility of capital, and the dispersion of productivity.
We show that a parsimonious model of the country-specific productivity process has
the ability to explain a large amount of the variation in productivity dispersion, as well as
dispersion in the static marginal revenue product of capital across countries. We provide
1

See Bartelsman and Doms (2000), Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2009) and references therein.
At the industry level, undoing misallocation has been shown empirically to have first-order welfare effects. A
well known example is Olley and Pakes (1996)’s study of productivity growth in the telecommunications equipment industry. They find that a large fraction of aggregate productivity growth in the industry is accounted for
by the reallocation of output to more productive firms. Many papers also find the Olley and Pakes (1996) covariance term between output and productivity plays a key role in accounting for aggregate productivity growth. See
Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2009).
3
See for instance Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), Collard-Wexler (2009), Midrigan and Xu (2009), and Moll
(2010) for some recent work.
2

2

evidence supporting the claim that the dynamic process of productivity is important, both
empirically and theoretically, in determining the patterns observed in the cross-section. In
particular, we find that sixty-one percent of the observed capital misallocation in the data is
captured by the model’s prediction.
More importantly, we make the point that the welfare implication of productivity dispersion depends crucially on whether the productivity process is a primitive. If the process is
exogenous, then our model provides an optimal capital allocation and, therefore, a socially
optimal dispersion in the marginal revenue product of capital. To the extent that producers
in developing countries seem to be doing at least as well as this benchmark productivity
dispersion, differences across countries are welfare irrelevant (conditional on adjustment
costs also being exogenous).
Hence, by missing the dynamics in capital adjustment, large measures of productivity
and marginal product dispersion may appear inefficient from a static perspective but are not
necessarily inefficient from a dynamic perspective. Clearly, we are not the first to make this
point, but our paper goes beyond this by empirically quantifying the extent to which differences in dispersion can be generated from a dynamic model of investment. Emphasizing
the potential importance of productivity dynamics is the fact that, in our empirical model,
the only difference between countries is the stochastic process of productivity shocks.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we briefly describe the
data and present some preliminary findings on the empirical relationship between dispersion and volatility. Section 3 introduces the investment model and discusses its empirical
implications. In the final section, we discuss conclusions and a few outstanding issues.

2

Data and preliminary analysis

In this section, we establish the statistical link between productivity dispersion and productivity volatility. First, we introduce the rich micro panel dataset, the World Bank’s Enterprise Research Data, which we use to investigate misallocation. Our introduction is brief
and we refer to Appendix A for more details. We then establish the correlation between
productivity dispersion and volatility.

2.1

Production data

These data were collected by the World Bank across 41 countries and many different industries between 2002 and 2006. The main advantage of this dataset is the uniform data
collection protocol across countries. Indeed, without this uniformity, it would be more difficult to argue that differences in measurement error are not responsible for the differences
we observe across countries. Standard output and input measures are reported in a harmonized fashion. In particular, we observe sales, intermediate inputs, various measures of
capital, and employment during (and up to) a three-year period, which allows us to compute
changes in productivity and capital.
While there are 71,789 establishments surveyed, only 5,010 can be used, since we
need two years of information on sales, assets, and employment to compute productivity and the change in productivity. Out of the 41 countries in the data, only 33 have usable
establishment-level observations.4 To make magnitudes comparable across countries, the
4

The limited number of establishments with productivity data is primarily an issue of survey design: For many

3

data are converted from local currency units into U.S. dollars, using the World Bank’s measure of purchasing power parity (PA.NUS.PPP).5

2.2

Measuring productivity and summary statistics

Before we report a few important summary statistics of the data, we discuss the measurement of productivity (TFP), productivity dispersion, and misallocation.

2.2.1

Modeling preliminaries

To guide measurement we begin by providing an explicit model of productivity, in the
context of a profit maximizing establishment (we assume that establishments operate as
autonomous units so, for our purposes, firms and establishment are synonymous). An establishment i, in country c, in time t, produces output Qict using the following technology:6
αK αL
Qict = Aict Kict
Lict

(1)

where Kict is the capital input and Lict is the labor input; and the demand curve for the
establishment’s product is given by a constant elasticity of demand curve:
−
Qict = Bict Pict

(2)

Combining these two equations, we obtain an expression for the revenue generating
production function:
βK βL
Sict = Yict Kict
Lict
(3)
1− 1

1

where Yict = Aict  B  , and βX = αX (1 − 1 ) such that X ∈ {K, L}.
We now need to impute the value of βL . Cost minimization implies that the labor cost
share (i.e., the share of the wage bill in costs) can be expressed as
 wct Lict
(4)
 − 1 Sict
We allow βL to vary at the level of a sector within a country to allow for flexibility in the
production function. Thus, our approach to measuring productivity is to compute:
βL =

yict = sict − βK kict − βL lict

(5)

We define TFP as yict = ln(Yict ).7 We measure the value of βL using the cost share
(as derived above) and simply recover the capital share from the constant returns to scale
years and countries, the World Bank does not collect historical data on capital stock.
5
Note that we account for differences in the rate of inflation across countries by using a year-specific measure
of PPP. Since productivity is a ratio, these PPP conversions get netted out in many specifications, but they are
useful when, for instance, we use controls for establishment size.
6
If materials, M , (or other inputs) are a concern, we can expand the production function to be Qict =
αK αL
min (Aict Kict
Lict , f (M )), such that f (M ) is monotonic and increasing. Note that this Leontief structure means
that we can ignore materials. Tables 8 and 9 in Appendix A.3 run the analysis in this paper using value-added and
gross output measures of productivity and find the same qualitative results, although changes in the data required
changes the composition of the sample we can use.
7
We use lower cases to denote variables in logs throughout the paper. In much of the literature, such as Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008), this measure of TFP is referred to as revenue productivity.

4

assumption, or βK = 1 − βL . In order to compute the labor cost share, we need to assign a
value to the elasticity parameter, . We follow Bloom (2009) and set it equal to four.8

2.2.2

Summary statistics

The 33 countries that have usable data are shown in Table 1, together with the dispersion
of TFP, computed as the standard deviation in yict . That is, taking Indonesia as an example, 438 establishments have sufficient data for our purposes, and the standard deviation in
yit across these Indonesian establishments is 1.23. The interpretation of this number is as
follows: The mean productivity level in the data (yict ) is 0.7. If all countries were to have
the same average level of productivity, an Indonesian establishment with productivity one
standard deviation higher than the average would be generating 3.4 times more output than
average, despite using the same inputs. The comparable multiples for Poland and Tanzania
are 1.7 and 4, respectively. These large differences between countries in productivity dispersion echo the findings that Hsieh and Klenow (2009) report in their comparison of India,
China, and the United States.
Table 2 presents summary statistics at the establishment, country, and country-industry
level in panels 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The first panel shows considerable variation in
establishment size. Average (logged) sales are 7.1, which translates to 1,211 USD with a
standard deviation of 3.1. This sets the point located one standard deviation higher than the
mean, at 26,903 USD. The largest establishment has total sales approaching 5 billion USD.
Fifty two percent of establishments report no investment (measured by Zero Investment),
which explains why the number of observations for Log Investment is 2,389, rather than
5,010.9
On average sales do not change substantially from year to year; the mean change in
log sales is 0.1. However, the standard deviation of this change is larger, and economically
significant, at 0.6. Likewise, productivity changes for some establishments are substantial
from year to year, as is reflected in a standard deviation of productivity change of 0.6, which
is striking given that the standard deviation of productivity is 1.1.
The bottom panels present aggregate statistics at the country and country-industry levels. The standard deviation of productivity within a country ranges from 0.42 to 1.49, which
are economically significant differences. Moreover, the standard deviation in the change in
productivity within a country varies between 0.2 and 1.1. Similar statistics are shown at the
country-industry level of aggregation, where we find a standard deviation of productivity
between 0 and 3.8, and a standard deviation of the change in productivity between 0.4 and
2. As one would expect, cross-country-industry differences in productivity dispersion and
volatility are somewhat larger than cross-country differences.

2.3

Dispersion and volatility

After measuring TFP for each establishment using data on sales and input usage, we construct the standard deviation of yict as a measure of TFP dispersion in each country. We rely
8

Alternatively, we could estimate the output elasticity directly from production data. We follow the standard
in this literature and rely on cost shares to compute TFP and thereby avoid the issues surrounding identification of
output elasticities (in our case, across many industries and countries).
9
The large share of zero investment data is a well known feature of production data in developing countries.
See, for instance, Levinsohn and Petrin (2003).

5

on the standard deviation of (yict − yict−1 ) as a measure of TFP volatility for each country.
We then examine the correlation between these measures of a country’s TFP dispersion and
TFP volatility. The result of this process is shown in Figure 1 (depicting specification I in
Table 3).
Figure 1 illustrates the positive correlation between TFP dispersion and TFP volatility.
Indeed, cross-country variation in TFP volatility explains 26 percent of the cross-country
variation in TFP dispersion in an OLS regression with a constant as the only other regressor.
Table 3 presents regressions of productivity dispersion on productivity volatility, measured as described in the previous two paragraphs. Specification I (depicted in Figure 1)
shows the OLS regression, using observations at the country level, weighted by the number
of productivity observations per country. This weighting is used to give more importance
to countries whose measurements of productivity dispersion and productivity volatility are
relatively precise. In other words, this weighting by observations per country is a simple proxy for the optimal weighting matrix, the inverse of the covariance matrix of the
estimated productivity dispersion and productivity volatility. In this specification, 26 percent of the (appropriately weighted) variation in within-country productivity dispersion is
accounted for by productivity volatility. Specification II shows the results from an unweighted regression. Across both specifications, we find a coefficient of around 0.57, with
standard errors of less than 0.25. Thus, there is strong statistical support for the hypothesis
that dispersion and volatility are related.
In specifications III and IV the unit of observation changes from the country to the establishment. The standard deviation of yict is common for all establishments in a country,
but we now control for establishment size using total assets and the industrial activity of the
establishment. The coefficients are equivalent to those found without these controls. The
standard errors are also comparable. The results from these regressions eliminate the concern that dispersion and volatility are co-generated by a third variable, such as a country’s
industrial composition or the size of plants within a country. We ran additional robustness
checks using different measures of productivity and dispersion, and these are presented in
the appendix. These rely on specifications that identify effects using country-industry level
variation and, hence, have country and industry fixed effects. We find that the relationship
between dispersion and volatility presented here is robust.

2.4

Capital misallocation and volatility

Productivity dispersion is economically relevant, to the extent that it reflects movements
away from an optimal feasible resource allocation. This is most often examined in the context of productive inefficiency within an economy by inspecting differences in the static
marginal revenue product of capital (MRPK) across establishments. The MRPK should, in
the absence of adjustment costs (or other frictions), be equal across establishments. Building on the model in section 2.2.1 the static marginal revenue product of capital is given
by:
∂Sict
Sict
M RP K =
= βK
(6)
∂Kict
Kict
Thus, the dispersion (measured in standard deviations) of log(M RPK ) is:
Std. (log(M RP K)) = Std. (log(Sict ) − log(Kict )) = Std. (sict − kict )
We use this as our measure of dispersion of the marginal revenue product of capital.

6

(7)

Table 4 presents regressions of static misallocation, Std. (sict − kict ), on productivity
volatility, Std.(yict − yict−1 ). We use the same controls and estimation procedures as before
and, as such, the only difference between tables 3 and 4 is the dependent variable. The
coefficients in each specification are 0.65, 0.74, 0.63, and 0.66, respectively. All coefficients
are statistically significant. Moreover, the R2 is 0.23 in specification I, where no other
controls are included. This increases to 0.3 when industry fixed-effects and log assets are
included. Thus, a substantial fraction of cross-country differences in misallocation can
be attributed to differences in country-specific productivity volatility. This suggests the
existence of an important link between the volatility of productivity in a country and the
extent of (static) capital misallocation in that economy.
As with productivity dispersion, we report additional robustness checks in the appendix,
using different measures of productivity. Again, we find that these results are robust.10

3

Structural analysis: Model and empirics

The previous section set the stage by establishing a central fact in the data. In this section,
we investigate the quantitative and qualitative implications of a link between dispersion and
volatility in a more structural setting, employing a calibrated model.

3.1

A dynamic investment model

We begin by articulating a dynamic investment model that allows us to examine the link
between productivity volatility and dispersion in both the static marginal revenue product
of capital and productivity. Then we take the model to the data and assess the extent to
which the model has explanatory power.
We take the framework developed in section 2.2.1 and embed it in a dynamic framework. Our model follows, and builds on, a standard model of investment used in the work
of Bloom (2009), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), Dixit and Pindyck (1994), and Caballero
and Pindyck (1996). Taking the structure in section 2.2.1 as given, we begin by noting that
establishments can hire labor in each period for a wage w. Thus, we can optimize out labor,
conditional on Yict and Kict . This leads to a ‘period-profit’ (ignoring capital costs for the
moment) of
#
 1 " βL
βK 
1
βL
βL 1−βL
1−βL
1−βL
πict = Yict Kict
−w
(8)
w
w
Capital depreciates at rate δ so Kict+1 = (1 − δ)Kict + Iict where Iict denotes investment. These investment decisions are affected by a one-period time to build and a cost of
investment C(Iict , Kict , Yict ).11 We employ the cost function used in Bloom (2009). It
is composed of: 1) a fixed disruption cost of investing; 2) capital irreversabilities, which
are captured by a wedge between the purchase and sale price for capital; and 3) a convex adjustment cost expressed as a function of the percent investment rate and, therefore,
10

We have run, but do not report, the full set of robustness checks reported for productivity dispersion.
This time to build assumption is, in itself, a friction that we can easily shut down by allowing investment to
become productive within a period. As an indication of the economic effect of adjustment costs, if we set these to
zero, then dispersion in the MRPK is reduced by half.
11

7

C(Iict , Kict , Yict ):
F
CK
1(Iict

6= 0)π(Yict , Kict ) +

+
Iict

− (1 −

P −
CK
)Iict

+

Q
CK
Kict



Iict
Kict

2

(9)

Next, let Yict follow an AR(1) process given by
ln(Yict ) = µ + ρc ln(Yict−1 ) + σc νict

(10)

where νict ∼ N (0, 1) is an i.i.d. standard normal random variable. Note that we allow the
volatility of productivity, as measured by σc , and the persistence coefficient, ρc to vary from
one country to another. Indeed, when we present results from computing our model, the
volatility and persistence parameters (σc , ρc ) are the only difference between countries.12
An establishment’s value function V is given by the Bellman equation:
V (Yict , Kict ) = max π(Yict , Kict ) − C(Iict , Kict , Yict )
Iict
Z
(11)
+β
V (Yict+1 , δKict + Iict )φ (Yict+1 |Yict , ρc , µ, σc ) dYict+1
Yict+1

and, thus, an establishment’s policy function I ∗ (Yict , Kict ) is just the investment level that
maximizes the establishment’s continuation value.
Note that since there is neither entry nor exit in this model, there is no truncation of
the productivity distribution.13 Thus, given the AR(1) structure above, the cross-sectional
standard deviation of productivity is mechanically given by the ergodic distribution of Yit .
Hence,
σc
Std.(yict ) = p
(12)
1 − ρ2c

where, as earlier, yict = ln(Yict ).
We analyze the model using computation. The parameters we use are found in table 5.
Parameters for the capital share, elasticity of demand, depreciation rate, and discount rate
are taken from Bloom (2009). We also follow Bloom in adopting his estimated parameters
for adjustments costs. These adjustment cost parameters are estimated from US Compustat
data, focusing on large U.S. firms. Bloom’s estimation procedure uses a model in which
investment decisions are made each month, with the model’s predictions aggregated to the
year-level to form moments in which to fit the data. Modeling decisions on a monthly level
is an attractive approach, as the model incorporates the likely time aggregation embedded
in annual data. We follow this approach in computing the model and interpret a period in
the model as equivalent to a month in data.14

12

Note that the specification in equation (10) rules out aggregate-level shocks to productivity growth. However,
a regression of changes in productivity on country-year dummies yields an R-squared of only 4 percent. Thus,
there is only a small aggregate component to productivity change.
13
The absence of entry and exit is a consequence of the decreasing returns to scale in the revenue equation
(yielded by constant returns to scale in the production function and an elastic demand curve) and the absence of
fixed costs, which make it profitable for any establishment to operate at a small enough scale.
14
This interpretation requires transforming the AR(1) process into its monthly equivalent. After noting that the
sum of normal random variables with the same mean is distributed normally, this reduces to a straightforward
algebraic exercise.

8

We also need to set a value for the wage term, w, which takes the role of a scaling
parameter in the per-period profit function. We set it to 0.3, simply to make sure per-period
profits are greater than zero.15
The last set of parameters we need to fix are the σc and ρc terms in the AR(1) process,
which governs the evolution of productivity over time. In the subsequent section 3.3.1, we
estimate this process using the establishment data from the World Bank Enterprise Survey
used earlier. For the moment, however, we merely note that the range of σc observed in
data lies in the interval [0.22, 1.12]. As a result, we compute the model for values of σc
between 0.1 and 1.4. For ρc we pick three values found in the data, the first is 0.865, which
is the median value across countries (corresponding to Tanzania), and 0.754 and 0.968, the
are the values closest to the 10th and 90th percentile values (i.e. a low value, corresponding
to Moldova, and a high value, corresponding to Nicaragua). For more details, see the
subsequent discussion in section 3.3.1 and Tables 6 and 7.
We compute the optimal investment policies for the value function in equation (11). We
solve this model using a discretized version of the state space (Yit , Kit ). Specifically, we
use a grid of capital states ranging from log capital 3 to log capital equal to 20, in increments
of 0.1. Moreover, we use a grid of productivity yit = log(Yit ) with 50 grid points, whose
transition matrix and grid points are computed using Tauchen (1986)’s method. The model
is solved in MATLAB using policy iteration with a sparse transition matrix (since there are
8,500 states). Using the computed optimal policies, we simulate the evolution of a country,
or industry, for 10,000 plants over 1,000 periods. We use the output from the 1,000th and
988th periods to compute the reported results (corresponding to years t and t − 1; recall
that we interpret a period as a month).

3.2

Computational results

Figure 2 shows the output of the model. Panel 1 puts values of σc on the horizontal axis,
and computed values of Std.[sict − kict ] are on the vertical axis. That is, it examines the
way dispersion in the static marginal revenue product of capital changes as σc , the volatility of productivity, changes. Panels 2 through 5 have the same format, showing the computed dispersion in productivity (Std.[yict ]), the computed volatility in the marginal revenue
product of capital over time (Std.[(sict − kict ) − (sict−1 − kict−1 )]), the volatility in establishments’ capital over time (Std.[kict − kict−1 ]), and the proportion of establishments with
zero investment over a year, respectively.
Panel 2 is the most mechanical of the relationships reported in Figure 2. As noted
above, the dispersion in productivity is given by √ σc 2 . Hence, any deviations away from
1−ρc

a straight line in the simulation merely reflect variance introduced by simulation error. A
further implication of this is that, if ρc and σc were constant over countries, there would be
no cross-country differences in productivity dispersion.
Panel 1 contains the dispersion of the static marginal revenue product of capital (Std.[sict −
kict ]). This dispersion reflects the optimal investment choices of establishments facing different productivity shocks over time and, hence, different state variables. To make the effect
of this clear, note that if all plants had the same capital stock, this graph would replicate the
relationship found in Panel 2. Yet the relationship between Std.[sict − kict ] and σc is not
15

It can be shown that different values of w that yield positive profits give the same dispersion and misallocation
statistics. Indeed, the adjustment cost model of Bloom (2009) is purposefully homogenous of degree one.

9

linear and has a slope change at σc = 0.4 for ρc = 0.968, at σc = 0.8 for ρc = 0.865, and
at σc = 1.1 for ρc = 0.754. At this point, the relationship between Std.[sict − kict ] and σc
becomes steeper.
To see why this is happening, examine Panel 4. Panel 4 shows the relationship between
Std.[kict − kict−1 ] and σc . As volatility increases, plants will engage in more investment
and disinvestment. Since greater volatility leads to larger changes in productivity, it is natural that plants respond by altering their capital stock more frequently. However, for at
least some values of the state space, plants begin to reduce their response to productivity
shocks after σc reaches 0.4 for ρc = 0.968, 0.8 for ρc = 0.865 and 1.1 for ρc = 0.754. At
these high levels of volatility, current productivity is a weaker signal of the future marginal
revenue product of capital. In the limit, where the productivity process is an i.i.d. draw,
current productivity provides no information about future profitability. Firms would chose
an optimal level of capital and stick to it forever, resulting in no variance in investment
across establishments. Thus, the “hump-shaped” response of capital adjustments to volatility is due to the changing trade-off in determining the value of investment today, between
the size of shocks experienced today and the likelihood that they will be swamped by future
shocks.
Panel 5 shows the fraction of plants with zero investment in the current year as a function of volatility, σc . This panel mirrors the effect of volatility on dispersion in capital
adjustment found in Panel 4: As volatility increases, establishments at first respond by
investing and disinvesting more often, but above σc = 0.4, 0.8 or 1.1, the frequency of adjustment falls (for at least some states).
The results in panels 4 and 5 help explain the relationship between misallocation and
volatility in Panel 1. As volatility increases above 0.4, 0.8 or 1.1, the capital adjustment
mechanism starts to shut down, and this speeds up the dispersion of the static marginal
revenue product of capital.
Finally, Panel 3 shows the relationship between the standard deviation of the change
in [sict − kict ] and σc . This relationship is essentially linear and is driven by year-to-year
changes in productivity, rather than large year-to-year changes in capital stock.

3.3

Empirical implications

We now confront the model with the data. Doing this requires that the σc and ρc parameters
in the AR(1) process, which governs the evolution of productivity over time, be estimated.
We estimate this using the World Bank Enterprise Survey data, resulting in a σc and ρc
parameter for each country. We then run the model for each country, using the country’s
estimated σc and ρc in the AR(1) productivity process, as well as the other model parameters described above and in Table 5. This generates the prediction for each country that we
take to the data.
It is worth emphasizing from the outset that the only part of the model estimated using
country-specific data are the σc and ρc parameters in the AR(1) process. All other parameters are taken from either standard practice in handling U.S. establishment data, or (in the
case of the adjustment cost parameters) from models estimated using U.S. data. Thus, the
only source of differences between countries in the model’s predictions is the different parameterizations on the productivity process. Thus, to the extent that the model fits the data,
this reflects the impact of cross-country differences in the productivity process in accounting for differences in countries’ cross-sectional dispersion in the static marginal revenue

10

product of capital (static capital misallocation) and the other variables of interest.

3.3.1

Estimating the productivity AR(1) process

The first step is to estimate the AR(1) process used to model the stochastic productivity
process over time. Tables 6 and 7, summarize the results of this exercise. Specification I,
in Table 6, shows a simple specification in which the process is modeled as
yict = µ + ρyict−1 + σνict

(13)

such that ρc and σ do not vary across countries. Both ρ and σ are significant, with ρ = 0.83
and σ = 0.6. The unit of observation is the establishment. The data is a short panel, as
we only have two years of data per establishment. Identification of the AR(1) relies on the
assumption that ρ and σ are constant over time and across establishments.16 This allows us
to identify the model using cross-sectional variation in establishment-specific productivity
pairs, < yict , yict−1 >.
Specifications II through IV estimate the model with a variety of robustness checks
on the base specification, examining the sensitivity of the parameters with respect to establishment size and to non-linear specification of the law of motion of productivity. The
specification we use to generate the model’s predictions is specification V, which provides
country specific estimates of both ρc and σc . These estimates are presented in Table 9,
together with the country-specific estimates of σc from specifications II and IV. As can
be seen, the parameters do not vary in any meaningful way across specifications. Moreover, we find statistically significant differences in the process for productivity in different
countries.

3.3.2

The fit of the model to the data

To assess the fit of the model, we compute the sum of squared errors, scaled by the sum of
the squared ‘dependent’ variable (data). That is, if the data is a vector x that is predicted by
a variable x̂, then we compute
S2 = 1 −

(x − x̂)0 (x − x̂)
x0 x

(14)

as our measure of fit. This measure of fit is closely related to the uncentered R2 measure
of fit familiar from regression analysis. However, because our model’s prediction does not
come from a regression, but rather from a parameterized model, nothing in the structure
restricts S 2 to lie between 0 and 1, though, by definition, it must be less than or equal to
one. That said, to map our measure of fit into a context equivalent to the R2 , it is correct to
interpret S 2 as the proportion of the observed data captured by the model’s prediction, with
the caveat that it is possible for this number to be negative. 17
16

This restriction is only driven by the data, and our framework could handle various forms of time-specific
persistence and volatility if the data had a longer time dimension. We have estimated this model on a longer panel
(of about 7-12 years) for two countries, India and Slovenia, and find that the AR(1) coefficient is stable over time.
We refer to De Loecker (2007) and Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2009) for more details on the
underlying data sources.
17
We use an uncentered measure of fit, as our model does not incorporate anything analogous to the estimated
constant commonly found in a regression specification.

11

Figure 3 shows the model’s prediction for each country, plotted against the measure of
the variable of interest found in the data.18 Circles indicate countries, and circle size is
proportional to the number of establishments per country. Each country is plotted using
a (x, y) coordinate, where the x-coordinate indicates the model’s prediction and the ycoordinate indicates the value in the data. The closer the country lies to the 45o line, the
more accurate the model’s prediction.
Panel 1 shows the dispersion in the static marginal revenue product of capital (Std.[sict − kict ])
for each country. The S 2 of the model is 0.61. This indicates a good fit, with 61 percent
of the observed static capital misallocation captured by the model’s prediction. Of some
interest is the fact that the model over-predicts noticeably for a series of countries with
model predictions greater than 2. These are (from right to left) Moldova, Guyana, Costa
Rica, Madagascar and Chile.
Panel 2 shows the dispersion in productivity (Std.[yict ]) for each country. The S 2 of the
model is 0.69. Again, this indicates a good fit, with 69 percent of the observed productivity
dispersion captured by the model’s prediction. As in Panel 1, the model over predicts
noticeably for some countries. The three countries with model predictions greater than
2 are (from right to left) Guyana, Moldova and Costa Rica. Note that the model’s misprediction in Panel 2 is a test of the AR(1) specification of the productivity process, rather
than a failure of the economic model, per se. In particular, from equation (12), the model
prediction is invariant to the level of adjustment cost. 19
Panel 3 shows the volatility in the marginal revenue product of capital over time for
each country (Std.[(sict − kict ) − (sict−1 − kict−1 )]). The S 2 of the model is 0.28. The
data lie on a line below the 45o line. As discussed below (and reported in table 8), if the
adjustment costs are set to zero this line rotates up to close to the 45o line.
Panels 4 and 5 show the the volatility in establishments’ capital over time (Std.[kict − kict−1 ])
and the proportion of establishments with zero investment over a single year, respectively.
The S 2 ’s are 0.74 and 0.82, respectively.
In table 8 we summarize the fit of the full model (illustrated in figure 3). We compare
it to two alternative models: one in which the adjustment costs are set to zero; and another
in which the ρc and σc terms are set to 0.83 and 0.6 (resp.) for all countries (i.e. we use
specification I in table 6 for the AR(1) process).
Table 8 indicates that a zero adjustment cost model does a poor job of capturing the
variation in the change in capital, but improves on the fit of variation in the change in static
MRPK. It does comparably to the full model in fitting the dispersion moments (panels 1
and 2), which reflects under-prediction that matches the over-prediction of the full model.
Taken together, these results suggest improving model fit by calibrating the adjustment cost
using some combination of the moments examined in panels 1 through 5. Table 8 suggests
that the outcome of such an exercise would be adjustment costs that decrease relative to
those in Bloom 2009, and (by construction) somewhat improved model fit.20
Table 8 also shows that eliminating country heterogeneity in ρc and σc improves fit on
18
El Salvador is excluded since its estimated ρc exceeds 1. This means that producing a stationary distribution
in the simulation is not feasible.
19
Because the variables of interest here are standard deviations of logs, it is useful to direct the reader to the
range of the underlying economic activity covered by the data, as noted in our discussion of Table 1 in section 2
20
The likely literal implication, that developing countries have lower adjustment costs than the US is almost
surely misleading. Rather, such a finding would probably reflect heterogeneity in the capital stock used in different
countries.

12

the dispersion moments (panels 1 and 2) but decreases fit on the change moments (panels
3 and 4). Whether the specification with, or without, country heterogeneity in ρc and σc
is preferred, the conclusion is the same: taking a dynamic investment model calibrated to
US data, and replacing the productivity process parameters with estimates from developing
country data, generates model predictions that capture an economically significant amount
of the dispersion in the static MRPK and productivity, in addition to several other moments,
in these developing countries. Thus, the economic structure, suggested by the reduced form
data work in section 2 and developed in the model in this section, seems to have value in
organizing the data.

3.4

Discussion

The model does a surprisingly good job of fitting the data, despite the fact that all parameters other than the ρc and σc terms in the AR(1) productivity process are taken from studies
fitting U.S. data. This has a series of implications for our thinking about resource allocation, productivity differences across countries, and the welfare and policy implications
therein.
First, the dynamic process underlying productivity is important in explaining crosssectional patterns of productivity and capital allocation. The importance of this is found
in several places in the existing literature. Our contribution is to demonstrate the empirical
importance of this mechanism. Our findings suggest that the dynamic process governing
productivity shocks is a first-order determinant of differences in productivity and, hence,
income across countries.
Second, the conclusions one draws regarding welfare and policy depend on the model
one has in mind regarding this dynamic process. If one has the view that the productivity
process is an exogenous, or primitive, feature of the model, then our findings suggest that,
in an aggregate sense, the establishments in the countries we studied are acting much as the
social planner in our model would have them act (assuming that the social planner takes
the capital adjustment costs as given). This suggests that there are few welfare implications
for differences in productivity dispersion and static misallocation across countries. On the
other hand, if the productivity process can be affected by government policy, then there
may be welfare dividends to policy interventions aimed at moving toward some sociallyoptimal productivity process. However, characterization of what this optimal process is
likely requires a more subtle modeling approach than that offered here. At any rate, this
paper sharpens the debate on the role of policy interventions that are geared at eliminating resource misallocation in developing countries by offering an alternative view that is
strongly supported by the data.

4

Conclusions and future work

We have focused on the adjustment costs in capital, coupled with productivity shock processes, in order to reinterpret the large dispersion in marginal revenue product of capital. In
doing so, we shut down many other economically relevant features of firms’ environment,
including, for instance, the heterogeneity in market power. This keeps our model parsimonious and makes the approach in this paper directly comparable with the approach taken
in the existant literature on cross-country productivity differences. A natural, alternative,

13

starting point would be to include additional heterogeneity in market power and interpret
the differences in marginal revenue product differently, i.e. as a reflection of differences in
market power which vary over time. See De Loecker and Warzynski (2009) for a detailed illustration of this approach.21 We note this to underscore the fact that observed productivity
differences can have many underlying drivers. We focus on just one.
The primary contribution of this paper is to establish the link between the dynamic process governing productivity changes over time and cross-sectional measures of productivity dispersion and (static) capital misallocation. In particular, we show that a parsimonious
model of the country-specific productivity process explains much of the variation in the
dispersion of productivity and the dispersion of the static marginal revenue product of capital across countries. We provide evidence to support the claim that the dynamic process
of productivity is important, both empirically and theoretically, in determining the patterns
observed in the cross-section.
Our findings reinforce the point that the country-specific stochastic process of productivity is sufficient to explain a significant proportion of cross-country variation in productivity and static capital misallocation. It suggests that producers in countries that experience
larger uncertainty in the operating environment (i.e., higher volatility in productivity) make
different investment decisions than those producers active in less volatile environments.
This leads to different levels of capital and output and, moreover, means that the welfare
gains from policies inducing reallocation of factors of production are likely to be lower than
otherwise implied by static models.
An alternative suite of policy options, aimed at making the productivity process more
benign, may be attractive as a complement to the redistributive measures featured in the
counterfactuals considered in other studies. It is likely that at least some component of the
stochastic process of productivity is influenced by government policy. To the extent that
this is true, our findings imply that, if government policies can provide a more predictable
business environment, then this will benefit the economy and help producers allocate resources in more productive ways. This raises the issue of the sources of adjustment costs
and productivity volatility, a topic on which we are silent in this paper. Our aim here is
to merely cast light on the importance of dynamics in assessing the welfare relevance of
productivity dispersion and in evaluating an appropriate policy response.

21

De Loecker and Warzynski (2009) provide a way to obtain producer-level markups using standard production
data, while allowing explicitly for dynamic inputs of production, such as capital. Pairing their approach with our
framework could, in principal, allow for a decomposition of “static” and “dynamic” components of the perceived
misallocation from the standard model. This we leave for future work.

14

A

Appendix

In this Appendix we briefly discuss the data and elaborate on how we measure TFP in
our data. It is important to stress that we measure TFP such that it is consistent with the
theoretical model introduced in the paper. This implies that we need to explicitly allow for
adjustment costs in capital and directly rely on monopolistic competition whereby markups
are common across establishments.
We then examine the robustness of our central results to different productivity measure
and different sources of identification. Finally, we discuss the measurement of the AR(1)
process used in the dynamic investment model.

A.1

Data

The data is available from http://www.enterprisesurveys.org, accessed on
December 15th, 2010. Extensive documentation is available from the same website.
The survey documentation describes the sampling universe as follows: “6. The population of industries to be included in the Enterprise Surveys and Indicator Surveys, the
Universe of the study, includes the following list (according to ISIC, revision 3.1): all manufacturing sectors (group D), construction (group F), services (groups G and H), transport,
storage, and communications (group I), and subsector 72 (from Group K). Also, to limit
the surveys to the formal economy the sample frame for each country should include only
establishments with five (5) or more employees. Fully government owned establishments
are excluded as the Universe is defined as the non-agricultural private sector.” from page 3
in ‘Enterprise Survey and Indicator Surveys Sampling Methodology’ August 29th, 2009 at
http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/Documents/Sampling_Note.pdf downloaded 23 April, 2011.
The survey used a stratified sampling procedure, in which establishments were sampled
randomly within groups based on the establishment’s sector of activity, establishment size,
and geographical location. The structure of the sampling leads to an oversampling of larger
establishments (relative to random sampling of all establishments in the economy). The
exact structure of the stratification varies by size of the economy in question. We have
chosen to not do any sampling correction, preferring to maintain as much transparency as
possible as to the mapping from data to findings, being mindful of the fact that we can
use data from only 7% of the sampled establishments in any case (and there may also be
non-random selection into this subset) and, most importantly, considering the absence of a
well defined criterion that could be used to guide any such correction. It is an open question
whether ideally we would weight by, say, contribution to GDP or weight each establishment
equally. More likely, weighting by some measure of activity makes more sense for our
purpose, but to the extent that, say, any Eritrean government statistics we would use to do
this would have measurement error, this may merely contribute to attenuation bias in results.
This is especially so, given that the sampling structure used in the surveys overweights large
establishments and, hence, already moves in the direction of weighting by contribution
to economic activity. In any case, the results in the paper are robust to controlling for
differences in the size and industrial composition of establishments across countries.
The establishments in the data are drawn from the manufacturing, construction, services, and transport, storage, and communications sectors. As would be expected, the
precise industry composition (defined at the 2 digit ISIC level) varies by country.

15

Establishments were surveyed between 2002 and 2006. The majority of establishments
within a country were surveyed in the same year. The survey asked questions about activity
in the current year and the previous 2 years. Thus, the panel data aspect of these data,
relating to activity in year t − 1, come from the recollections and records of managers in
year t.

A.2

Measurement

To measure TFP we require a measure of plant-level sales (Qict ), employment (Lict ) and
capital services (Kict ). We also rely on intermediate inputs (Mict ) in some of our TFP
specifications, i.e. for TFP based on gross output and value added. We follow the standard practice and refer to Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2009) for a very nice
overview and discussion on the measurement of TFP and related variables using similar
data sources.
A number of issues emerged in the calculation of labor and TFP, including that labor
input is generally based on the number of employees or wage bill converted to the number
of employees with no correction for hours worked. Moreover, sales and gross output data
are not corrected for inventories, and the capital stock is based on book values. These are
the standard data restrictions researchers face using this type of data.
We rely on the World Bank deflators to convert all monetary variables into USD. Sales
is directly measured in the data, whereas labor is measured by the total number of workers
active in a plant, or alternatively we convert the total wage bill of a plant into the number of
workers using a plant-specific wage. The latter is corrected for aggregate wage trends using
the median wage trend in a given industry-country pair. Finally, we rely on the book value
of capital as measured by either total assets or net book value. We experimented with both
measures and our results are invariant. When we consider a measure of value added we
compute it by netting the sales variable from the use of intermediate inputs. The selection
of these variables leaves us with 5,010 observations across countries and time.
Our base results rely on TFP measured as described in section 2.2.1. Relying on cost
minimizing producers generates the well known FOC for labor, an input assumed to be
freely chosen by the plant without adjustment cost. Thus,


1 wL
βL = 1 −
(15)

S
where we drop the relevant subscripts.22 Standard cost minimization dictates that the production function coefficients of variable inputs in production are equal to the expenditure
share of the relevant input in total costs. We therefore directly measure an industry-countrytime specific cost share for labor where we again rely on  = 4. Our assumption of constant
returns to scale in production then gives us the capital coefficient by simply considering
1 − βL . Note that we hereby do not impose the static FOC on capital. We take the median
labor share in a given industry-country at a given point in time, or
βLsct = median(βLisct )
22

(16)

Our framework can easily allow labor to be treated just like capital, and we would then rely on a gross output
production function from the outset whereby we can solve for optimal intermediate input demand given input
prices, productivity, labor and capital. However, given that we want to able to compare our results directly to the
existing literature we focus on a production function in labor and capital.

16

For many establishment-years in the data we can compute productivity straight from
data. However, for some establishment-years we only observe the establishment’s wage
bill and not the number of workers. To address this issue we use the median countryindustry wage, w̃, (imputed from observations with both the wage bill and the number of
workers) as a deflator and apply it to the wage bill to give a measure of labor. That is, to
compute Lict we use Lict = wLw̃ict . In what is presented in this paper we use this measure
for all establishment-year observations.
Total factor productivity at the plant level is the log of deflated sales minus the weighted
log of labor and capital, where the weights are the cost shares defined above.
sct
yict = sict − βLsct lict − βK
kict

(17)

Our alternative measures of TFP, using value added (y V A ) or gross output (y GO ), are
obtained similarly:
GO
yict

VA
sct
yict
= vaict − βLsct lict − βK
kict

= sict −

βLsct lict

−

sct
βM
Mict

−

sct
βK
kict

(18)
(19)

In the following subsection we show that our results are robust to use of these alternative
measures of TFP. The trade-off in a cross-country analysis of plant-level productivity is
between sample size and having a set of variables measured in a consistent and harmonized
fashion across time and countries. Our three different measures of TFP are computed in
order to verify the sensitivity of our main results to those underlying data issues.

A.3 Robustness of the productivity dispersion, static misallocation and volatility relationship
Tables 9 and 10 examine the robustness of specification I in tables 3 and 4 to alternate
measures of TFP. The first column (TFP Leontief) reports the results from tables 3 and 4,
while the second and third columns report results using gross output and value added measures of TFP respectively. As can be seen, little changes as the TFP measure changes: the
productivity dispersion coefficient gets larger if gross output or value added is used; while
the dispersion in the marginal revenue product of capital (misallocation) coefficient gets
smaller if gross output or value added is used. In all cases the relationship remains statistically significant and the R-squared statistic is either comparable or larger as compared to
using the TFP Leontief specification.
Table 11 examines the use of different measures of dispersion. In specification I we
replicate specification I in table 3. In specification II we use the range between the 10th
and 90th percentile as our measure of cross-sectional dispersion (in all specifications we
use the standard error of the change in productivity as our measure of volatility: this will
be changed in future version of the paper). In specification III we use the inter-quartile
range. Specification III ceases to generate a significant relationship between dispersion and
volatility.
Lastly, Table 12 runs regressions in which the unit of observation is a country-industry
pair. In Columns III and IV, we include both industry and country fixed-effects (but not their
interactions). This enables us to control for either industry or country specific factors that
might artificially generate the volatility-dispersion relationship. For instance, in different
countries it may be more or less straightforward to measure productivity. Including country

17

fixed-effects bars these country specific factors from explaining the dispersion-volatility relationship. We find lower coefficients in this regression, 0.41 without any controls and 0.34
when country and industry fixed-effects are added. These effects are precisely estimated,
in part because there are far more country-industry pairs (236) than countries (33).

References
BARTELSMAN , E., AND M. D OMS (2000): “Understanding productivity: Lessons from
longitudinal microdata,” Journal of Economic Literature, 38(3), 569–594.
BARTELSMAN , E., J. H ALTIWANGER , AND S. S CARPETTA (2009): “Cross-country differences in productivity: the role of allocation and selection,” Discussion paper, NBER
Working Paper 15490.
B LOOM , N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77(3), 623–685.
C ABALLERO , R., AND R. P INDYCK (1996): “Uncertainty, investment, and industry evolution,” International Economic Review, 37(3), 641–662.
C OLLARD -W EXLER , A. (2009): “Productivity Dispersion and Plant Selection in the
Ready-Mix Concrete Industry,” Working Paper, New York University.
C OOPER , R., AND J. H ALTIWANGER (2006): “On the nature of capital adjustment costs,”
Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 611–633.
D E L OECKER , J. (2007): “Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from Slovenia,” Journal of International Economics, 73(1), 69–98.
D E L OECKER , J., AND F. WARZYNSKI (2009): “Markups and firm-level export status,”
Discussion paper, NBER Working Paper 15198.
D IXIT, A., AND R. P INDYCK (1994): Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton University
Press.
F OSTER , L., J. H ALTIWANGER , AND C. S YVERSON (2008): “Reallocation, firm turnover,
and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?,” American Economic Review,
98(1), 394–425.
G OLDBERG , P., A. K HANDELWAL , N. PAVCNIK , AND P. T OPALOVA (2009): “Trade
liberalization and new imported inputs,” American Economic Review, 99(2), 494–500.
H SIEH , C.-T., AND P. J. K LENOW (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.
L EVINSOHN , J., AND A. P ETRIN (2003): “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
to Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 317–341.
M IDRIGAN , V., AND D. Y. X U (2009): “Finance and Misallocation,” Discussion paper,
NYU.

18

M OLL , B. (2010): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing
Undo Capital Misallocation?,” Discussion paper, Princeton University.
O LLEY, G. S., AND A. PAKES (1996): “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–1297.
R ESTUCCIA , D., AND R. ROGERSON (2008): “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogeneous establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707 –
720.
TAUCHEN , G. (1986): “Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and Vector Autoregressions,” Economics Letters, 20(2), 177–81.

19

Tables and Figures

Figure 1: TFP Dispersion and TFP Volatility
Figure 1: TFP Dispersion and TFP Volatility
1.6

Standard deviation of productivity (Dispersion)

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

Standard deviation of change in productivity (Volatility)

Note: Circles indicate countries. Circle Size is proportional to the number of establishments per country.
The straight line is the line–of–best–fit (computed using OLS with a constant term, as per specification I in
Table 3). The horizontal axis indicates the value of the standard deviation of [yict − yict−1 ] and the vertical
axis indicates the standard deviation in yict , where yict = ln(Yict ), and Yict is defined as in equation (5).

20

Table 1: List of countries, with TFP dispersion and number of observed establishments
Region

Country

Standard Deviation of TFP

Establishments

Morocco

0.70

377

Eritrea
Zambia
Madagascar
South Africa
Malawi
Mauritius
Ethiopia
Tanzania

0.42
0.76
0.80
0.80
0.96
1.16
1.20
1.38

8
157
92
198
127
62
216
70

Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan

0.50
0.79
0.91

94
94
92

Oman
Syria

0.56
0.99

5
57

Bangladesh
Sri Lanka

1.12
1.21

134
123

Philippines
Indonesia
Cambodia

0.93
1.23
1.28

293
438
11

El Salvador
Guatemala
Nicaragua
Costa Rica
Honduras
Ecuador

0.77
0.96
0.96
1.05
1.06
1.10

200
168
225
278
218
116

Brazil
Peru
Chile
Guyana

0.78
0.88
1.08
1.49

87
36
734
27

Poland
Moldova
Lithuania
Turkey

0.52
0.79
1.07
1.11

63
75
95
40

North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

Central Asia

Middle East

South Asia
South East Asia

Central America

South America

Europe

21

Table 2: Summary Statistics: World Bank Enterprise Research Data.

Establishment Level Data
Log Sales
Log Value Added
Log Materials
Log Capital
Log Wage Bill
Workers
Productivity
Log Investment
Zero Investment
Change in Sales
Change in Value Added
Change in Capital
Change in Labor
Change in Productivity

Mean
7.1
6.2
6.4
7
5.3
261.3
0.7
7.9
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0

Std. Dev.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.1
3
840.1
1.1
4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.5
0.7
0.6

Min.
-5.6
-8.3
-7.2
-6.5
-5.9
1
-5.8
-5.1
0
-7.6
-4.9
-4.4
-4.9
-7.9

Max.
22.3
21.7
21.5
22.5
18.9
23385
5.9
25.4
1
7.1
5.9
8.7
7.1
7.2

N
5010
4191
4933
5010
4096
5010
5010
2389
5010
5010
4021
5010
3991
5010

Country Level Data
Establishments per Country
Standard Deviation of Productivity (Dispersion)
Standard Deviation of Change in Productivity (Volatility)
Interquartile Range Deviation of Productivity
Interquartile Range of Change in Productivity
90-10 Range of Productivity

151.8
0.9
0.6
1
0.3
2.1

147
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.1
0.5

5
0.4
0.2
0
0.1
1.1

734
1.5
1.1
1.7
0.7
2.8

33
33
33
33
33
33

19
0.9
0.5

25.4
0.5
0.4

1
0
0

149
3.8
2

236
236
236

Country-Industry Level Data
Establishments per Country-Industry
Standard Deviation of Productivity
Standard Deviation of Change in Productivity

Note: The data were drawn from the World Bank Enterprise Research Data. To be included in the final
data set an establishment needed to have at least two years of information on sales, materials, assets, and
salaries. We exclude establishments with productivity (yict ) greater than 6 in absolute value to remove the
effect of outliers. The results reported in the paper are qualitatively unchanged if the threshold on yict is set
to be 2 or 9.

22

Table 3: Effect of time-series volatility on productivity dispersion
Specification
Dependent Var:

I

II (unweighted)
III
IV
Standard Deviation of yict , by country

Std.[yict − yict−1 ]

0.57***
(0.20)

0.58***
(0.23)

0.56***
(0.19)

0.58***
(0.17)

0.65***
(0.11)
X
5010
33
.31

-0.01
(0.01)
0.67***
(0.10)
X
5010
33
.32

Log Assets (t − 1)
Constant
Industry FE
Establishments
Countries
R-Squared

0.65***
(0.11)

0.63***
(0.13)

5010
33
.26

5010
33
.24

Note: Column I and II run regressions on country level aggregates.
Column I runs a weighted OLS with weights equal to the number of
establishments per country, whereas Column II has equal weights for
each country. Columns III and IV run regressions at the establishment level (where Std.yict and Std.[yict − yict−1 ] only vary at the country level). Sampling error is accounted for using a bootstrap procedure
where Std.yict and Std.[yict − yict−1 ] are recomputed for each bootstrap
replication (200 bootstrap replications are used). These standard errors
are clustered by country by having the bootstrap resample countries
rather than individual establishments.

23

Table 4: Effect of time-series volatility on static misallocation
Specification
Dependent Var:
Std.[yict − yict−1 ]

I
II (unweighted)
III
IV
Standard Deviation of sict − kict , by country
0.65***
(0.22)

0.74***
(0.22)

0.63***
(0.23)

0.66**
(0.22)

0.70***
(0.13)
X
5010
33
.29

-0.01
(0.01)
0.74***
(0.13)
X
5010
33
.30

Log Assets (t − 1)
Constant
Industry FE
Establishments
Countries
R-Squared

0.70***
(0.12)

0.65***
(0.13)

5010
33
.23

5010
33
.33

Note: Column I and II run regressions on country level aggregates.
Column I runs a weighted OLS with weights equal to the number of
establishments per country, whereas Column II has equal weights for
each country. Columns III and IV run regressions at the establishment
level (where Std.sict − kict and Std.[yict − yict−1 ] only vary at the country level). Sampling error is accounted for using a bootstrap procedure
where Std.yict and Std.[yict − yict−1 ] are recomputed for each bootstrap
replication (200 bootstrap replications are used). These standard errors
are clustered by country by having the bootstrap resample countries
rather than individual establishments.

24

Panel 1: Dispersion in the static MRPK
9

8

7

!"#$%$&'-)($

Std.(ln(st)-ln(kt))

6

!"#$%$&'()*$
5

4

3

2

!"#$%$&'+*,$
1

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

Sigma

Panel 2: Dispersion in productivity

Panel 3: Dispersion of the change in the static MRPK

6

3.5

5.5

3

5

Std.( [ ln(st) - ln(kt) ] - [ ln(st-1) - ln(kt-1) ] )

4.5

Std.( ln(yt) )

4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5

2.5

2

1.5

1

1

0.5
0.5
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

0

1.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Sigma

Panel 4: Dispersion of the change in capital

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

Panel 5: Proportion of establishments with zero investment in a year

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

Pr( I = 0 in year t )

Std.( ln(kt) - ln(kt-1) )

0.8
Sigma

0.5

0.4

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

Sigma

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

Sigma

Figure 2: Model comparative statics, by σc [Sigma] (and ρc [Rho])
Note: This is output from the dynamic investment model, parametrized as per Table 5.

25

1.3

1.4

1.5

Panel 1: Dispersion in the static MRPK
3.75
3.5
3.25
3
2.75
2.5

Data

2.25
2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25

!"#$

0
0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

1.25

1.5

1.75

2

2.25

2.5

2.75

3

3.25

3.5

3.75

Model prediction
Panel 3: Standard deviation of change in static MRPK

Panel 2: Productivity dispersion

2.5

2.75

2.25

2.5
2.25

2

2

1.75
1.5

1.5

Data

Data

1.75

1.25

1.25

1
1

0.75
0.75

0.5

0.5

0.25

0.25

!"#$

0
0

0.25

!"#$

0
0.5

0.75

1

1.25

1.5

1.75

2

2.25

2.5

0

2.75

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

Panel 4: Standard deviation of change in capital

1.5

1.75

2

2.25

2.5

1

1.1

Panel 5: Proportion of establishments with zero investment

1.25

1.1
1

1.125

0.9

1

0.8

0.875

0.7

Data

0.75

Data

1.25

Model prediction

Model prediction

0.625

0.6
0.5

0.5

0.4
0.375

0.3
0.25

0.2

0.125

0.1

!"#$

0
0

0.125

0.25

0.375

0.5

0.625

0.75

0.875

1

1.125

1.25

Model prediction

!"#$

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Model prediction

Figure 3: Correspondence between model prediction and data
Note: Circles indicate countries. Circle Size is proportional to the number of establishments per country.
Each country is plotted using a (x, y) coordinate where the x-coordinate indicates the model prediction and
the y-coordinate indicates the value in the data. The closer the country lies to the 45o line, the better the
model prediction.

26

Table 5: Baseline parameters
Parameter
α = 13
 = −4
δ = 10%
1
β = 1+6.5%
P
CK = 42.7%
F
= 1.1%
CK
Q
CK
= 0.996

Comments





















ρc ∈ {0.754, 0.865, 0.968} 
µ = 0.13

σc ∈ [0.1, 1.4]
w = 0.3

Values taken from Bloom (2009).

Values taken from specification V in
Table 6. Values for ρc correspond
to values for Moldova, Tanzania and
Nicaragua respectively.
Scaling parameter selected to ensure
period profits are positive.

27

Table 6: Time series process, AR(1), for productivity
Dependent Var: Productivity yit
yit−1

I

II

III

IV

V

0.83***
(0.03)

0.88***
(0.04)

0.87***
(0.02)

0.90***
(0.04)

0.84***
(0.01)

(yit−1 ) •(Country Dummy)
Var.

X
0.12

0.15***
(0.04)

0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.12***
(0.03)

0.60***
(0.04)

0.54***
(0.04)

2
yit−1
3
yit−1
4
yit−1

Constant
Variance σ
Constant
Country Specific Variance
Var.
Log Assets

0.01
(0.01)

0.13***
(0.03)

0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.10***
(0.03)

0.13***
(0.03)

0.66***
(0.00)
X
0.21

0.66***
(0.01)
X
0.21

0.66***
(0.00)
X
0.20

Observations
5010
5010
5010
5010
5010
Countries
33
33
33
33
33
Log-Likelihood
-4515
-4468
-4055
-4026
-3985
Note: Standard Errors (in parentheses) clustered by country. ‘Var.’ indicates the variance
of the set of parameters indicated in the row above.

28

Table 7: Country-specific σc ’s and ρc ’s, from Table 6
Specification
Country
III (σc ) IV (σc ) V (σc )
Bangladesh
0.66
0.66
0.66
Brazil
0.40
0.40
0.38
Cambodia
0.91
0.91
0.85
Chile
0.76
0.73
0.75
CostaRica
0.54
0.53
0.53
Ecuador
0.58
0.62
0.56
El Salvador
0.51
0.50
0.51
Eritrea
0.67
0.67
0.66
Ethiopia
0.71
0.72
0.71
Guatemala
0.68
0.67
0.65
Guyana
0.60
0.61
0.58
Honduras
0.39
0.40
0.39
Indonesia
0.71
0.71
0.70
Kyrgyzstan
0.22
0.22
0.22
Lithuania
0.90
0.90
0.90
Madagascar
0.60
0.60
0.60
Malawi
0.50
0.50
0.50
Mauritius
1.11
1.12
1.10
Moldova
0.27
0.26
0.27
Morocco
0.55
0.55
0.54
Nicaragua
0.43
0.42
0.43
Oman
0.24
0.24
0.22
Peru
0.31
0.30
0.30
Philippines
0.30
0.31
0.30
Poland
0.23
0.22
0.22
South Africa
0.59
0.59
0.58
Sri Lanka
0.50
0.49
0.49
Syria
0.53
0.52
0.53
Tajikistan
0.36
0.35
0.35
Tanzania
0.62
0.62
0.61
Turkey
0.41
0.42
0.41
Uzbekistan
0.69
0.69
0.60
Zambia
0.47
0.47
0.47
Mean
0.57
0.57
0.56
Note: The AR(1) specification is:
yict = µ + ρc yct−1 + σc ηict

29

V (ρc )
0.84
0.63
0.79
0.94
0.95
0.92
1.23
0.78
0.70
0.97
0.87
0.83
0.81
0.85
0.82
0.90
0.80
0.87
0.75
0.83
0.97
0.92
0.89
0.90
0.93
0.81
0.90
0.79
0.96
0.86
0.53
0.86
0.97
0.85

Table 8: Model fit, reported as S 2 , of different specifications
Full Model Zero Adj. Costs
(ρc , σc ) = (ρ, σ)
Panel 1: Dispersion in static MRPK
0.610
0.597
0.827
Panel 2: Productivity dispersion
0.686
0.682
0.920
Panel 3: Std. of change in static MRPK
0.284
0.938
0.107
Panel 4: Std. of change in capital
0.735
-10.715
0.597
Panel 5: Establishments with zero investment
0.821
0.304
0.746
Notes: “Full Model” has parameters as described in table 5 and (ρc , σc ) as estimated in specification V
of table 6. “Zero Adj. Costs” sets the adjustment cost parameters equal to zero. “(ρc , σc ) = (ρ, σ)”
imposes the same productivity process on every country, drawn from specification I of Table 6.

Table 9: Appendix: Robustness checks: Productivity dispersion on volatility for different
TFP measures
TFP measure:
Dependent Var:

TFP Leontief
Std.yict

TFP GO
Std.yict

TFP VA
Std.yict

Std.[yict − yict−1 ]

0.57***
(0.20)

0.94***
(0.09)

1.00***
(0.16)

Constant

0.65***
(0.13)
5010
33
0.29

0.22***
(0.06)
4831
33
0.78

0.39***
(0.11)
4571
33
0.57

Observations
Countries
R2

Note: All columns show regressions on country level aggregates weighted by the number of establishments per
country. Standard errors are clustered at the country
level but do not account for sampling error in Std.yict
and Std.[yict − yict−1 ] for specifications other than TFP
Leontief.

30

Table 10: Appendix: Robustness checks: Misallocation on volatility for different TFP measures
TFP measure:
Dependent Var:

TFP Leontief
Std.[sict − kict ]

TFP GO
Std.[sict − kict ]

TFP VA
Std.[sict − kict ]

Std.[yict − yict−1 ]

0.65***
(0.22)

0.38***
(0.14)

0.59***
(0.18)

Constant

0.70***
(0.12)
5010
33
0.26

0.85***
(0.09)
4831
33
0.19

0.66***
( 0.13)
4571
33
0.26

Observations
Countries
R2

Note: All columns show regressions on country level aggregates
weighted by the number of establishments per country. Standard
errors are clustered at the country level but do not account for sampling error in Std.yict and Std.[yict − yict−1 ] for specifications other
than TFP Leontief.

Table 11: Appendix: Robustness checks: Different measures of productivity dispersion
Specification
Dependent Var:

I
Std. yict

II
90-10 percentile yict

III
IQR yict

Std.[yict − yict−1 ]

0.57***
(0.20)

0.69*
(0.41)

0.22
(0.18)

Constant

0.65***
(0.11)
5010
33
.26

1.72***
(0.21)
5010
33
.08

0.93***
(0.11)
5010
33
.02

Observations
Countries
R-Squared

Note: All columns show regressions on country level aggregates weighted
by the number of establishments per country. Sampling error is accounted for using a bootstrap procedure where the dependent variable and
Std.[yict − yict−1 ] are recomputed for each bootstrap replication (200 bootstrap replications are used). All TFP measures use TFP Leontief.

31

Table 12: Appendix: Industry-country productivity dispersion and productivity volatility
Specification
Dependent Var:
Std.[yict − yict−1 ]

I
II
III
IV
Standard Deviation of yict , by industry-country
0.41***
(0.08)

Log Capital

-0.00
(0.00)
-0.03***
(0.01)

Productivity
Industry FE
Country FE
Constant
Observations
Country-Industries
R-Squared

0.41***
(0.07)

0.69***
(0.05)
4983
236
.12

0.71***
(0.05)
4983
236
.13

0.34***
(0.09)

0.34***
(0.09)

X
X
0.64***
(0.05)
4983
236
.55

0.00
(0.00)
-0.01*
(0.00)
X
X
0.65***
(0.05)
4983
236
.55

Note: Standard errors are clustered by industry-country. Sampling error
not accounted for. All TFP measures use TFP Leontief.

32

