NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUSINESS PARTNERS, FINANCING, AND THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF
INVENTIONS
Thomas Åstebro
Carlos J. Serrano
Working Paper 17181
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17181

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2011

We have benefited from the comments of Victor Aguirregabiria, Serguei Braguinsky, Alberto Galasso,
Bart Hamilton, Octavian Harare, Ig Horstmann, Alexander Kritikos, Illoong Kwon, Robert Petrunia,
Peter Thompson, Aloysius Siow, Sheryl Winston Smith, Scott Stern, and seminar participants at the
DRUID conference 2008, REER conference in Georgia Tech 2008, Society of Economic Dynamics
2008, University of Chile, International Industrial Organization conference 2009, EARIE 2009, EEA
2009 meetings, Spanish Economic Association Meetings 2009, Canadian Economic Association Meetings
2010, Amsterdam Center for Entrepreneurship (ACE) workshop 2010, the University of Nottingham,
LBS Sumantra Ghoshal Strategy Conference, and the Fourth Searle Conference on Entrepreneurhip
and Innovation. Åstebro acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council, Canada and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, Canada for
data collection and HEC Foundation for support writing this article. Serrano acknowledges financial
support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, Canada, and the Connaught Research
Funds from the University of Toronto, Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Thomas Åstebro and Carlos J. Serrano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Business Partners, Financing, and the Commercialization of Inventions
Thomas Åstebro and Carlos J. Serrano
NBER Working Paper No. 17181
June 2011
JEL No. G24,J24,M13,O31
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the effect of business partners on the commercialization of nvention based ventures,
and it assesses the relative importance of partners’ human and social capital on commercialization
outcomes. Projects run by partnerships were five times more likely to reach commercialization, and
they had mean revenues approximately ten times greater than projects run by solo-entrepreneurs. These
gross differences may be due both to business partners’ value added and to selection. After controlling
for selection effects and observed/unobserved heterogeneity, our smallest estimate of partner value
added approximately doubles the probability of commercialization and increases expected revenues
by 29% at the sample mean.
Thomas Åstebro
HEC Paris
astebro@hec.fr
Carlos J. Serrano
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
carlos.serrano@utoronto.ca

1

Introduction

Venture capital is now recognized to play an important role in entrepreneurship and financial
intermediation. The volume of venture capital commitments –whether in the form of formal
venture capital (VC) or informal venture capital– is large. As a natural consequence, whether
early stage financiers bring value added to start-ups has become a subject of interest in the
entrepreneurial finance literature. However, while scholars have examined the value added by
venture fund investors to new ventures, relatively little is still known about the value added of
informal venture capital such as angels and business partners, a sector which, by some estimates,
is as large or larger than the VC sector.1
In this paper we investigate the impact of informal venture capital on early stage ventures
by relying on a survey which documents the human, social, and financial capital contribution of
business partners to inventive projects. The raw data from the survey shows a very important
role for business partners in commercialization success; the rate of commercialization of projects
run by partnerships (0.30) is five times larger than those run by solo entrepreneurs (0.06), and
the revenues of projects undertaken by partnerships are almost ten times as large as those run
by solo entrepreneurs. The survey answers on the provision of human, social, and financial
capital contributions, with some assumptions, allow us to identify how much of these gross eﬀects
represent value of obtaining human and social capital while controlling for selection of projects
into partnerships. In addition, we provide a simple model to illustrate the value added of informal
venture capital, and the sources of selection. The main focus of the paper, however, is to identify
empirically the impact of informal venture capital on early stage ventures.
Informal venture capital shares with VCs the role as financial intermediaries, but have somewhat diﬀerent objectives and modes of operation. Informal venture capital investors typically
make only a few investments at a time, tend to invest substantially smaller amounts than VCs,
invest their savings on their own or in syndication with other private persons, and they more
often than VCs invest in early-stage deals. They are geographically widely distributed and make
most investments locally. As opposed to institutional investors they do not, generally, rely on
traditional control mechanisms, such as board control, staging or contractual provisions. They
rather spend time ’hands-on’ in the business or exercise control through other mechanisms such
as trust or social influence. Many are active investors who seek to contribute their experience,
1
For example, Reynolds (2005) reports the informal investor sector to $162 billion per year over the period 20002004, while formal venture capital were reported to provide $45 billion per year to start-ups during 2000-2003. More
recently, Sohl (2010), reports U.S. angel investors to have provided $17.6 billion in financing for 57,225 projects in
2009 and the (U.S.) National Venture Capital Association report that formal venture capital in the same period
provided $17.7 billion in financing for 2,795 projects, of which $1.6 billion went to 312 startups.

2

knowledge and contacts to the investee; they often invest in sectors where they have had previous
experience, while others are passive investors. Furthermore, informal venture capital takes various forms ranging from the most structured (groups of angels) to the least (individual angels and
business partners).2
Focusing our empirical analysis on business partners is interesting on its own. Business partnerships are important for the economy; approximately 10% of all U.S. businesses are partnerships
and 18% of business receipts are from partnerships.3 Business partners appear even more important for start-ups. For example, in the panel study of entrepreneurial dynamics, 52% of start-ups
were partnerships (Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter, 2003). But to our knowledge the literature has not
clarified specifically why business partners are so important for start-ups. Reflecting conventional
wisdom, the business press commonly advises entrepreneurs to partner with people in order to
increase the chances to commercialize their ideas. However, the empirical evidence on the value of
this advice is scattered.4 More importantly, little is known about the mechanisms through which
business partnerships are formed.
Documenting that early stage financiers provide a real impact to start-ups has been diﬃcult
(Hellmann and Puri, 2000; Hall and Lerner, 2010). There are several complicating factors when
trying to quantify the value added of early stage financiers — self-selection and sorting being of
primary concern. For instance, if inventions commercialized by partnerships have higher revenues
than inventions commercialized by solo entrepreneurs it may reflect that partners provide value
added in the form of human or social capital, but it may also reflect that partners join inventors
with better inventions (selection on invention quality), or that inventors with better inventions,
whom on average are more likely to be credit constrained, enlist partners to obtain financing
(selection on demand for financing). The policy implications are vastly diﬀerent depending on the
answer; in the latter case one might ask if there are available policies to relax credit constraints.
In the former case one might instead ask for policies to improve the eﬃciency of the market
for finding business partners. Both policies are currently in use in Europe to stimulate business
2

Using a representative survey of 22,000 U.S. households, Bygrave and Reynolds (2006) show that as much as
5% of household are informal venture investors, 50% of their investments are received by a relative, 28.5% by a
friend or neighbor, 6.1% by a colleague at work, and 9.4% by a stranger. For further descriptive evidence of the
informal venture capital sector, see Harrison, Mason, and Robson (2010); Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2010) ; Mason
(2009); VanOsnabrugge and Robinson (2000); Wong, Bhatia, and Freeman (2009); Wiltbank and Boeker (2007);
and Wiltbank (2009).
3
Statistics of Income, http://www.irs.gov/taxstats/article/0„id=175843,00.html. The approximately 3.1 million
U.S. partnerships in 2007 had 18.5 million partners. Excluding limited and limited liability partnerships (popular
investment vehicles in the movie and construction industries), there were 852,000 U.S. partnerships with 3.9 million
partners.
4
Cressy (1996) and Astebro and Bernhard (2003) both report substantial eﬀects on the survival of new firms of
the number of owners.

3

formation (Mason, 2009), but without apparent knowledge of their respective eﬃcacy. Thus,
understanding the mechanisms behind partnership formation matters both for economic policy
and business strategy.
To illustrate how we will disentangle the selection eﬀects from value added, we develop a
model of invention commercialization with business partner selection. Our model describes the
choice of an individual deciding whether to commercialize an invention on her own or to form
a partnership. Individuals are endowed with both an invention and limited wealth. Partners
can provide human and social capital to increase the productivity of capital, and may also relax
liquidity constraints. Forming a partnership involves a sunk cost. Partnership formation therefore
depends on the partner’s potential contribution of human and social capital and the extent to
which an inventor is liquidity constrained. The model shows how selection on invention quality
and demand for financing can jointly arise.
Our empirical analysis uses data from invention projects through a survey of Canadian individual inventors using the Invention Assessment Program at the Canadian Innovation Center
(CIC). The data reveal that in approximately 21 percent of the projects the inventor was joined
by business partners. The primary reason for the inventor to create a partnership was to obtain
human capital (65%), followed by obtaining financing (51%), and social capital (42%), indicating
a broad array of resources provided by partners. These partners take on substantial risk. In our
sample the average pre-revenue external investments are approximately $29,500 (2003 Cdn $),
when the average probability of commercialization is 0.11.
Regression analysis show that there is selection into partnerships based on the quality of the
invention and the demand for financing. High-quality assessed invention projects by the CIC
were twice as likely to be joined by a partner as the low-quality projects. And the average R&D
expenditures were over four times larger for projects eventually joined by partners than for soloruns. We also test model implications stating that; a) the probability to form a partnership with
financing should increase with invention quality, and b) the partnership eﬀect should decline once
controlling for the amount of external financing and c) the marginal return to external financing
should be less than for internal financing. Regression analysis support all three predictions.
To examine value added we use commercialization success as our key dependent variable: the
log of business revenues. Other studies have used business survival, raising of venture capital or
time to IPO as proxies for business success. For this sample we believe that commercialization
revenues is an appropriate measure of business success as most of these businesses have limited
opportunity to raise formal venture capital or be listed on major stock exchanges, and business
survival may be capturing the subjective value of staying an entrepreneur. Accounting for selection
4

on invention quality in Tobit regressions of commercialization revenues significantly reduces the
eﬀect that forming a partnership has on commercialization success, but a significant partnership
eﬀect remains.
Three additional mechanisms may explain the remaining partnership eﬀect: The role of commercialization investment, external financing, and labor eﬀort. Indeed, accounting for these mechanisms reduces the partnership eﬀect further. The remaining partnership eﬀect, however, is still
economically significant after applying these controls.
We use two alternative approaches to control for additional heterogeneity. In the first approach
we control for selection on measurable inventor and invention characteristics into partnerships
using a propensity score weighted Tobit model. This further reduces the size of the partnership
coeﬃcient. However, the remaining partnership coeﬃcient still represents at least 46% of the
coeﬃcient’s original size. At the sample mean, partners’ human and social capital thus increases
the probability of commercialization between 0.06 and 0.09 percentage points when the probability
of commercialization is 0.06 for solo entrepreneurs, and increase expected revenues by at least 29%.
In the second approach we control for unobserved heterogeneity. To do so we test an implication of our model: once controlling for the capital investment, a partner that is said to exclusively
provide financing should not provide any further value added to the project. If a partnership effect remains in such a project, it must therefore indicate selection on unobservables. We can thus
construct a lower bound on the value added of partner ability. Implementing this specification,
we find a lower bound of partner value added providing at least a 0.06 percentage points increase
in the probability of commercialization, and at least a 38% increase in expected revenues. Both
approaches thus deliver the same message: the value added of partners’ human and social capital
is very large.
Our paper is related to those examining the value added of formal venture capital to entrepreneurs and the economy. This literature tries to identify if VC financing improves business
performance and innovation (Kortum and Lerner, 2000; Mollica and Zingales, 2007), and if VCs
additional resources (such as a big rolodex) add value to the start-up (see Hellmann and Puri,
2000; Hellmann and Puri, 2002; Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2005; Chemmanur, Krishnan, and
Nandy, 2009). Several papers show that the reputation of a VC acts as a signal of the quality of
the venture, indicating that some VCs may be selected by entrepreneurs because they add value
beyond financing (see Meggison and Weiss, 1991; Hsu, 2004; Sorensen, 2008). Hall and Lerner
(2010) summarizes this literature stating that it has been a challenge so far to clearly document
value added by early stage investors.5
5

The first paper acknowledging the possibility that venture funding and innovation could be positively related to

5

Closest to our paper is Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2010) who empirically demonstrate a positive
eﬀect of obtaining angel financing, among angel financing applicants, on survival and access
to follow-on funding of high-growth start-up firms using a regression discontinuity approach.
Similarly to Kerr et al. (2010), we estimate the relative importance of early stage informal venture
capital to inventive projects, and we address the potential endogeneity of financing. Our paper,
however, diﬀers from Kerr et al. (2010) in at least four aspects. First, we do not restrict the source
of informal venture capital. Second, by using two proxies of pre-partnership invention quality, we
control for selection into partnerships based on invention quality and demand for financing. Third,
to guide analysis we provide a formal model of the partnering process to identify the precise eﬀects
of selection into partnerships, commercialization investments, external financing, labor eﬀort, and
value added in the form of human and social capital. Finally, we take a diﬀerent stand by
empirically identifying the marginal eﬀect of the partners human and social capital on both the
probability of commercialization and expected commercialization revenues, while also purging
estimation from the eﬀects of external financing, and observed and unobserved heterogeneity in
two distinct ways.
There is also a large related literature on teamwork eﬃciency which analyzes bargaining issues
and contract design primarily as it applies to team production in large established firms (see
review by Lazear and Shaw, 2007). In this paper we abstract away from bargaining issues, which
nevertheless might be important.
Our work also contributes to the literature on the choice of entrepreneurship. In a paper
also relevant to the subject, Lazear (2005) develops a theory of entrepreneurs as jacks-of-alltrades where he assumes that the entrepreneur must perform all business tasks and the choice of
entrepreneurship is a strict function of his worst skill. The model we propose distances itself from
Lazear’s in that we allow individuals to add partners to obtain the required skills. Furthermore,
our work is distinct to Holmes and Schmitz (1990), who develop a theory of entrepreneurship with
specialization and business transfers. We focus on the process and benefits of partnerships and,
accordingly, we abstract from the possibility that the inventor may instead transfer her invention
to others.6 Finally, Evans and Jovanovic (1989) studied the degree to which personal wealth
provides a binding liquidity constraint for a single individual’s choice between entrepreneurship
and wage work. We instead focus on individuals that already have an entrepreneurial idea and
who may find partners to relax liquidity constraints for commercial entry.
an unobserved factor (e.g., the arrival of technological opportunities, the quality of the venture) was by Hellmann
and Puri (2000).
6
We find only 5 inventors that were able to transfer their idea for cash to another entity. Those 5 are deleted
from analysis.

6

2

A model of selection into business partnerships

The economy is populated by inventors and business partners. Inventors are endowed with a unit
of labor, an invention of quality  and assets .7 The inventor can use her unit of labor to
commercialize the invention. The invention quality and assets are distributed with cdf  and
are independent. Business partners are also endowed with a unit of time. The partner can use
their unit of time to contribute complementary human and/or social capital as well as financing.
The partner’s social and human capital ability are randomly drawn from a cdf  . We assume
that both the inventor and partner have an inelastic supply of labor and will therefore spend their
unit of time in the venture. Every inventor meets a partner with positive probability. Inventions
can be commercialized by the inventor on her own or with a partner.

8

If the invention is commercialized by the inventor on her own, the profits are   =   +
( − ) where  is the amount of commercialization capital invested in the business,  is
the interest rate (i.e., the opportunity cost of capital), and  ∈ (0 1). The complementarity
between the commercialization capital and the invention quality implies that a higher quality of
the invention will produce a higher marginal product of capital at all levels of capital. As a result
some inventors may have insuﬃcient assets to fully fund the capital investment. Following Evans
and Jovanovic (1989), we consider that inventors can borrow against their assets to fund capital
investment. If   , the inventor is a net borrower, and ( − ) is the amount he repays at
the end of the period. An inventor with assets  will be able to borrow an amount up to ( − 1)

and invest up to  ≤ ,9 where   1 Whenever the optimal capital investment is higher than
the inventor’s borrowing capacity the inventor will be liquidity constrained.
If the invention is commercialized with a partner, the capital is leveraged by (), the partner’s
ability. The partner may also provide financing beyond what can be borrowed based on wealth
to release an inventor’s liquidity constraint. The joint profits then are   = ()  + ( −

) −  .10 We constrain () ≥ 1 indicating that partners do not reduce productivity. For
7

In an extended version one may separately introduce the inventor’s entrepreneurial ability. Here,  can be
considered representing also the inventor’s ability. In the empirical analysis we analyze the robustness of results by
allowing entrepreneurial ability to vary in some specifications.
8
We abstract away from deciding on the number of partners; our stylized partner could therefore also be interpreted as the endowments of a set of partners. We also disregard the case where the inventor directly sells
the invention. Our simplified model holds for the majority of partnerships since most partnerships are between
two individuals. For example, Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter (2003) shows that in the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial
Dynamics, out of 421 start-ups with partners, 74% had two members, 13% had three members, 7% four, and 5%
had five or more. A slightly expanded version of our model would characterize selection of multiple partners by
setting the opportunity cost to n where n is the number of partners.
9
Note that  =  + ( − 1)
10
Inventors are assumed to form a partnership rather than hiring employees because it is hard to write employment
contracts when commercialization eﬀorts (while observed by the contractual parties) are not verifiable by a third
party (Grossman and Hart, 1986).

7

simplicity we hereon reduce notation to  for partner ability, although () is some function of
a vector of human and social capital. Partners’ ability contribute towards a higher productivity
of capital for a given level of invention quality.11 An additional benefit of a partnership is that
business partners can contribute external financing. The parameter  is a sunk cost to form a
business partnership. We interpret it as the partner’s opportunity cost to join the partnership.
For simplicity, we assume that invention quality, inventor wealth, and the partner’s ability are
observable by the two parties.12 This assumption together with an inelastic supply of labor
implies that there will be no use of convertible features in the contract between the inventor and
the business partner.13 These assumptions were motivated by the distinctive objectives and modes
of operation of informal venture capital. Informal venture capital investors, generally, do not rely
on traditional control mechanisms, such as board control, staging or contractual provisions. They
typically make only a few investments at a time and tend to invest substantially smaller amounts
than VCs, invest their savings on their own, and they often spend time ’hands-on’ in the business.
In addition, we assume that partners are suﬃciently financially endowed that partnerships can
reach the unconstrained level of capital investment that maximizes profits. This final assumption
simplifies the analysis considerably.
An inventor chooses to form a business partnership if the profit from that,    is higher
than the profit from a solo-entrepreneurship,   , assuming contracting is eﬃcient.14 Profits are
evaluated at the capital investments that maximizes their respective profits subject to liquidity
constraints. Eﬃcient contracting implies that as long as forming a partnership is mutually beneficial, our results do not depend on how profits are split. If the inventor is not liquidity constrained
11

An alternative interpretation is that partners leverage the quality of the invention. Both interpretations are
possible, adopting the alternate does not change the comparative statics that follow.
12
Allowing for asymmetric information in our model at the time of partnership formation will not change the
qualitative results concerning selection on invention quality and demand for financing.
13
A more general framework including some elements such as persistent asymmetric information, unobserved
eﬀort, and multiple rounds of financing —albeit without selection— has been analyzed in Chemmanur and Chen
(2006) and Repullo and Suarez (2004). Both papers study the double-sided moral hazard problem on the part
of both the investor and the entrepreneur. The optimal contracts in both models predict the use of convertible
features either to provide incentives to the entrepreneur (Repullo and Suarez, 2004) or the investor (Chemmanur
and Chen, 2006). Interestingly, Chemmanur and Chen’s analysis predicts that angel financing contracts are less
likely to incorporate convertible features compared to formal VC contracts.
14
Eﬃcient contracting implies that we are agnostic about how the surplus is split. That is, the incentive to form
a partnership for the inventor will be the same independently on how the surplus is split. There is no strictly
preferred way to determine the division of surplus and, while it has sometimes been derived from an explicit
bargaining game, it has been more common to assume that each party’s share of the surplus is given exogenously.
For example, in one well-known model of teamwork production, Kremer (1993, p. 585) simply notes that “the
division of a firm’s output among its heterogeneous workers [is] determined by a complex bargaining problem.” Our
model could consider potential ineﬃciencies associated with moral hazard problems of partnership production (see
Holmstrom, 1982), but since we have no data on partnership structure, predictions from such an extension would
not be testable. Instead, we assume that all ineﬃciencies associated with partnerships are scaled by the parameter
.

8

(i.e.,  ≤


(1−) )15 
 ()

the diﬀerence between   and   represents extra profits associated

with a higher productivity of capital as a result of the partner’s ability. Unconstrained partnerships are formed exclusively to add human and/or social capital. If the inventor is liquidity
constrained, the extra profits represent both higher productivity of capital (whenever partner’s
ability is provided) and the eﬀect of relaxing liquidity constraints, increasing the commercialization investment to its optimal level. These partnerships may be formed to add human and/or
social capital, or to obtain external financing.
Figure 1: The Decision to Partner as a function of A and Q given fixed inventor assets Z

Invention
quality (Q)

QP(Z,1)
Partnership with both
ability and financing

QP(Z,A)

Partnership with
ability and without
financing
Soloentrepreneur

QC (Z,A)

Partner’s
ability(A)

1

The partnership optimal decisions are illustrated in Figure 1 where invention quality () is
plotted against partner ability () for a given level of assets.16 The figure is divided into two
b ( ), where 
b is
main regions — solo-entrepreneurship and partnership — by the threshold 

the value of  where   =   . Given a partner’s ability and the inventor’s assets, the inventor
b  ( ), which
will form a partnership if and only if the invention quality is above the threshold 
b ( ) decreases with the partner’s ability indicating
implies that      . The threshold 
that the higher the ability of the partner, the lower the invention quality needed for an inventor
15

Note that


()1−


is the level of invention quality such that the inventor’s commercialization investment
 1(1−)
= 
that maximizes the profits in a partnership is equal to the inventor’s investment capacity, i.e., 

See appendix for more details.
16
The formal proofs of the following results are in the appendix.

9

to be indiﬀerent between commercializing the invention with or without a partner.
A prediction that follows from this model is that when invention quality increases, the probability to form a partnership increases. This is because a higher invention quality facilitates the
amortization of the sunk costs to form a partnership. As a result, we should expect a positive correlation between pre-partnership invention quality and inventions commercialized in partnerships.
A second prediction from the model is that the higher the ability of the partner that the inventor
meets the higher the probability of partnership. This implies that conditional on a partnership
being formed, the average ability of a partner should be strictly higher than the ability of the
average potential partner. Both predictions are probabilistic because there is a probability of
meeting a partner and there is ex ante uncertainty about the ability of the partner. These predictions have important implications for the estimation of value added. There will be selection into
partnerships based on invention quality, and there will be selection into partnerships based on the
partner’s ability. Estimation of the marginal impact of the partner’s ability on commercialization
success must therefore control for the quality of the invention, and can only be interpreted as an
average treatment-on-the-treated eﬀect (Heckman, 1979).
The region with partnership formation is further divided into two areas by the threshold
b defines the quality
— partnerships with financing and partnerships without financing. 

b ( )


b decreases with the
level above which the inventor is liquidity constrained. The threshold 
partner’s ability indicating that the higher the partner’s ability the lower is the invention quality

above which an inventor is liquidity constrained. Partnerships with ability but without financing
b in Figure 1. These partnerships do not require
b and below 
are located in the region above 

a partner for financing reasons, but the partner’s contribution of human and/or social capital
outweighs the cost of partnering. There are two characteristics about these partnerships that are
worth noticing. First, partnerships with ability but without financing exist only for intermediate
levels of invention quality; for higher levels of invention quality there will always be external
financing as the inventor’s liquidity constraint will eventually bind; and for lower levels of invention
quality a partnership may only be profitable when external financing releases liquidity constraints
(inventor’s assets are low) and therefore partners will provide both ability and financing. Second,
for the intermediate levels of quality, decreasing invention quality further may temporarily increase
the proportion of partnerships with no financing while the overall proportion of partnerships may
decrease, as can be seen in Figure 1. The explanation is that the relative benefit of the contribution
of partners’ ability holds up better than the drop in value added of external financing as invention
quality diminishes.
Partnerships with both ability and financing are characterized by inventions that range from
10

high to low levels of invention quality. The partnerships with higher level of invention quality
involve external financing because the inventor’s liquidity constraints are more likely to bind.
Instead, partnerships of low invention quality may only be profitable when inventor’s assets are
low and therefore partners must provide both ability and financing. If the demand for external financing originates from these lower quality inventions, the selection eﬀect on demand for
financing will be less. These results suggest that to assess the importance of selection on demand
for financing we may compare the mean invention quality in partnerships with both ability and
financing against partnerships with ability but without financing. If the mean quality in partnerships with both ability and financing is lower than the quality in partnerships with ability but
without financing, then the proportion of inventors with suﬃciently low assets in the economy
will be large and the selection on demand for financing will be less.
Finally, it is possible that if invention quality is suﬃciently high a partner without ability may
join simply to release credit constraints. Partnerships that provide only financing are located at
the top left corner of Figure 1.
To summarize this discussion, there will be three types of partnerships; those where partners
only bring financing, those where partners provide both ability and financing, and those where
partners only provide ability. A first testable prediction of the model was that when invention
quality increases, the probability to form a partnership increases. This implies selection on quality.
The second prediction was that the higher the ability of the partner that the inventor meets the
higher the probability of partnership. This implies selection on partner ability. A third prediction
was that the probability to form a partnership to obtain financing increases with invention quality.
This prediction implies selection on demand for financing. However, we also showed that the
mean invention quality in partnerships with both ability and financing may be lower than for
partnerships with ability and without financing. This could happen if the proportion of inventors
with suﬃciently low assets in the economy is large and would imply that selection on demand for
financing would be less.17
17

If we for the moment assume uniform distributions of assets and invention quality in the inventor population,
and a uniform distribution of partner ability, the most likely type of partnership is that where partners bring both
financing and abilities. However, skew or bimodal distributions of quality, assets or ability in the economy may
temper this prediction. An additional conclusion from the model is that the pool of solo-entrepreneurs will consists
of two types; those with low quality inventions which are not liquidity constrained and those with higher quality
which are liquidity constrained but which did not find a suitable partner. The fraction of liquidity constrained
solo-entrepreneurs as well as the fraction of partnerships varies across economies as a function of the preponderance
of potential partners (with financing and abilities) in the economy, and the distribution of invention quality and
assets in the inventor population.

11

3

Data

We focus our empirical analysis on a sample of independent inventors; that is, individuals who
decide to develop inventions outside their regular employment duties. Many inventors may not
have great entrepreneurial or business skills and may lack the financial capital necessary to commercialize their inventions. Further, they may lack the benefits of working in a large organization
in terms of access to a multitude of internal resources such as a lab, funding, skilled colleagues,
and an established marketing and distribution network. They may thus find it particularly useful
to have others join them in their commercialization eﬀorts. A construction business, corner store,
personal service, or restaurant (the most common start-ups), may not require large up-front investments, but commercializing new products involve using significant business skills and capital
investments. Studying independent inventors should thus likely provide an excellent opportunity
to examine the role of informal venture capital, partnership mechanisms, and their outcomes.
However, it is costly, given their scarcity, to find independent inventors among the general
population. To economize on search costs, we therefore use a list of independent inventors,
self-identified through their use of the services of the Canadian Innovation Centre (CIC). The
assessment results in an overall recommendation that is either positive or negative. Our sample
frame consists of inventors that had asked the CIC to evaluate their inventions between 1994
and 2001. Of these, we had current addresses for 1,770 which we contacted by surface mail in
2004. We were then able to contact 934 by telephone, and from these we obtained 830 telephone
surveys. All data except the invention evaluations are self-reported. We remove 53 partially
answered surveys and 5 observations where the IP was sold or licensed, leaving 772 observations
for analysis.18 Missing item responses were imputed five times assuming data were Missing At
Random (MAR) using a switching regression approach described in van Buuren et al. (1999),
where missing data were randomly replaced conditional on observed data and survey structure.
Means, coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors are subsequently computed over five complete
datasets using the formulae in Little and Rubin (1987, equations 12.17—12.20).19 Pseudo-2 ’s are
provided for one of the five samples as an indication of absolute levels.
The data primarily contains information on pre-CIC research and development (R&D) expen18

For survey details see Astebro, Jeﬀrey, and Adomdza (2007).
In multiple imputation, missing values for any variable are predicted using existing values from other variables.
The predicted values replace missing values, resulting in a full data set. This process is performed multiple times.
Standard statistical analysis is performed on each imputed data set. Results are then combined. Multiple imputation
restores not only the natural variability in the missing data, but also incorporates the uncertainty caused by
estimating missing data. Uncertainty is accounted for by creating diﬀerent versions of the missing data and observing
the variability between imputed data sets. For a further introduction to multiple missing data imputation see
Graham and Hofer (2000).
19

12

ditures, pre-partnership invention quality assessment by the CIC, post-CIC commercialization
expenditures, a dummy for the creation of a partnership to commercialize the invention, three
non-exclusive dummies for the type of capital partners bring (human capital, social capital, and
financing), the amount of external financial capital, whether or not the invention was commercialized, total commercialization revenues, and year and industry classification codes. There are
also sundry inventor and invention characteristics in the survey that we employ when computing
partnership propensity scores.

3.1

Summary statistics

The modal inventor age is 45-54 and the modal educational attainment is high school, although
about 26% of the inventors had some professional or graduate education. Only 16% of the inventors reported they were unemployed, home-makers, retired, disabled, or on sick leave during
the time that they were developing their focal invention. Most (58%) were full-time employees,
while 32% were self-employed when developing their invention (multiple answers possible). To
understand the composition of the inventor sample better, we drew a comparison sample from
the general Canadian population.20
While the identification of inventors relies on a specific, focal, invention submitted to the CIC
it does not imply that the individuals are predominantly one-shot inventors. To the contrary,
the sample is dominated by long-term serial inventors. Fifty-three percent of them had spent six
or more years developing inventions, and 75% had worked on more than one invention. Eleven
percent developed the invention as part of their normal duties at work. Twenty-six percent were
stimulated by something at work, a majority of which (73%) were not required to innovate at
work. Descriptions of some inventions reveal most to be “user-driven”. The sources of invention
are thus quite varied.
With regards to the inventions, 21% were rated as of high quality by the CIC and given a
positive recommendation, suitable to develop further at least as a part-time eﬀort. The other
20

We queried a sample of 300 Canadians from the general population based on sampling quotas for province,
work experience, and gender, to reflect similarities in the aggregate with the inventors on these three variables. The
combined samples contains unusually high fractions reporting that they are or have been self-employed (63 percent),
or have owned a business (60 percent). The rates of entrepreneurship are much higher for the inventor sample than
for the general population sample: 72 percent of the inventor sample report current or prior self-employment,
compared with 43 percent of the general population sample; 67 percent of the inventor sample report current or
prior business ownership compared with 43 percent of the general population sample. Overall, the average number
of businesses that have been owned is 1.20; again, the figure is much higher for the inventor sample (1.49) than
for the general population sample (0.69). Note also that individuals in the more entrepreneurial inventor sample
are more likely to have come from an entrepreneurial family. The two samples otherwise do not diﬀer much on
comparable variables such as age, education, experience, gender, marital status, managerial experience and business
experience. For further details see Astebro and Thompson (2011).

13

79% were deemed of low quality and inventors were recommended to stop further development.
Most numerous were sports/leisure products (28%), followed by 16% security or safety applications, 14% automotive, 14% medical or health, and 13% which had environmental or energy
applications. Inventions involving high technology (9%) and industrial equipment (14%) were
also relatively frequent. Successful consumer-oriented inventions included a new milk container
design, a washable sanitary pad, and a home security light timer that imitates typical use. Other
inventions had business applications. These inventions included an aligner and printer for photographic proofs, a tractor-trailer fairing that enhances fuel eﬃciency, a re-usable plug to insert
in wooden hydroelectric poles after testing for rot, and a computerized and mechanically integrated tree harvester. Thus, the inventions varied substantially in technological complexity and
market potential. The median invention development eﬀort was performed in 1997, and 95% of
respondents had attempted to develop their focal invention before 2003.
The pre-commercialization investments in the inventions reveal to be far larger than in the
ordinary start-up. For example, the 1992 Characteristics of Business Owners database report that
the majority of U.S. start-ups (approximately 60%) were started or acquired with no cash outlay
or with less than $5,000 (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1997.) In contrast, the average R&D
investment for the inventors is approximately Cdn. $22,500 and the additional commercialization
investment is another Cdn. $24,800 (2003 values). Nevertheless, investments in these projects at
the same time appears somewhat less than those undertaken by ’business angel networks’. For
example, Wiltbank and Boeker (2007) report the average investment size per project (including
follow-on investments) by business angel networks to be $191,000 (median investor contribution
$50,000), while Wiltbank (2009) report an average investor contribution of £42,000. Note that the
samples of projects with business angel investors are constructed conditioned on business angel
investments being positive, while our sample does not have this restriction.

4

Partnerships and the commercialization of inventions

We first report some descriptive statistics on partnerships and solo-entrepreneurs. In approximately 21% of the projects the inventor was joined by someone to commercialize the invention.
The primary reason for the inventor to create a partnership was to obtain human capital (65%),
followed by obtaining financing (51%), and social capital (42%).21 Figure 1 suggested four po21

We asked the inventor "Did you ever team up with other people trying to commercialize the invention?", if
yes, we further inquired: "Why did you team up with other people?" with the following options read: "You needed
to have your skills complemented by their skills", "They had contacts that were useful", "You needed the capital
they provided", "They had resources that were useful (land, equipment, plant)" and "Other". In analysis the two
categories prior to "other" are collapsed into one. The questions imply that there is some form of matching where

14

tential choices for an inventor: no partnership; with only financing provided; partnership with
financing and ability provided; and finally partnerships with only ability provided by the partner.
Table 1 can be used to compute the proportions of these outcomes. As stated above, 79% are
without a partnership. Among the partnerships, in 16% of the cases there were only financing
provided, in 51% there were both financing and ability provided by partners, and in 45% of the
partnerships there were only ability provided.
The fact that a significant number of inventors are joined by someone to commercialize their
invention suggests that there may be benefits to partnership. Indeed, we find that working with
partners is positively correlated with the probability that inventions are commercialized. Table 1B
shows that partnerships have a probability of commercialization of 0.30, which is about five times
larger than that of projects run by solo-entrepreneurs (0.06). The presence of partners is also
positively correlated with revenues. Projects run by solo-entrepreneurs had mean present value
of revenues of $24,196; mean revenues from projects run by partnerships were approximately ten
times as much; $232,397. While solo entrepreneurship dominates the data there appears to be
enough variation to examine partnership selection mechanisms and benefits. Importantly, not all
partners provide financing indicating a potential value added eﬀect through human and/or social
capital.

4.1

Selection into partnership

Selection on invention quality The theoretical model predicts a positive correlation between pre-partnership invention quality and the probability of partnership formation. To investigate selection on invention quality, we classify inventions into two categories; high quality
inventions will be those with a CIC positive assessment, the rest of the inventions are deemed
of low quality. It is immediately apparent that partners are more likely to join inventors with
high quality inventions, as shown in Table 1B. Partnerships are twice more likely to have high
quality inventions than solo-entrepreneurs, 35 percent versus 18 percent. Stated diﬀerently, 34
percent of inventions rated as high quality were eventually joined by a partner, while only 17%
of inventions with low quality were joined by a partner. We have also classified the quality of
the inventions using the inventor’s own research and development (R&D) expenditures prior to
the CIC assessment and formation.22 Partners were more likely to join inventors with higher
R&D expenditures. The average R&D expenditures by the inventors that were eventually joined
by partners was $90,364; the solo-entrepreneurs spent on average $4,725. To control for varying
the partner provides something which the inventor does not have.
22
We separate between the idea creation and commercialization phase by the date of the CIC assessment.

15

Table 1: Commercialization, Invention Quality, R and D Expenditures and Revenues by Soloentrepreneurs and Teams.
The sample consists of 772 inventions from inventors that had asked the Canadian Innovation Center (CIC) to evaluate their inventions between 1994 and 2001. The table
is divided into three parts. Panel A describes the percentage of inventions that were
commercialized in partnerships, and the percentages of partnerships where partners provided only financing, both financing and ability, or only ability. Panel B presents characteristics of inventions commercialized by partnerships and solo-entrepreneurs. These
characteristics are: the percentage of inventions with a positive CIC assessment; the
probability of commercialization; and the means of the R and D expenditures, the
commercialization investment, and the commercialization revenues. Panel C presents
characteristics of projects conditional on commercialization. All data are in Cdn 2003
dollars. Each missing item response has been imputed five times following van Buuren
et al. (1999). Means are computed using the formulae in Little and Rubin (1987).
A. Percentage of projects with partnerships and contributions by partners
Percentage partnerships (%)

21.0

Contributions among partnerships (%)
Only financing
Both financing and human/social capital
Only human/social capital

15.6
35.6
45.6

B. Characteristics of projects unconditional on commercialization
Percentage with
positive CIC review (%)
Mean R&D expenditures ($)
by inventor prior to the CIC review
Mean commercialization
investment ($)
Mean commercialization
revenues ($)
Probability of commercialization (%)

All

Partnership

Soloentrepreneur

21.5

35.5

17.8

22,518

90,364

4,725

24,823

70,690

12,792

67,432

232,397

24,196

10.9

29.9

5.9

C. Characteristics of projects conditional on commercialization
Percentage with
49.3
55.0
positive CIC review (%)
Mean R&D expenditures ($)
166,009
282,354
by inventor prior to the CIC review
Mean commercialization
investment ($)
110,343
169,732
Mean commercialization
revenues ($)
619,739
776,238

16

41.7
10,882
31,158
411,073

Table 2: Probit Regression Analysis of Partnership
The sample consists of 772 inventions from inventors that had asked the Canadian Innovation Center (CIC) to evaluate their inventions between 1994 and 2001. The dependent
variable is partnership, a dummy variable taking the value 1 if an innovation was commercialized as a partnership, 0 otherwise. The independent variables are "Positive", a
dummy variable taking the value 1 if the CIC assesment was positive, 0 otherwise; and
"R and D expenditures", the natural logarithm of R and D expenditures. All data are in
Cdn 2003 dollars. All regressions include dummy variables controlling for the project’s
industry, and the year the invention was assessed by the CIC. Standard errors in parenthesis. ***, ** or * mean the coeﬃcient is significant at the 1 percent, 5 percent, or
10 percent level, respectively. Each missing item response has been imputed five times
following van Buuren et al. (1999). Coeﬃcients and standard errors are computed using
the formulae in Little and Rubin (1987).
Parameter estimates of eﬀects of invention quality
Positive

0.397***
(0.130)

R&D expenditures
Pseudo 2 (%)
N

0.06
772

0.080***
(0.016)
0.08
772

0.211
(0.142)
0.071***
(0.017)
0.08
772

capital requirements by technology and for varying costs of capital we include industry and year
dummies in a regression of the probability of formation on invention quality. Estimates survive the
inclusion of these industry and year controls (see Table 2). The Table also reveals that inventors’
R&D expenditures were correlated with the CIC assessments.
Selection on demand for financing An additional reason for why partners join inventors
is to provide external financing. The model provides several predictions concerning the interplay
of external financing and formation. A first prediction is that the probability to form a partnership
to obtain financing increases with invention quality. Using the same quality indicators and controls
as before as predictors, Table 3 presents Probit regressions with a dummy = 1 if a partnerships
was formed to obtain financing, and zero otherwise. The table shows support for this prediction.
It appears that most of the invention quality variation that determines partnership financing is
best captured with pre-partnership R&D expenditures.
Another prediction refers to the invention quality where partners provide both ability and
financing versus the quality where partners provide only ability. According to our theory, partnerships with both ability and financing can have lower average invention quality than partnerships
with only ability only if the proportion of inventors with low assets is high. Data show that
partnerships with both ability and financing indeed have a lower proportion of positive CIC as-

17

Table 3: Probit Regression Analysis of Partnership with Financing
The sample consists of 772 inventions from inventors that had asked the Canadian
Innovation Center (CIC) to evaluate their inventions between 1994 and 2001. The
dependent variable is partnership with financing; a dummy variable taking the value
1 if an innovation was commercialized by a partnership with financing, 0 otherwise.
The independent variables are Positive; a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the CIC
assesment was positive, 0 otherwise; and the natural logarithm of R and D expenditures.
All data are in Cdn 2003 dollars. All regressions include dummy variables controlling
for the project’s industry, and the year the invention was assessed by the CIC. Standard
errors in parenthesis. ***, ** or * mean the coeﬃcient is significant at the 1 percent, 5
percent, or 10 percent level, respectively. Each missing item response has been imputed
five times following van Buuren et al. (1999). Coeﬃcients and standard errors are
computed using the formulae in Little and Rubin (1987).
Parameter estimates of eﬀects of invention quality
Positive

0.125
(0.152)

R&D expenditures
Pseudo 2 (%)
N

0.05
772

0.055***
(0.019)
0.06
772

-0.029
(0.165)
0.057***
(0.021)
0.06
772

sessments (30%) and R&D expenditures (Cdn $18,775) than partnerships with only ability (41%
and Cdn $177,025, respectively). The diﬀerences are statistically significant (t-tests of diﬀerences
in proportions and means are 3.32 and 3.60, respectively.) This result suggests that the proportion
of inventors with low assets may be large. It implies that selection on demand for financing may
be less since the demand for financing may be primarily from lower quality inventions. Once we
analyze value added we can test additional predictions relating to the demand for financing.

5

The value added of partners’ ability

To study the contribution of partners in the commercialization of inventions we adopt the following
econometric specification:
 =

(

∗ if
0 if

∗  0
∗ ≤ 0

)

with ∗ as a latent variable indicating commercialization success, and
∗ =  +  +  +  +   + 
where  is the log of commercialization revenues;  is unobserved (to the econometrician) invention quality;  is a dummy that equals one if a partnership was formed to commercialize
18

invention ;  represents regressors that vary across inventions, and  is a normally distributed
zero mean residual component. The terms  and   correspond to industry and CIC application
year eﬀects as implemented by a set of dummy variables, and  captures the eﬀect of partner’s
ability on the commercialization revenues conditional on a partnership being formed.23 We use
the log form to allow for multiplicative eﬀects of inputs as posited by our theoretical model.
Table 4 reports the eﬀect of forming a partnership and control variables on the latent variable
∗ . We use a Tobit model as there are a large number of inventions that are never commercialized
and have zero revenues.24 To provide intuition, we use a standard decomposition technique of the
coeﬃcient  into the marginal eﬀect on the probability of commercialization, and the marginal
eﬀect on expected log revenues, both estimated at sample means (see e.g. McDonald and Moﬃtt,
1980).25 The first column (Model 1) shows the estimated coeﬃcient for the partnership dummy
controlling for industry and year eﬀect. Joint t-tests indicate that industry dummies (t=1.74)
and year dummies (t=1.70) are only marginally significant. After controlling for industry and
year dummies the size of  is 15.25. Taking this value and evaluating the marginal eﬀects of
partnership at the mean of the sample imply that an invention project run as a partnership has
approximately a 0.22 greater probability of commercialization than one run by a solo-entrepreneur,
and its expected revenues are eight times higher than a solo-entrepreneur project. (Since the
controls are only marginally significant the gross diﬀerences in Table 1B are quite similar; 0.24
and 9.6, respectively.)
The positive correlation between commercialization success and partnership formation has
to be interpreted with caution. We previously showed that partners are more likely to join
inventions of higher quality and that the demand for financing depends on invention quality and
thus also determines partnership formation. Both findings indicate that the partnership coeﬃcient
in Column 1 is endogenously determined and likely upwards biased.
We therefore add two proxies to account for selection based on invention quality: the CIC
assessment and the log of R&D expenditures. The second column in Table 4 (Model 2) shows
23

See Proposition 4 in the appendix for proof that  must be interpreted as a treatment-on-the-treated eﬀect.
We also experimented with a Heckman selection specification, but we could not find a variable that could be
reasonably assumed to aﬀect the probability to commercialize but not revenues conditional on commercialization.
Without an exclusion restriction estimations were very unstable or did not converge.
25
Consider the following Tobit model. Let the dependent variable be  =  ∗ (if ∗  0) and  = 0 (if  ∗ ≤ 0), and
the latent variable ∗ =  +  The marginal eﬀect on the observed log of expected revenues  is (|)
  Φ( 
)


where  is a regressor of interest,  is a matrix of the sample means of the regressors,   is the corresponding Tobit
estimated coeﬃcient of the regressor  , and Φ is the cdf of the standard normal distribution. If  is a dummy,
the marginal eﬀect is the diﬀerence between the diﬀerence of the predicted values of of the dummy evaluated at
the sample mean of the rest of the regressors. Because our dependent variable is the log of revenues, the marginal
eﬀect of partnership in revenues can be approximated by exponentiating the marginal eﬀect of partnership on the
log of revenues.
24

19

that the eﬀect of partnership formation on expected commercialization success then decreases
from 15.25 to 11.68, a 23 percent reduction. The test indicates that there is clear selection on
project quality into partnerships. However, the partnership coeﬃcient still remains significant
and large. At the sample means, partnerships are associated with an increase in the probability
of commercialization of 16 percentage points, and an increase in the expected revenues by a factor
of 3.5. The large magnitudes of these eﬀects indicate additional partnership eﬀects.
Two additional mechanisms may explain the remaining partnership eﬀect – the role of commercialization investments and external financing. Our theory suggests that optimal commercialization investments should increase whenever the partner’s ability increases the productivity of
capital. If partner’s ability increases the productivity of capital, controlling for the commercialization investment should account for the part of the partnership eﬀect that causes an increase in
the optimal investment level. In addition, the amount of external financing provided by partners
should capture the partnership eﬀect on revenues from relaxing liquidity constraints. Unfortunately, due to survey structure we cannot simultaneously identify these two eﬀects.26 We therefore
run two regressions where we first analyze the impact of commercialization investments and then
analyze the impact of external financing.
In Model 3 of Table 4 we analyze the eﬀect of commercialization investments. The third column
adds the natural logarithm of post-partnership commercialization investments; the sum of all cash
provided both by the inventor and external financiers to commercialize the invention after the
formation of a partnership. The results show that the commercialization investment is aﬀected
by partners contributing ability because the partnership coeﬃcient declines significantly (35.5%)
when adding the commercialization investment. But while the introduction of commercialization
investment reduces the partnership coeﬃcient considerably, the partnership eﬀect remains positive
and statistically significant. For instance, evaluating the eﬀects of partnerships at the mean of the
sample, partnerships increase the probability of commercialization by 8 percentage points, and
increase expected revenues by 65%. Another noteworthy results is that both the quality indicators
diminish in size and significance once we control for commercialization investment. The reason is
that the commercialization investment is also endogenous to project quality: optimal investments
increase with invention quality.
26

The survey enquired: 1. First, we would like to know how much money was spent on developing XX. Include all
costs for product development, marketing research, making of prototypes, etc. How much did you spend before you
contacted the CIC for an evaluation? 2. How much did you spend after you contacted the CIC for an evaluation?
3. I will now read a list of sources of funds that you may have used to pay for the costs of developing your invention.
Please tell me for each source whether you have actually used it or not. 4. Consider the total amount of money
you have spent on this invention so far. How large a proportion of this amount was your own money? These data
allow us to identify either the eﬀect of commercialization investment (using question 2) or external financing (using
question 4).

20

To examine whether inventors are liquidity constrained and the degree to which partners
relax these liquidity constraints, in Table 5 we separate between the natural logarithm of the
inventor’s cash contribution and the natural logarithm of the sum of all cash contributions by all
external financiers.27 A first result from this analysis is that the size of the coeﬃcient for external
financing is almost four times lower than the coeﬃcient for own financing in Model 3. This result
is consistent with the idea that inventors are capital constrained. If they were not constrained the
coeﬃcients for internal and external financing should be equal.28 Thus, selection into partnerships
to release liquidity constraints is likely to occur. External financing is also positively correlated
with the partnership eﬀect, but not very much. Quantitatively, the partnership coeﬃcient is
reduced from 10.28 (in model 2) to 9.26 (in model 3), a reduction by 10%. The results indicate
that partners may often not be the main external financier.
Our theoretical model assumed that labor supply was inelastic both for the inventor and the
partner. But it is possible that labor may be supplied elastically. The inventor may for example
be trading oﬀ time in the venture with working part-time as an employee and the partner may be
investing in several ventures at the same time. We therefore relax the assumption of inelastic labor
supply in Model 4. In particular, we inquired about the sum of the number of hours provided by
the inventor and all partners post CIC evaluation to commercialize the invention. Including the
log of this number (with log of zero hours set to zero) will allow us to approximately isolate partner
ability from hours of input by the partner. Results are reported in Model 4 in Tables 4 and 5.
Controlling for labor inputs, the partnership coeﬃcient drops by 0% in Table 4 and 5% in Table
5. The low conditional correlation between the partnership dummy and total hours indicate
that it is the inventor whom perform the majority of commercialization eﬀorts, and that the
main contribution by partners is skills, rather than hours. However, the magnitudes of the other
parameters generally drop, indicating that labor eﬀorts are positively correlated with invention
quality, total commercialization investments, and the amount of external financing. Nevertheless,
the partnership coeﬃcient remains significant and large.
Whatever is left of the partnership coeﬃcient after accounting for selection on quality, commercialization investment, labor supply, and external financing can be attributed to the partner’s
ability, but as well to measurement error and model mis-specification. In the next two subsections we therefore attempt to further control for selection on inventor-invention characteristics,
selection on unobservables and measurement error to isolate the eﬀect of partner ability on com27
All others may be for example banks, family, friends, business partners, universities as well the government.
Due to survey structure we could not separate the investments between these external suppliers of capital.
28
This result is consistent with the finding that smaller and younger firms have higher growth-cash flow sensitivities than larger and more mature firms (see e.g. Fazzari, Hubbard, and Peterson, 2000).

21

mercialization success.

5.1

Accounting for selection on observables

We start by controlling for selection into partnerships on observable inventor characteristics using
a propensity-score weighted model described by Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003).29 Woolridge
(2007) discuss a related approach, but Hirano et al.’s method may produce more eﬃcient estimates.
We estimate the propensity to form a partnership with logistic regression using as predictors
the previously used variables: Positive, pre-partnership R&D expenditures, industry and year
dummies, as well as a range of additional pre-determined pre-partnership inventor and invention
characteristics to calibrate the propensity to form a partnership.30 The range of inventor and
invention characteristics is quite large. Matching partnership observations to non-partnership
observations with similar propensity scores we can behave as if there was random assignment to
partnerships on inventor and invention characteristics, under the condition that there is ample
partnership and non-partnership observations for each score. We examined this requirement
and deleted 48 observations where there was no common support, leaving 724 observations for
subsequent analysis. The region of common support for the score is [.02, .91], capturing the 1st
to the 99th percentile. Because there is considerable overlap in the score distributions between
partnership and non-partnership observations between the 1st to the 99th percentile the so-called
balance property is satisfied and we can safely rely on the scores to provide reasonable matching.
Results of the inverse propensity-score weighted Tobit are provided in Model 5. As seen, the
estimate of the partnership coeﬃcient is again reduced, indicating that there is also selection on
observable inventor and invention characteristics. The coeﬃcient however does not decrease that
much, it drops by an additional 6.3% and 9.7%, in Tables 4 and 5 respectively. Therefore, after
controlling for these selection eﬀects, the partnership coeﬃcient still remains large. The size of
29
In another attempt to endogenize partnership formation we estimated an IV model with "the invention was
stimulated at work" as exogenous predictor of partnership. It seems reasonable to presume that if the stimulus
for the invention was at work it may make it easier for the inventor to find partners, but should not necessarily
directly aﬀect returns. The variable indeed was a significant predictor of partnership (t=2.94, p0.01) and the
J-test confirmed that it was not correlated with the error term of the outcome regression (Chi-2=0.09 and 0.06,
p0.10.) Although the instrument is valid and reliable the results were not stable. This is a situation where the
instrument simply is too weakly identified.
We also experimented with including all the inventor and invention characteristics in the production function.
This produced results qualitatively similar to the ones reported in Tables 4 and 5 and were deemed to be of no
major interest. Results available on request from the corresponding author.
30
We included inventor gender, marital status, age, education, work experience, managerial experience, business
experience, family business experience, years experience inventing, number of inventions developed, invention developed at work, invention stimulated at work, invention developed together with someone else, full-time, part-time,
un- or self-employed when inventing. We also included the following invention characteristics: positive, pre-team
R&D expenditures, pre-team number of hours of eﬀort, industry dummies, year dummies, and whether the fee paid
to the CIC for the review was partly subsidized by a third party.

22

Table 4: Tobit Regression Analysis of Commercialization Revenues
This Table presents latent variable results from Tobit regressions. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of commercialization revenues. The independent variables
are; partnership: a dummy variable =1 if an inventor formed a partnership to commercialize the innovation and 0 otherwise; partner with ability is a dummy =1 if the inventor
formed a partnership and the partner contributed human and/or social capital and 0
otherwise; partner without ability but with financing is a dummy variable =1 if the inventor formed a partnership and the partner contribute financing but did not contribute
neither human nor social capital; Positive, is a dummy variable =1 if the CIC assesment
was positive, 0 otherwise; and R and D expenditures, and commercialization investment
are the natural logarithms of R and D expenditures and commercialization investment,
respectively. All data are in Cdn 2003 dollars. All regressions include dummy variables
controlling for the project’s industry, and the year the invention was assessed by the
CIC. Standard errors in parenthesis. ***, ** or * mean the coeﬃcient is significant at
the 1 percent, 5 percent or 10 percent level, respectively. Missing item data are multiple
imputed using switching regression and assuming data are MAR. Coeﬃcient estimates
and standard errors are constructed using the formulae in Little and Rubin (1987).

Partnership eﬀects
Partnership

Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Tobit

Tobit

Tobit

Tobit

Model 5
Propensity
Score
Weighted
Tobit

15.25***
(2.38)

11.68***
(2.14)

7.54***
(1.94)

7.54***
(1.92)

7.06***
(1.84)

Partner with ability

Control variables
Positive evaluation
R&D expenditures

5.44***
(2.15)
1.57***
(0.35)

3.02
(1.98)
0.54*
(0.33)
1.61***
(0.28)

3.05
(1.98)
0.48
(0.33)
1.14***
(0.31)
1.05**
(0.44)

2.19
(1.94)
-0.30
(0.29)
1.00***
(0.31)
1.32***
(0.48)

3.11
(1.98)
0.49
(0.33)
1.19***
(0.32)
1.01**
(0.44)

-34.22***
(5.43)
13.37***
(1.28)
0.13
772

-31.78***
(4.98)
11.97***
(1.13)
0.18
772

-32.71***
(5.05)
11.81***
(1.11)
0.19
772

-25.76***
(4.49)
9.51***
(0.91)
0.14
724

-32.17***
(4.98)
11.87***
(1.12)
0.18
772

Commercialization
investment
Commercialization
labor

Sigma
Pseudo 2 (%)
N

Tobit

7.09***
(2.01)
6.52*
(3.69)

Partner without ability
but with financing

Constant

Model 6

-25.07***
(4.70)
14.88***
(1.44)
0.09
772

23

the eﬀect is either 46% or 52% of the gross partnership coeﬃcient in Model 1, respectively. The
estimate from Table 4 implies that expected revenues of commercialized inventions increase by 29%
going from solo-entrepreneurship to partnership, and that the probability of commercialization
increases by 0.06 percentage points, which is a 97% percent increase over the commercialization
rate of solo-entrepreneurs, both non-trivial impacts (at the sample means of other variables).
The estimates of the impact of partnerships from Table 5 are somewhat stronger. Partnerships
increase the probability of commercialization by 0.09 percentage points, and increase expected
revenues by 49% (at the sample means of other variables).
Another result to note is that once we control for inventor and invention characteristics prior
to collaboration, the coeﬃcient for own financing becomes negative. This may be the case because
our propensity score method uses observables that are correlated with the borrowing capacity of
the inventor.

5.2

Accounting for selection on unobservables

Finally, we address the possibility that there is inventor-invention unobserved heterogeneity and
measurement error of our identified selection eﬀects. Here we utilize the fact that some partners
only provide financial capital. We decompose the partnership eﬀect as follows: Partnership =
partner with ability [ ()] + partner without ability but with financing [ (__ )]. A result
of our theoretical model is that the financial contribution of partners exclusively aﬀect commercialization investments by relaxing liquidity constraints. An implication of this identifying restriction
is that once we control for invention quality and commercialization investment, a partner that
exclusively provides financing should not aﬀect revenues in any other way, i.e., the coeﬃcient for
 (__ ) should be zero ( = 0). If the estimated coeﬃcient for  (__) is zero,
b should represent the partner’s estimated value

b = 0, then the coeﬃcient for  () (label this )

added. Alternatively, if 
b is positive, then there will likely be selection on unobservables and
b may have an upward bias.31
therefore 

Model 6 in Tables 4 (5) replaces Partnership with dummies for  () and  (__). In
b = 709 (  001), and 
Table 4 we find that 
b = 652 ( = 008). Results in Table 5 are similar.

b is upwards biased due to selection on unobservables.
Therefore, it appears that 

We proceed to separately identify the contribution of the partner’s ability from selection on

unobservables. Rather than imposing further parametric restrictions to obtain point identification,
31
Our empirical strategy may over estimate the importance of selection on unobservables whenever the partner’s
financial investment generates additional value added beyond the partner’s contributions of business contacts (social
capital) and complementary technical skills (human capital). For instance, the partner’s financial contribution may
generate a positive signal about the quality of the venture.

24

Table 5: Tobit Regression Analysis of Commercialization Revenues with Inventor’s and Other’s
Capital
This table presents results from Tobit regressions. The dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of commercialization revenues. The independent variables are partnership, a
dummy variable =1 if an inventor formed a partnership to commercialize the innovation
and 0 otherwise; partner with ability is a dummy variable =1 if the inventor formed a
partnership and the partner contributed human and/or social capital and 0 othewise;
partner ability but with financing is a dummy variable =1 if the inventor formed without
a partnership and the partner contribute financing but did not contribute neither human
nor social capital; Positive, which is a dummy variable =1 if the CIC assesment was
positive, 0 otherwise; and own financing and other financing are the natural logarithms
of the total R and D expenditures and the total commercialization investment from the
inventor and the partner, respectively. All data are in Cdn 2003 dollars. All regressions
include dummy variables controlling for the project’s industry, and the year the invention
was assessed by the CIC. Standard errors in parenthesis. ***, ** or * mean the coeﬃcient
is significant at the 1 percent, 5 percent, or 10 percent level, respectively. Missing item
data are multiple imputed using switching regression and assuming data are MAR.
Coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors are cosntructed using the formulae in Little
and Rubin (1987).

Partnership eﬀects
Partnership

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Tobit

Tobit

Tobit

Model 5
Propensity
Score
Weighted
Tobit

10.28***
(2.08)

9.26***
(2.08)

8.83***
(2.02)

7.98***
(1.92)

Partner with ability

Own financing

5.03***
(2.06)
1.90***
(0.36)

4.30**
(2.05)
1.74***
(0.36)
0.43**
(0.22)

4.29**
(2.02)
0.81**
(0.37)
0.22
(0.21)
1.73***
(0.44)

4.02**
(2.05)
-0.56*
(0.28)
0.40*
(0.22)
2.13***
(0.46)

4.31**
(2.03)
0.86**
(0.37)
0.25
(0.22)
1.70***
(0.44)

-36.38***
(5.54)
13.02***
(1.24)
0.15
772

-35.37***
(5.42)
12.83***
(1.22)
0.15
772

-33.67***
(5.17)
12.31
(1.17)
0.17
772

-24.01***
(4.50)
9.22***
(0.88)
0.12
742

-33.22***
(5.12)
12.39***
(1.18)
0.17
772

External financing
Commercialization
labor
Constant
Sigma
Pseudo 2 (%)
N

Tobit

8.45***
(2.10)
6.66*
(3.81)

Partner without ability
but with financing
Control variables
Positive evaluation

Model 6

25

b The eﬀect of selection on unobservables may diﬀer between
we construct a lower bound for .

partners who provide abilities and partners who only provide financing. Indeed, Figure 1 shows
that conditional on inventor’s assets the partnerships that receive only financing ( = 1) have
on average higher quality inventions than the rest of the partnerships. An implication of this
result is that the higher the quality of an invention, the more likely it is that a partnership with
only financing will be formed. This is equivalent to that ( () )  ( (__ ) ).
The sign of this inequality allows us to calculate a lower bound of the partner’s ability:   =
b − 0224b
b and 

 32 Evaluating the right hand side of the bound at the estimated 
b we obtain
  = 563 (std. err. 199   000) and   = 695 (std. err. 206   000) for the estimations

presented in Table 4 and Table 5, respectively Because we can safely assume that an upper bound
b the best estimate of partner’s ability must lie in the range  ∈ (563 845) The lower
for  is 

bound represents a partnership coeﬃcient that is lowered from 7.54 in Model 4 to 5.63 in Model 6

of Table 4, a 25% reduction. The lower bound is 37% of the gross partnership coeﬃcient in Model
1. The lower bound remains economically meaningful. For example, the mean probability of
commercialization increases from 0.06 to 0.12 at the estimated lower bound value added, and the
eﬀect on expected revenues is a 38% increase. As the lower bound estimate is higher for results
in Table 5 we refrain from reporting those details. Note that this method returns estimates quite
similar to those from the method controlling for observed heterogeneity.

6

Conclusion

We investigated the value of informal capital for invention commercialization through business
partnership formation. Partnerships are defined as when an inventor partners with someone to
obtain human capital, social capital and/or financing to attempt commercializing an invention.
We develop a model of invention commercialization with partnership formation which reveals
three selection eﬀects. We show that partners are more likely to join inventor-inventions of high
quality because these inventions allow them to obtain a higher return as compensation for their
eﬀort. A second insight is that among all potential partners the better partners are more likely
to join inventors. Lastly, inventors with high quality inventions are more likely to be liquidity
constrained and consequently more likely to seek partners for financing.
Raw data reveal that the eﬀect of partnerships on project outcomes is considerable. The rate
32

 =
Define ()

( ())
 ( ())

( (_ _  ))
 ( (_ _  )) .

(
) = 
 since our theoretical model


implies that the true value of  is 0, while () =  −  Rearranging and using that ( () ) 
 is   = 
 − (  ( (_ _  )) )
 − 0224
( (__ ) ), the lower bound   for 
 = 
  We have
 ( ())
replaced  ( ()) and  ( (___ )) with their sample counterparts.
and (
) =

26

of commercialization of inventions run by partnerships is five times larger than those run by solo
entrepreneurs and revenues are almost ten times as large for partnerships as for solo entrepreneurs.
The data reveal selection into partnerships based on invention quality: 33% of inventions rated
as high quality were eventually joined by a partner, while only 17% of inventions with low quality
were joined by a partner.
To examine selection on the demand for financing and the eﬀect of external financing we note
that the model implies that the probability to form a partnership to obtain financing increases with
project quality, that the marginal investment return should drop once a partner provides financing
(indicating liquidity constraints) and that the partnership coeﬃcient should drop once controlling
for the external investment. All predictions are supported in empirical analysis. Nevertheless,
business partners do not appear to be the major source of external financing since the partnership
eﬀect was little reduced when introducing the external investment. Data also show that invention
quality is lower when partners provide both ability and financing than when they only provide
ability. This result suggests that the proportion of inventors with low assets may be large. It
implies that selection on demand for financing may be less since the demand for financing may
be primarily from inventors with lower quality inventions.
Accounting for selection, commercialization investment, external financing, and labor hours in
Tobit analysis of commercialization revenues the remaining eﬀect of partnership formation must
be due to partners providing human and/or social capital or additional heterogeneity. We try
to isolate the eﬀect of partner ability from additional heterogeneity in two ways and find that it
represents an increase in the probability of commercialization between 0.06 and 0.09 in both a
propensity-score-weighted specification, and in an unobserved-heterogeneity specification. These
are economically meaningful results as the probability of commercialization for a solo-entrepreneur
is 0.06. The estimated eﬀect of partner ability on revenues is also large, representing approximately
either a 29% or a 38% increase in expected revenues for commercialized inventions, depending
on whether we use the propensity-score-weighted or the unobserved-heterogeneity specification.
While conditioning on a range of observables as well unobservables, these estimates must still be
interpreted as a treatment-on-the-treated eﬀect, that is, the average eﬀect of partners’ human and
social capital on project revenues for those partners selecting to join inventors. The reason is that
partners’ ability are heterogeneous and that partners with the highest ability are more likely to
join inventors.
Our paper relates to the growing work in finance which tries to estimate the value added
of venture capital to entrepreneurs. This eﬀect has been hard to isolate because VCs select on
project quality, they probably release credit constraints, and may also provide various forms of
27

value added. The three eﬀects appear simultaneously when projects are financed by VCs. In a
recent paper Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2010) compare the impact of obtaining and not obtaining
informal venture capital for entrepreneurs selecting to apply to two angel financing networks who
are just above and below a funding cut-oﬀ, thereby eliminating much of explanations based on
selection on unobservables. The authors estimate the joint eﬀects of these networks releasing
liquidity constraints and providing value added, conditional on entrepreneurs applying to these
networks. We take a diﬀerent approach than Kerr et al. (2010), in that we try to separately
estimate both the selection and added value eﬀects, and we also try to disentangle the eﬀect of
partners releasing liquidity constraints from the eﬀects of their human and social capital.
Our setting is admittedly unique. We likely examine a domain where good business partners’
human and social capital may be considerably more useful than in regular start-ups such as the
mom-and-pop corner store. In this respect our sample is probably similar to that in Kerr’s et
al. (2010) study. At the same time our sample does not contain many projects that receive
VC funding and so bargaining issues related to follow-on VC financing are probably unlikely.33
Nevertheless, our model and empirical methodology is with ease portable to other related domains
of investigation and extendable to include analysis of bargaining. Our data further exhibited
some limitations such as not linking the type of external investors with the amounts they provide,
not counting the number of partners, not collecting contractual information (we doubt there
exist much), and not providing information on the characteristics of potential partners. These
limitations provide opportunities for future research.
The policy implications that one may draw from these estimations must be very tentative given
the first-of-a-kind nature of this work. Nevertheless, if the results hold up in future work, it would
suggest that for inventive projects, a major policy leverage to increase commercialization rates
and revenues is to lubricate the market for finding skilled partners. Furthermore, the analysis
echoes the sentiments by angel investors that they have a tough time finding suﬃcient investment
opportunities (Mason, 2009). In this study the few projects with high initial quality had twice
the participation rate by business partners than those with mediocre quality.
Finally, our work contributes to the literature on entrepreneurial choice. Lazear (2005) develop
a theory of entrepreneurs as jacks-of-all-trades where he assumes that the entrepreneur must
perform all tasks. The model we propose diﬀers from Lazear’s in that we allow individuals with
insuﬃcient skills to form partnerships to obtain the required skills rather than having to invest
in own skill development. Our model also addresses project financing on which Lazear is silent.

33

The fraction which received VC financing was 0.8%, too small to be analyzeable in our study.

28

References
Astebro, T., and I. Bernhardt (2003): “Start-Up Financing, Owner Characteristics and
Survival,” Journal of Economics and Business, 55(4), 303—320.
Astebro, T., S. Jeffrey, and G. Adomdza (2007): “Inventor Perseverance After Being Told
to Quit: The Role of Cognitive Biases,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20(3),
253—272.
Astebro, T., and P. Thompson (2011): “Entrepreneurs: Jacks of all Trades or Hobos?,”
Research Policy, 40, 637—649.
Buuren, S van. Boshuizen, H. C., and K. D.L. (1999): “Multiple imputation of missing
blood pressure covariates in survival analysis,” Stat Med, 18, 681—694.
Bygrave, W. D., and P. D. Reynolds (2006): “Who Finances Startups in the USA? A
Comprehensive Study of Informal Investors, 1999-2003,” Babson College, Babson Kauﬀman
Entrepreneurship Research Conference (BKERC).
Chemmanur, T., and Z. Chen (2006): “Venture Capitalists versus Angels: The Dynamics of
Private Firm Financing Contracts,” Working paper, Boston College.
Chemmanur, T., K. Krishnan, and D. Nandy (2009): “How does venture capital financing
improve eﬃciency in private firms? A look beneath the surface,” Unpublished working
paper, Center for Economic Studies.
Cressy, R. (1996): “Are business startups debt rationed?,” The Economic Journal, 106, 1253—
1270.
Evans, D., and B. Jovanovic (1989): “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808—827.
Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard, and B. C. Petersen (2000): “Investment-cash flow sensitivities are useful: A comment on Kaplan and Zingales,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115 (2), 695—705.
Graham, J., and S. Hofer (2000): Multiple Imputation in Multivariate Research. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Grossman, S., and O. Hart (1986): “The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical
and lateral integration,” Journal of Political Economy., 94(4), 691—719.
Hall, B. H., and J. Lerner (2010): “The Financing of R&D and Innovation,” in Handbook
of the Economics of Innovation, ed. by B. H. Hall, and N. Rosenberg, chap. 14. Elsevier
29

North-Holland.
Harrison, R. T., C. M. Mason, and P. J. Robson (2010): “The Determinants of Long Distance Investing by Business Angels: Evidence from the United Kindom,” Entrepreneurship
and Regional Development, 22(2), 113—137.
Heckman, J. (1979): “Sample selection bias as a specification error,” Econometrica, 47, 153—161.
Hellmann, T., and M. Puri (2000): “The interaction between product market and financing
strategy: the role of venture capital,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 959—84.
(2002): “Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-up Firms: Empirical
Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 57(1), 169—97.
Hirano, K., G. W. Imbens, and G. Ridder (2003): “Eﬃcient Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects Using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71(4), 1161—90.
Hochberg, Y. V., A. Ljungqvist, and Y. Lu (2005): “Whom You Know Matters: Venture
Capital Networks and Investment Performance,” Journal of Finance, 62(1), 251—301.
Holmes, T., and J. A. Schmitz (1990): “A Theory of Entrepreneurship and Its Application to
the Study of Business Transfers,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(2), 265—94.
Holmstrom, B. (1982): “Moral hazard in partnerships,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 324—40.
Hsu, D. (2004): “What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Aﬃliation?,” Journal of
Finance, 59, 1805—44.
Kerr, W. R., J. Lerner, and A. Schoar (2010): “The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis,” Harvard Business School Unpublished Working Paper 10-086.
Kortum, S., and J. Lerner (2000): “Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 31, 674—692.
Kremer, M. (1993): “The O-ring theory of economic development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 551—75.
Lazear, E. P. (2005): “Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Labour Economics, 23(4), 649—81.
Lazear, E. P., and K. L. Shaw (2007): “Personnel Economics: The Economist’s View of
Human Resources,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(4), 91—114.
Little, R. J. A., and D. Rubin (1987): Statistical analysis with missing data. John Wiley &
Sons, New York.

30

Mason, C. M. (2009): “Public Policy Support for the informal Venture Capital Market in
Europe,” International Small Business Journal, 27(5), 536—56.
McDonald, J. F., and R. A. Moffitt (1980): “The Uses of Tobit Analysis,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 62 (2), 318—321.
Megginson, W., and K. A. Weiss (1991): “Venture capitalist certification in initial public
oﬀerings,” Journal of Finance, 46(3), 879—903.
Mollica, M., and L. Zingales (2007): “The impact of venture capital on innovation and the
creation of new business,” Unpublished working paper, Univeristy of Chicago.
Puri, M., and R. Zarutskie (2008): “On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital- and nonventure-capital-financed firms,” Unpublished working paper, Center for Economic Studies.
Repullo, R., and J. Suarez (2004): “Venture capital finance: A security design approach,”
Review of Finance, 8, 75—108.
Reynolds, P. D. (2005): Entrepreneurship in the United States: 2004 Assessment. Miami, FL,
Florida International University.
Ruef, M., H. E. Aldrich, and N. M. Carter (2003): “The Structure of Founding partnerships: Homophily, Strong Ties, and Isolation among U.S. Entrepreneurs,” American
Sociological Review, 68(April), 195—222.
Sohl,

J.

(2010):

Changes

in

“The
Seed

and

Angel

Investor

Start-up

Market

Investments,”

in

2009:

Centure

Holding
for

Steady

Venture

but

Research,

http://www.unh.edu/news/docs/2009angelanalysis.pdf.
Sorensen, M. (2008): “How Smart is Smart Money? An Empirical Two-Sided Matching Model
of Venture Capital,” Journal of Finance, 52 (6), 2725—62.
Van-Osnabrugge, M., and R. Robinson (2000): Angel Investing: Matching Start-up Funds
With Start-up Companies - A Guide For Entrepreneurs And Individual Investors. John
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Wiltbank, R. E. (2009): “Siding with the Angels: Business Angel Investing - promising outcomes and eﬀective strategies,” British Business Angel Association and NESTA.
Wiltbank, R. E., and W. Boeker (2007): “Returns to Angel Investors in Groups,” Kauﬀman
Foundation.
Wong, A., M. Bhatia, and Z. Freeman (2009): “Angel Finance: The other Venture Capital,”
Strategic Change, 18, 221—30.
31

Woolridge, J. M. (2007): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press.

32

Appendix A: Inventor’s maximization problem
Let  (  ) define the value of an invention of quality  with a potential partner with
ability  evaluated at the profit maximizing capital investment as
 (  ) = max{  (  )   (  )}

  (  ) = ())
  (  ) =  

∗

 ∗

+ ( −   ∗ ) − 

+ ( −  ∗ )

where  ∈ (0 1),  and  refer to solo-entrepreneurship and partnership,  ∗ is the commercialization investment that maximizes the value of an invention. The capital investment that
maximizes the inventor’s profits from commercializing the invention on her own is



∗

=

³ ´
½  1(1−)




if  ≤  ()1−

if    ()1−

¾

which may be constrained by the inventor’s assets when the invention quality is suﬃciently
high  


1− 
 ()

Note that


1−
 ()

is the level of quality such that the commercializa-

tion investment that maximizes profits is equal to the investment capacity of the inventor (i.e.,
³ ´1(1−)

= ) The commercialization investment that maximizes the partnership’s profits


from commercializing the invention is


∗

=

µ

()


¶1(1−)

Evaluating the value of the venture at the commercialization investment that maximizes profits, we obtain that the diﬀerence between the value of partnership (  ) and the value of soloentrepreneurship (  ) is:
⎧
³ ´(1−)
³ ´1(1−)


⎪
⎪
[
−
][1(1−) −1] − 
⎪


⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨


³ ´(1−)
³ ´1(1−)
 − =


⎪
[
−
][1(1−) −1] −  +
⎪


⎪
⎪
³
³
´
´
⎪
⎪
⎩ [  (1−) −  1(1−) − ()(1−) + ()1(1−) ]



if

⎫

⎪
 ≤ 
()(1−) ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
otherwise

An inventor and partner are indiﬀerent between forming and not forming a partnership when

  −  = 0 The top equation equals the diﬀerence in profits for a non-capital-constrained project
33

⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭

with and without a partner. The first bracketed term of that equation is necessarily positive and
increasing with . The second bracket is also positive and its magnitude depends on the partner’s
ability.
The second equation shows the diﬀerence in profits between partnership and solo-entrepreneurship
for those inventions where an inventor is liquidity constrained. As in the top equation, the first
two bracketed terms together represents the value added of the partner’s ability, which are increasing in . The bottom term is the diﬀerence between the profits of a liquidity constrained
entrepreneur which received financing from a partner and the profits for the same entrepreneur
had he not received external financing. This diﬀerence is the contribution of a business partnership exclusively formed to increase the capital investment level from the constrained investment
level,  to the unconstrained level,


 .

This term is therefore positive.

Appendix B: Proofs.
b ( ()) and 
b ( ()) that describes
Proposition 1. There exist two cut-oﬀ rules, 

three potential choices that an inventor ( ) that meets a potential partner with ability ()
can make: no partnership; partnership with financing; and partnership with no financing.

Proof. We start by showing that there exist a level of  such that for a fixed  an inventor
is liquidity constrained. Consider two cases: the inventor meets a partner, or she does not. If
the inventor does not meet a partner, the constrained investment level is  ∗ =  for  

1− = 
b  ( ) Note that 
b  ( ) is quality level such that the solo-entrepreneur capital
 ()

investments that maximizes profits are equal to the inventor’s maximum investment capacity 
b ( ()), where
If the inventor meets a partner, we have  ∗ =  for    ()1− = 
()

() is the partner’s ability.
b ( ()) is the level of invention quality that makes an inventor inThe second cutoﬀ rule 

diﬀerent between forming a partnership and commercializing the invention solo. Let  (  ) =
b ( ()) is the invention quality
max{  (  )   (  )} be the value of an invention 
b   ()) =   (
b    ()) There exists a unique cutoﬀ 
b  ( ()). For
such that   (
that to follow, it must be the case that e () =   (  ) −   (  ) is strictly increasing
with  and that the value of e () is positive for some  (e.g., a  suﬃciently high) and negative
for another  (e.g.,  = 0). We will then focus our analysis on showing that e () is increasing

in . Let us first consider a Q such that the inventor is liquidity constrained, i.e.,  =  Then,
as  increases, the value of   increases at a faster pace than    Next consider the inventor

not liquidity constrained. Here   increases at a faster pace than   with  because a marginal
change in  in a partnership is amplified through the partner’s ability (). This is because ()

34

and  enters multiplicatively in the revenue of an innovation. Therefore, we can conclude that,
b ( ()) that makes an inventor
for a fixed  and () there exist an invention quality level 
indiﬀerent between forming a partnership or working solo.

b ( ()) is decreasing with the
Proposition 2. For a fixed wealth , the cutoﬀ rule 

partner’s ability (). Therefore, the probability of forming a partnership increases with the
quality of the invention .

b ( ()) and the partnership cutoﬀ
Proof: We would like to show that the liquidity cutoﬀ 
b ( ()) are decreasing functions with the partner’s ability (). That 
b ( ()) is de

b ( ()) =  ()1−  Showing
creasing with () for a fixed Z is straightforward because 
()

b ( ()) decreases with () is somewhat more involved. For a fixed  the higher ()
that 
is the higher is the the capital investment, and so is the value of partnership    The value

of solo-entrepreneurship   does not change with (), so the diﬀerence between partnership
and entrepreneurship increases with (). Now we have to show that the higher  is, the lower
is the diﬀerent between   and   . For a fixed (), the lower  is the lower is the capital
investment and so is the value of partnership and the value of solo-entrepreneurship. However,
because ()and  enter multiplicatively in the revenue function, the value of partnership will
drop more than the value of solo-entrepreneurship. Therefore, we conclude that the higher is the
b ( ()).
partner’s ability (), the lower is the cutoﬀ 

Proposition 3. Inventors who are liquidity constrained are more likely than unconstrained

inventors to form partnerships.
Proof: To prove this result we must show that for a fixed inventor’s wealth , the probability
b  ( ()) than for the rest of
to form a partnership is higher for an invention with quality   

b ( ()) The probability to form a partnership is the probability to meet
the inventions  ≤ 
b ( ()) Let us start with inventions where an
a partner with ability () such that   

b ( ()). Here the
inventor is not liquidity constrained, i.e., the quality level is such that  ≤ 

benefit of partnership is exclusively given by the partner’s ability () and partnerships will only
b  ( ) (see proposition 2). This implies
be formed for inventions with invention quality above 

b ( ()) the probability of partnership will tend to be low Alternatively, if an
that when  ≤ 
b  ( ())), the benefit to form a partnership is due
inventor is liquidity constrained (i.e.,   

to both the partner’s ability () as well as the increase in the level of capital investment from
³
´1(1−)
 The two eﬀects together
the constrained level  to the unconstrained  ∗ = ()

b ( ()) than for inventions held by
are associated with a lower cutoﬀ to form a partnership 

b ( ()) Therefore, the probability
inventors that were not liquidity constrained, i.e.,  ≤ 
35

to form a partnership is higher when the inventor is liquidity constrained than for the rest of
inventions.
Proposition 4. Conditional on a partnership being formed, the average ability of a partner
is strictly higher than the ability of the average potential partner.
Proof: Recall that () is the realization of a stochastic random variable that determines the
partner’s ability. Before meeting a partner, the ability of a potential partner is [()]. For a
fixed invention quality  and inventor’s wealth , the probability of partnership is the probability
b  ( ()) is strictly
b ( ()) Since the function 
a partner () meets a inventor with   
monotone with () for a fixed invention quality  we can define the probability of partnership
b [−1] ( )) where 
b  [−1] is the inverse function of 
b  We want to show that
Pr(()  

conditional on a partnership being formed, the ability of the average partner is higher than the
b  [−1] ( )]]  [()] This inequality holds
expected ability of a partner, i.e., [()|() ≥ 

for all  in a partnership because () ≥ 1 Therefore, the ability of the average partner that
formed a partnership is higher than the average potential partner.

b ( ) is increasing with the
Proposition 5. For a fixed ability , (a) the cutoﬀ rule 
b ( ) is increasing with the inventor’s assets  up
inventor’s assets ; and (b) the cutoﬀ rule 
b  ( ) is independent of .
to a level of inventor’s assets where 
b ( ) is increasing with the inventor’s assets 
Proof: First, we show that cutoﬀ rule 

Let us consider a level of invention quality  such that for a fixed  an inventor is liquidity
constrained. There are two cases to analyze. (1) If the inventor does not meet a partner, the
b  ( ) It is easy to see that
constrained investment level is  ∗ =  for    ()1− = 


b ( ) is increasing in  because  ∈ (0 1). (2) If the inventor meets a partner,
the function 

b ( ). Again, it is easy to see that the function
()1− = 
we have  ∗ =  for   
b ( ) is increasing in  because  ∈ (0 1) Second, we show that 
b ( ) is increasing with


b ( ) is independent of .
the inventor’s assets  up to a level of inventor’s assets where 

Let us consider a suﬃciently high level of invention quality  and partner ability  such that a
partnership can be profitable. Note that for a given  and , there exits a level of inventor’s assets
( ) above which the inventor is not liquidity constrained. Above this level of inventor assets,
b ( ) will be independent of  because the partner does not provide value
the cutoﬀ rule 

added through the channel of relaxing liquidity constraints. Below the level of assets ( ),
the inventor is liquidity constrained and thus the partner provides additional value added through
relaxing the liquidity constraint. Note that the higher the assets of the inventor, the lower the
b ( ).
potential benefits of partnership and thus the higher is the cutoﬀ 
36

