                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DIVIDE AND RULE OR THE RULE OF THE DIVIDED? EVIDENCE FROM AFRICA

                                          Stelios Michalopoulos
                                            Elias Papaioannou

                                          Working Paper 17184
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w17184


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2011




We would like to thank 4 referees and the Editor for their invaluable comments. We thank seminar
participants at Dartmouth, Tufts, Oxford, Vienna, Brown, Harvard, NYU, the CEPR Development
Economics Workshop, Stanford, UC-Berkeley, UC-Davis, IMF, the NBER Political Economy Meetings,
the NBER Summer Institute Meetings in Economic Growth and Income Distribution and the Macroeconomy
for valuable comments. We also benefited from discussions with Yannis Ioannides, Rafael La Porta,
Antonio Ciccone, Rob Johnson, Raphael Frank, Jim Feyrer, Ross Levine, Avner Greif, Jeremiah Dittmar,
David Weil, Sandip Sukhtankar, Quamrul Ashraf, Oded Galor, Ed Kutsoati, Pauline Grosjean, Enrico
Perotti, Pedro Dal Bó, Nathan Nunn, Raquel Fernandez, Jim Robinson, and Enrico Spolaore. We are
particularly thankful to Andy Zeitlin, Melissa Dell, Andei Shleifer, Nico Voigtländer, and Daron Acemoglu
for detailed comments and useful suggestions. We also thank Nathan Nunn for providing the digitized
version of Murdock’s Tribal Map of Africa. A Supplementary Appendix with additional sensitivity
checks is available online at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~elias/ and http://sites.google.com/site/steliosecon/.
All errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Divide and Rule or the Rule of the Divided? Evidence from Africa
Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 17184
June 2011
JEL No. N0,N17,O1,O11,O55

                                               ABSTRACT

We investigate jointly the importance of contemporary country-level institutional structures and local
ethnic-specific pre-colonial institutions in shaping comparative regional development in Africa. We
utilize information on the spatial distribution of African ethnicities before colonization and regional
variation in contemporary economic performance, as proxied by satellite light density at night. We
exploit the fact that political boundaries across the African landscape partitioned ethnic groups in different
countries subjecting identical cultures to different country-level institutions. Our regression discontinuity
estimates reveal that differences in countrywide institutional arrangements across the border do not
explain differences in economic performance within ethnic groups. In contrast, we document a strong
association between pre-colonial ethnic institutional traits and contemporary regional development.
While this correlation does not necessarily identify a causal relationship, this result obtains conditional
on country fixed-effects, controlling for other ethnic traits and when we focus on pairs of contiguous
ethnic homelands.


Stelios Michalopoulos
Tufts University
Department of Economics
Stelios.Michalopoulos@tufts.edu

Elias Papaioannou
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
1    Introduction
In recent years there has been a surge of empirical research on the determinants of African
and more generally global underdevelopment. The predominant institutional view suggests
that poorly performing national institutional structures, such as lack of constraints on the
executive and poor property rights protection, as well as ineﬃcient legal and court systems are
the ultimate causes of underdevelopment (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) for a
review). This body of research puts an emphasis on the impact of colonization on contemporary
country-level institutions and in turn on economic development. Yet in the African context
many downplay the importance of colonial and contemporary institutional structures. Recent
works on weak and strong states emphasize the limited state capacity of most African states and
their inability to provide public goods, collect taxes, and enforce contracts (Acemoglu (2005);
Besley and Persson (2009, 2010)). The inability of African governments to broadcast power
outside the capital cities has led many influential African scholars to highlight the role of pre-
colonial ethnic-specific institutional and cultural traits. This body of research argues that the
presence of the Europeans in Africa was (with some exceptions) quite limited both regarding
timing and location. As a result of the negligible penetration of Europeans in the mainland and
the poor network infrastructure that has endured after independence, it is local ethnic-level,
rather than national institutional structures, that shape African development today (see Herbst
(2000) for a summary of the arguments).
      In this paper we contribute to the literature on the determinants of African develop-
ment tackling these two distinct, though interrelated, questions. First, do contemporaneous
nationwide institutions aﬀect economic performance across regions once we account for hard-to-
observe ethnicity-specific traits, culture, and geography? Second, do pre-colonial institutional
ethnic characteristics correlate with regional development once we consider country-specific
attributes, like economic/institutional performance and national post-independence policies?
      In contrast to most previous works that have relied on cross-country data and methods,
we tackle these questions exploiting both within-country and within-ethnicity regional variation
across African ethnic regions. We utilize data from the pioneering work of Murdock (1959,
1967), who combining various sources has produced a map portraying the spatial distribution
of ethnicities (Figure 1) as well as quantitative information on the economy, institutions,
and cultural traits of several ethnic groups around colonization. To overcome the paucity of
economic indicators across African ethnicities, we measure regional economic development at
the ethnicity-country level using satellite images of light density at night which are available
at a fine level of aggregation.
      After showing that light density correlates strongly with various measures of economic


                                                1
development at diﬀerent levels of aggregation (namely across African countries, administrative
regions and villages within countries, as well as within ethnic areas across national bound-
aries), we examine the impact of contemporary national institutions on economic performance.
In line with cross-country studies, we find a positive correlation between rule of law (or control
of corruption) and luminosity across African ethnic regions. Yet due to omitted variables and
other potential sources of endogeneity this correlation does not imply a causal relationship.
To isolate the one-way eﬀect of contemporaneous institutions on regional development we ex-
ploit diﬀerences in country-level institutional quality within ethnicities partitioned by national
boundaries, as identified by intersecting Murdock’s ethnolinguistic map with the 2000 Digital
Chart of the World (Figure 1).




           Figure 1: Ethnic Boundaries                      Figure 1: Ethnic and Country Boundaries
       The artificial design of African borders, which took place in European capitals in the late
19th century (mainly in the Berlin Conference in 1884−5 and subsequent treaties in the 1890),
well before independence and when Europeans had hardly settled in the regions whose borders
were designing, oﬀers a nice (quasi)-experimental setting to address this question.1 The drawing
of political boundaries partitioned in the eve of African independence more than 200 ethnic
groups across diﬀerent countries. Taking advantage of this historical accident, we compare
economic performance in regions belonging to the historical homeland of the same ethnic group,
but subject to diﬀerent contemporary national institutions. The regression discontinuity (RD)
   1
    There is no ambiguity among African scholars and historians that almost all African borders were artificially
drawn. See Asiwaju (1985) for examples and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011) for additional references
on the drawing of borders in Africa.


                                                       2
approach allows us to account for diﬀerences in geography, the disease environment, and other
ecological features. Moreover, by comparing development across border regions that belong to
the historical homeland of the same ethnic group (see Figures 2 − 2 for examples), allows us
to also neutralize biases coming from cultural and other ethnic-specific diﬀerences. Our results
show that there is no systematic relationship between countrywide diﬀerences in institutions
and regional economic performance within partitioned ethnicities in Africa.




                           Figure 2                      Figure 2




                           Figure 2                      Figure 2
      We then turn our focus on the economic impact of pre-colonial ethnic institutions. Our
analysis shows that political complexity before the advent of European colonizers correlates
significantly with contemporary development, even when we account for national policies and
other country-specific features. This correlation does not necessarily imply a causal relation-
ship because one cannot rule out the possibility that other ethnic characteristics and hard-to-
account-for factors related to land endowments or the ecology drive the association between
pre-colonial ethnic institutional traits and development. Yet the positive association between


                                               3
historical institutions and luminosity prevails numerous permutations. First, it is robust to
an array of controls related to the disease environment, land endowments, and natural re-
sources among others. Second, regressing luminosity on a variety of alternative pre-colonial
ethnicity-specific economic and cultural traits reported by Murdock (1967), we find that po-
litical centralization is the strongest correlate of regional economic development. Third, we
find that the positive correlation between ethnic historical political complexity and regional
development obtains across pairs of adjacent ethnic homelands where groups with diﬀerent
pre-colonial institutions reside. Thus, although we do not have random assignment in ethnic
institutions and it is therefore hard to establish causality, the results clearly point out that, un-
like national institutions, traits manifested in diﬀerences in the pre-colonial institutional legacy
of each ethnic group matter for contemporary African development.


      Related Literature Our research nests and advances over many strands of literature
that examine the historical roots of economic development in Africa.
      First, an influential body of research asserts that through persistence, the institutions
that European powers established in the eve of colonization are the deep roots of contemporary
development. While there is ambiguity on the exact mechanisms via which colonization aﬀected
African (and more generally non-European) development, there is an agreement that the type
of colonization and the identity of the colonizing power had long-lasting eﬀects on institutional
quality (e.g. La Porta et al. (1997, 1998, 1999); Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002); Feyrer and
Sacerdote (2009)). Yet in spite of the ingenious instrumental variables identification schemes
employed in the cross-country literature omitted variables and heterogeneity are always major
concerns (e.g. Glaeser et al. (2004), La Porta et al. (2008), Nunn (2009)). The micro approach
of our study enables us to overcome problems inherent to the cross-country analysis adding to a
vibrant body of research that examines the within-country impact of institutions (e.g. Banerjee
and Iyer (2005); Huillery (2009); Iyer (2010); Acemoglu and Dell (2010) and Gennaioli et al.
(2011)).
      Second, our identification scheme on the impact of the national institutions explores
discontinuities across the border within partitioned ethnicities. As such our work relates to
case studies that examine the eﬀect of national policies at the border. In an early contribution
Miguel (2004) compares public policies in health and education across the Kenya-Tanzania
border to examine the eﬀect of Tanzanian nation-building policies. Using a similar to ours
methodology, Bubb (2009) investigates how diﬀerences in de jure property rights between
Ghana and Ivory Coast aﬀect development in border areas. He finds that despite large dif-
ferences in de jure property rights between the two countries, there are no diﬀerences in de



                                                 4
facto property rights across the border. Berger (2009) and Arbesu (2011) explore discontinu-
ities across administrative colonial boundaries within Nigeria to study the long-run eﬀects of
the diﬀerent colonial tax systems. The political science literature provides anecdotal evidence
based on case studies at the border. For example, Miles (1994) studies the development of
the Hausa after their partitioning (at the Niger-Nigeria border), documenting that diﬀerent
French and British policies (mainly on the role of local chiefs) endured after independence and
had long-lasting eﬀects. Posner (2005) examines ethnic policies in Zambia and associates them
with national representation. Our study, rather than focusing on the eﬀect of national policies
across a particular border or within a single partitioned ethnic group, combines satellite light
density images with Murdock’s ethnolinguistic map to examine in a systematic way the eﬀect
of national institutions on development across Africa’s partitioned ethnicities.
       Third, our findings advance the literature on the role of pre-colonial institutional and
cultural features in African development (Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940), Schapera (1967),
Stevenson (1968), Goody (1971), Bates (1983), Robinson (2002), Boone (2003); see Herbst
(2000) for an overview). There were marked diﬀerences in institutional and social traits across
African regions at the time of colonization (Murdock (1959, 1967); Bates (1983)). There were
noteworthy diﬀerences on political centralization, land rights, and the power of local chiefs
among others. As colonizers did not expand their power in remote areas far from the capital
cities and the coastline, such local institutions were preserved and were instrumental during
the half century period of colonial rule (roughly 1890 − 1940).2 Along the same lines, Mamdani
(1996) argues that the indirect rule of the Europeans, if anything, increased the role of local
chiefs during the colonial era. Moreover, several African case studies stress the ongoing crucial
role of ethnic institutions and traditions (Englebert (2000); Miguel and Gugerty (2005); Franck
and Rainer (2009); Glennerster, Miguel, and Rothenberg (2010)). For example, in an early
contribution Douglas (1962) compares development between the neighboring groups of Lele
and Bushong in the Democratic Republic of Congo providing evidence that the two ethnicities
have diﬀerent local institutions which are manifested in their levels development. Gennaioli and
Rainer (2006, 2007) construct a country-level measure of pre-colonial political centralization
and show that it is positively correlated with various contemporary measures of economic and
institutional development.
       The African historiography has proposed various channels via which ethnic institutions
matter today. Herbst (2000) and Boone (2003) argue that in centralized societies there is a high
degree of political accountability of local chiefs. Others argue that centralized societies were
quicker in adopting growth-enhancing Western technologies and habits, because the colonizers
  2
    For example, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2003) partly attribute the economic success of Botswana
to the limited impact of colonization and the inclusive character of pre-colonial ethnic institutions.


                                                   5
collaborated more strongly with politically and socially complex ethnic groups with strong chiefs
(Schapera (1967, 1970)). Herbst (2000) emphasizes the role of ethnic class stratification and
political centralization in establishing well-defined and secure land rights (see also Goldstein
and Udry (2008)). Furthermore, complex tribal societies with strong political institutions seem
to have been more successful in getting concessions both from colonial powers and from national
governments after independence. Mamdani (1996), nevertheless, diﬀers in his assessment on
the beneficial contemporary role of hierarchical pre-colonial structures arguing that the legacy
of indirect rule in Africa through traditional chiefs was a basis for post-independence poor
institutional and economic performance.
      We improve upon this body of research showing that pre-colonial institutions are pos-
itively and systematically linked to regional development even when we control for local ge-
ography and country-specific eﬀects. Accounting for common-to-all-ethnicities country factors
is central, as Gennaioli and Rainer (2006) show a positive cross-country correlation between
pre-colonial centralization and current measures of institutional development. Moreover, con-
trolling for geography is important as studies on African institutional development argue that
pre-colonial political centralization was driven by land suitability for agriculture and popu-
lation density (e.g. Bates (1981); Fenske (2009)). Although our results do not necessarily
identify causal eﬀects, they oﬀer support to those emphasizing the importance of pre-colonial
ethnicity-specific institutions in current times. In this regard our findings are in line with recent
empirical studies showing that historically determined socioeconomic and political factors have
persistent eﬀects on comparative development (examples include the forced labor practices of
Spanish colonizers in Peru (Dell (2010)); the formation of city-states in Italy during the late
period of the Middle Ages (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008)); 19th century inequality in
Colombia (Acemoglu, Bautista, Querubin, and Robinson (2008)); the type of colonization and
early inequality in Brazil (Naritomi, Soares, and Assunção (2009)).
      Moreover, the uncovered evidence on the limited role of national institutions on regional
development relates to works on state capacity (e.g. Tilly (1985); Migdal (1988); Acemoglu
(2005); Besley and Persson (2009, 2010); Acemoglu, Ticchi, and Vindigni (2011)) that em-
phasize the inability of weak states to broadcast power. Likewise, the finding that the positive
correlation between national institutions and regional development weakens in border areas has
implications for the literature on optimal state formation (e.g. Alesina and Spolaore (2003);
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2005)). Finally, this study contributes to a large body of work on the
historical causes of contemporary African development. Nunn (2008) stresses the importance
of the slave trade, while Englebert, Tarango, and Carter (2002), Alesina, Easterly, and Ma-
tuszeski (2011) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011) show a significant negative impact


                                                 6
on economic development from the improper colonial border design.


      Paper Structure In the next section we first discuss the luminosity data that we
use to proxy regional development and present the pre-colonial ethnic institutional measures.
We then lay down the empirical design. In section 3 we report our results on the eﬀect of
contemporary national institutions on regional development. Section 4 presents our findings on
the role of pre-colonial ethnic institutions in shaping regional development. Section 5 concludes.


2     Data and Identification
2.1   Data on partitioning

The starting point in compiling our dataset is George Peter Murdock’s (1959) Ethnolinguistic
map that portrays the spatial distribution of ethnicities across Africa around the European
colonization in the mid/late 19th century. Murdock’s map (reproduced in Figure 1) includes
843 tribal areas (the mapped groups correspond roughly to levels 7 − 8 of the Ethnologue’s
language family tree); 8 areas are classified as uninhabited upon colonization and are therefore
not considered in our analysis. In the empirical analysis we also eliminate the Guanche, a small
group in the Madeira islands that is currently part of Portugal. One may wonder how much
the spatial distribution of ethnicities across the continent has changed over the past 100 − 150
years. Reassuringly, using individual data from the Afrobarometer Nunn and Wantchekon
(2011) show a strong correlation (around 062) between the location of the respondents in 2005
and the historical homeland of their ethnicity as identified in Murdock’s (1959) map. In the
same vein, Glennerster, Miguel, and Rothenberg (2010) document in Sierra Leone that after
the massive displacement of the 1991 − 2002 civil war there has been a systematic movement
of individuals towards the areas of their ethnic group’s historical homeland.
      We project on top of Murdock’s ethnolinguistic map the 2000 Digital Chart of the World
(Figure 1) that portrays contemporary national boundaries yielding 1 247 country-tribe ob-
servations. This allows identifying in a systematic way partitioned ethnicities across Africa.
Appendix Table 8 reports split groups, defined as groups where at least 10% of their historical
homeland belongs to more than one contemporary states. In the empirical analysis we focus
on partitions of at least 100 square kilometers as tiny partitions are likely due to the lack of
precision in the underlying mapping of ethnicities. Our procedure identifies 526 partitions that
belong to 227 ethnic groups. For example, the Maasai were partitioned between Kenya and
Tanzania (shares 62% and 38% respectively), the Anyi between Ghana and the Ivory Coast
(shares 58% and 42%), and the Chewa between Mozambique (50%), Malawi (34%), and Zim-
babwe (16%). We also checked whether our codification of partitioned ethnicities is in line with


                                                7
Asiwaju (1985), who provides the only systematic codification (to our knowledge) of split eth-
nicities in Africa. Our strategy identifies almost all ethnic groups that Asiwaju (1985) lists as
partitioned. Our procedure reveals that the median country in Africa has 43% of its population
belonging to partitioned ethnicities. This estimate is of the same order of magnitude to that of
Englebert et al. (2002) and Alesina et al. (2011), who using alternative sources and techniques
estimate that on average 40% of the African population comes from partitioned ethnic groups.

2.2   Satellite Light Density at Night

The nature of our study requires detailed data on economic development at the grid level.
To the best of our knowledge, geocoded high resolution measures of economic development
spanning all Africa are not readily available. To overcome this issue we use satellite data on
light density at night to proxy for local economic activity.
      The luminosity data come from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program’s Opera-
tional Linescan System (DMSP-OLS) that reports images of the earth at night captured from
20 : 00 to 21 : 30 local time. The satellite detects lights from human settlements, fires, gas
flares, heavily lit fishing boats, lightning, and the aurora. The measure is a six-bit digital num-
ber (ranging from 0 to 63) calculated for every 30-second area pixel (approximately 1 square
kilometer). The resulting annual composite images are created by overlaying all images cap-
tured during a calendar year, dropping images where lights are shrouded by cloud cover or
overpowered by the aurora or solar glare (near the poles), and removing ephemeral lights like
fires, lightning and other noise. The result is a series of global images of time stable night lights.
Using these data we construct average light density per square kilometer for 2007 and 2008 at
the desired level of aggregation (ethnicity-country) averaging across pixels that fall within the
historical homeland of each ethnic group in each country.
      This high resolution dataset makes the data uniquely suited to spatial analyses of eco-
nomic development in Africa for several reasons. First, most African countries have low quality
income statistics, even at the national level (for example, the codebook of the Penn World Ta-
bles assigns the lowest scores on data quality to all African countries). Second, we lack data on
regional income or value added for most African countries. And while there are some regional
proxies of poverty and health, these data do not map to our unit of analysis and they are not
usually comparable across countries (as survey methods diﬀer). Third, by using light density
we also capture the economic activities of the underground economy, which are not reflected in
the aggregate statistics. As the share of the shadow economy is high in Africa (La-Porta and
Shleifer (2008)), the usage of luminosity data is particularly desirable in our setting.
      The use of luminosity data as a proxy for development builds on the recent contribution


                                                  8
by Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2011) and others (e.g. Elvidge, Baugh, Kihn, Kroehl, and
Davis (1997); Doll, Muller, and Morley (2006); Sutton, Elvidge, and Ghosh (2007)) who show
that light density at night is a good proxy of economic activity. These works establish a strong
within-country correlation between light density at night and GDP levels and growth rates.
There is also a strong association between luminosity and access to electricity and public goods
provision, especially across low income countries (see Elvidge, Baugh, Kihn, Kroehl, and Davis
(1997) and Min (2008)). In ongoing work Pinkovskiy (2011) documents large and statistically
significant jumps in GDP per capita as forecasted by luminosity across borders (both globally
and across African countries); he further shows that these discontinuities correlate with diﬀer-
ences in countrywide GDP per capita. Even Chen and Nordhaus (2010) who emphasize some
problems of the satellite image data, argue that luminosity can be quite useful for regional
analysis in war-prone countries with poor quality income data.
        Satellite data on lights are subject to saturation and blooming. Saturation, which occurs
at a level of light similar to that in the urban centers of rich countries, results in top-coded
values. Blooming occurs as lights tend to appear larger than they actually are, especially for
bright lights over water and snow. These issues, however, are less pressing within Africa. First,
there are very few instances of top-coding (out of the 30 457 572 pixels of light density only
000017% are top-coded). Second, since luminosity is quite low across African regions, bloom-
ing (bleeding) that occurs due to the diﬀusion of lights is not a major problem. Additionally,
to account for overglow over water, area under water is a standard geographic control in our
regressions. Finally, variation in satellite light density across countries and regions may arise
because of: (i) cultural diﬀerences in use of lights and geographic diﬀerences; (ii) the compo-
sition of income between consumption and investment; (iii) the division of economic activity
between night and day, and (iv) the satellite used. By including country and ethnicity fixed
eﬀects, and conditioning on a rich set of climatic and geographic control variables, we account
for these problems.

2.2.1    Satellite Light and Development

In spite of the works showing a strong correlation between luminosity and GDP per capita
we performed cross-validation exercises investigating the relationship between luminosity and
various economic indicators across African countries, regions, and areas across the border.

Luminosity and GDP per Capita across Countries We start by examining whether
luminosity correlates with development across African countries. Figure 3 illustrates the un-
conditional correlation between log light density and log GDP per capita in 2000. There is
a clear positive relationship. The 2 is 035 and the estimate is more than 6 standard errors

                                                9
larger than zero. Besides economic performance, light density also reflects urbanization. Figure
3 shows the relationship between log GDP per capita and log light density partialling out the
eﬀect of log population density. The relationship between log light density and log GDP per
capita is now stronger (the coeﬃcient increases from 031 to 047 and the t-stat jumps to 10).


      Light Density and Income Per Capita Across African Countries                                                                                                                                                                      Light Density and Income Per Capita Across African Countries
                                                                                                                   Unconditional Relationship                                                                                                                                                                                                       Conditional on Population Density
                                                                                                                                                    Equatorial Guinea
                                             9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Equatorial Guinea


                                                                                                                                     Botswana                                                         Tunisia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                                     Sout h Africa
      Log (GDP per Capita in 2000)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Log (GDP per Capita in 2000)
                                                                                                                           Namibia                      Gabon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  South Africa

                                                                                                                                                                                               Egypt                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Egypt
                                                                                                                                                                         Algeria                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Botswana             Morocco
                                             8




                                                                                                                                                                                       Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                                         Swaziland                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gabon Swaziland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                           Republic of Congo            Libya                                                                                                                                                                                                           Namibia                          Algeria

                                                                                                                                                              Lesotho                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Republic of Congo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lesotho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Libya
                                                                                                                            Mozambique   Senegal                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Senegal      Ghana
                                                                                                                                         Benin
                                                                                                                                     Zimbabwe     CoteGhana
                                                                                                                                                      D'Ivoire                                                                                                                                      Mozambique                                                             Benin           Cot e Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D'Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                               Nigeria                                                                                                                                                                                                     Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                         Cameroon        Djibouti                                                                                                                                             Rwanda
                                                                                                Mauritania                   SudanKenya                                                                                                                                                            Cameroon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kenya                                                                  Djibouti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The Gambia
                                             7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                          Somalia                                                   The Gambia                                                                                                                             Uganda Burkina Faso
                                                                                                           Mali       Liberia
                                                                                                                           Burkina Faso Rwanda                                                                                                                                                                    Sudan
                                                                                                                          Angola
                                                                                                                              Uganda                                                                                                                                                           Liberia     Comoros
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Malawi
                                                                                                     Madagascar
                                                                                                       Guinea-Bissau                         Malawi                                                                                                               Somalia                Burundi
                                                                       Central Af rican Republic                     Ethiopia Zambia                                                                                                                                    Guinea-BissauEthiopia Mali
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Madagascar             Mauritania         Angola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Togo
                                                                                                                   Guinea           Burundi TogoComoros                                                                                                                                                             Zambia
                                                                                                   Niger             Tanzania                                                                                                                                                             Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Central African Republic
                                                                                          Chad
                                                                                                                 Sierra Leone                                                                                                                                                                                          Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Niger




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                             6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chad

                                                                                              Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Congo (Democratic Republic of the)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2
                                             5




                                                                  -6                                  -4                                     -2                                    0                                    2                                                                                           -2                         -1                          0                          1                          2                          3
                                                                                           Log (1 + Average Light Density in 2007-2008)                                                                                                                                                                                             Log (1 + Average Light Density in 2007-2008)


                                                                                                                    Figure 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 3

Luminosity and Infant Mortality across Administrative Regions
  We also examine the correlation between satellite light density and infant mortality, as an
alternative proxy of development, at the regional level, using comparable across African coun-
tries data from the Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN) of
Columbia University’s Earth Institute.3 Figures 4 and 4 illustrate the significantly negative
correlation between log light density and infant mortality across 264 African regions. The es-
timate is −944 with a t-stat of 9; when we condition on log population density, the estimate
increases in absolute value (−1489) retaining its significance at the 99% confidence level.


                                                                  Light Density and Infant Mortality Across African Regions                                                                                                                                                                                         Infant Mortality and Light Density Across African Regions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Conditional on Population Density
                                                                                                                  Unconditional Relationship                                                                                                                                                                              Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       South Sina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Matrouh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        New Valley
                                                            5
                     Log Light Density per African Region




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Red Sea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                    Occupied   Kalyoubia
                                                                                Menoufia
                                                                               Palestini   n TerritoriesMaputo Cidade
                                                                           Damiett
                                                                              Daka  a aSuha
                                                                               Gharbia
                                                                                    hlia
                                                                                 Sharkia      Quena
                                                                                                gHarare
                                                                                                    Assyout                                                                                                                                                                                                               Libya        Sud
                                                                                                                       Kigali Ville
                                                                                                                                Addi(PVK)
                                                                                                                                     s
                                                                            KafrAleCairo
                                                                                    xandria
                                                                                 El-Sh    Gauteng Bulawayo         Nairobi                                                                                                                                                                                                      North Sina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Suez Gauteng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ismailia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log Light Density Within an African Region




                                                                            Behera
                                                                          Mauritius
                                                                                Ismailia
                                                                                      Fayoum
                                                                                           Greater  Accra BanguiConakry
                                                                                              Beni-Suet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ouest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mpumal     (inc. Libreville)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           anga
                                                                               Port-Said                             Banjul                                                                                                                                                                                                          Northern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Northern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Western Cape Tunisia      Cape
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Provi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              South  EastAswan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nSud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ce
                                                                     Israel
                                                                       Seychelles        South East
                                                                                                 Menia                 Nouakchott                                                                                                                                                                                                  South
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Seychelles Free
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Behera    State
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  West  Quena
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hara re
                                                                                    Suez MaekelAswan                   South    East                                                                                                                                                                                             CentralDamietta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GiFayoum  Menia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               z a EstSuhag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sharkia   Beni-Suet
                                                                                      Centre         Ouest                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kgatleng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Menoufia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KafrDakahlia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            El-Sh           Kgalagadi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ouest Assyout
                                                                                TunisiaGiza Est      C entre       Khartoum
                                                                                                                          Atlantique                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Centre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Central                           Conakry Swaziland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                       Ouest                                                   Harari                                                                                                                                                                              Northern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oriental
                                                                                   Cape
                                                                                     Northe
                                                                                               M pumalanga
                                                                                           Verde   KwaZulu
                                                                                             rn Province     Natal
                                                                                                           Tensift
                                                                                                                  South   West
                                                                                                                              Marities
                                                                                                                                Oueme        Swaziland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cape
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Est    VerdeGhanzi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Gharbia  SoNorth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kalyoubia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          uthern West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kweneng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tensift
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Centre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Maputo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nord   (G3)  Cidade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Copperbelt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nord-Ouest
                                                                                        North
                                                                                         NorthEast
                                                                                                West
                                                                                                 Gazira        Sao Tome andCentral   Brikama      Dire                                                                                                                                                                                            Centre-Sud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Alexandria Nile  River
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eastern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KwaZulu     NatalKhartoum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cape Congo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               South
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nouakchott
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      East      Lusaka                             Região Capital
                                                                   WesternSouth
                                                                            Ca pe Sina Sina
                                                                                 North           Centra l                          Principe
                                                                                                                             Coppe rbelt Lusa         kaDawa
                                                                                                                                               Centre-Nord                                                                                                                                                                               Port-Said   Gazira
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Greater   Accra                  EquatorialCentre-Nord
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Guinea
                                                                                          Free Ashanti
                                                                                               St ateOriental
                                                                                                        Ouest  (inc.Cape
                                                                                                                      Libreville)                          Kigali Rurale                                                                                                                                                                          Northwest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Maekel W.Sao      Kordofan
                                                                               Matrouh         Cent Ea   stern
                                                                                                          Eastern
                                                                                                      re-Sud       WesternMaput o province                                          Região Capital                                                                                                                           Northe ast                                   South
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tome Nairobi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  andCentral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Principe         Côte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sead'Ivoire
                                                            0




                                                                             Libya                                     Grande Comore
                                                                                                                                   Mono                  Côte d'IvoireSouth                                                                                                                                                                        Cairo      Ouest Western  Maputo        BrikamaRed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Atlantique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       province
                                                                                                    WestVolta      Lesotho                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mashonaland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ashanti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Eastern West    Nord       Marities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kigali Ville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Addis(PVK)        RegiãoHarari
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Este                       Região Oeste
                                                                               Red Sea Kgat leng
                                                                                              Sud Central
                                                                                                           & littoral  Central
                                                                                                                     White   North
                                                                                                                            Nile
                                                                                                                            Western  West
                                                                                                                              Cyangugu
                                                                                                                                 Anjouan  Central/South
                                                                                                                                             Central         & Ouagadougou
                                                                                                                                                               Gisenyi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LesothoNile Oueme
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WhiteNorth-Western
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Southern                              Dire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Região
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Koulikoro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Djibouti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dawa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (inc.  Centro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bamako)  Sul        Região Norte
                                                                                                                  SudCentre
                                                                                                         Mashonaland    Brong-Ahafo
                                                                                                                            Upper
                                                                                                                           East      EastEquatorial
                                                                                                                                               Coastal
                                                                                                                                              Koulikoro
                                                                                                                                                         Guinea
                                                                                                                                                           (inc. Bamako)   Nyanza                                                                                                                                                           MatabelelandCentral   Bulawayo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mashonaland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Volta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            South Central,  East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Brong-Ahafo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nord-Est
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Central Kassala
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &Tillaberi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Central/South
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (inc. Niamey)
                                                                                 New Valley     Mashonaland
                                                                                           Northern
                                                                                                            Debub
                                                                                                              Sud
                                                                                                          Southern
                                                                                                        Sinnar
                                                                                                           Nile   West
                                                                                                                 River     North
                                                                                                                               Congo
                                                                                                                    Antananarivo
                                                                                                                                   East            TigrayBurundi
                                                                                                                                                 Djibouti      Moheli                                                                                                                                                                Matabeleland North Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sinnar             South,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Midlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Centre         East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Banjul       CoastalGaza& Kayes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OuagadougouSofala
                                                                                                    CCape            W. Kordofan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                       entral Kweneng
                                                                                                    Northwest               Coast Kerewan
                                                                                                                     Midlands                  Kassala             Zou
                                                                                                                                                                  Gitarama                                                                                                                                                                               N.Kordofan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         We st & littoral                       Inhambane                   South
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kigali Rurale
                                                                                       Northern Highla ndsRift Southern
                                                                                                                  Valley  Mashonaland
                                                                                                                     Northern                Central
                                                                                                                                              Ruhengeri
                                                                                                                                   Low Tillaberi
                                                                                                                                         er GuineaBasse
                                                                                                                                                  North    W estey) Butare
                                                                                                                                                    (inc. Niam                                           Região Oeste                                                                                                                                                Northern    North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mashonaland West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BanguiMono
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Blue  Nile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Central               Tahoua/Agadez
                                                                                             Est
                                                                                             Matabeleland
                                                                                                 Northw est South    Centra
                                                                                                             & southwestManicaland
                                                                                                                             l, South,
                                                                                                                        Plateaux     East
                                                                                                                                    Kara   ern Mansakonko
                                                                                                                                         &Sud
                                                                                                                                           East            Gaza
                                                                                                                                                    Inhambane
                                                                                                                                                            SNNP
                                                                                                                                                            Oromiya
                                                                                                                                                                                    Sofa Região
                                                                                                                                                                                         la     Norte
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nampula
                                                                                                                                                                                            Liberia                                                                                                                                      Northern HighlandsRiftGadaref
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Valley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S.Darfur    Grande  S.Kordofan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Como
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 North/West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tigray
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gao/Kidal/Tombouctou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Zou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Western
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Manica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tete                 Região Sul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Liberia
                                                                               Northeast    South
                                                                                     Matabeleland      North
                                                                                                          Eastern  Upper   WestNord-Est   CenBlue
                                                                                                                                    Savanes     tral        R edSegou
                                                                                                                                                                  SeaSikasso                                                                                                                                                                             N.Darfur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zone   FleuveAntananarivo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Upper(G2) North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WestUpper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Borgou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        East              Gambela
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Northern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UpperEastern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Guinea
                                                                                         C entra
                                                                                           Ansebal MasvingoNortheGadaref
                                                                                                                    rn        Centrale
                                                                                                                                     Borgou
                                                                                                                                  Nort           Lake
                                                                                                                                       h/MacCarthy
                                                                                                                                          Ext reme    Nile
                                                                                                                                                         Amhara
                                                                                                                                                           Região
                                                                                                                                                      north/Adamaoua
                                                                                                                                                       Island          Manica
                                                                                                                                                                     Centro
                                                                                                                                                                    Kayes      Sul                      Maradi
                                                                                                                                                                                                Sierra Leone                                                                                                                                Anseba MasvingoEastern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Debub   Manicaland      Kerewan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LowerSudGuinea     RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mansakonko
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cha   IdSegou                           Nampula
                                                                                                                   S.Darfur
                                                                                                                     W . Darfur
                                                                                                            N.Kordofan
                                                                                                                   North  WestKei
                                                                                                                                          S.   North East
                                                                                                                                             Kordofan
                                                                                                                                            Western
                                                                                                                                             Central
                                                                                                                                   North-Western            D osso
                                                                                                                                                        Ataco Congo,     Eastern
                                                                                                                                                                     Guinea-Bissau
                                                                                                                                                                       Tete
                                                                                                                                                                ra UpperDem.Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                                 Rep. Of                                                                                                                                                                             W. Darfur   North/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KaraExtreme
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ben-Gumz     BasseCongoSikasso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    north/Adamaoua   , Dem. Rep. Of Luapula
                                                                                                                  Semenawi
                                                                                                               Gash-Barka
                                                                                                                      Antsiranana   h Bahri
                                                                                                                                  Nord Southern       Highlands
                                                                                                                                                        North/West        Affa r
                                                                                                                                                                          Região    Este
                                                                                                                                                                                              Mopti Sul Zambezia
                                                                                                                                                                                            Luapula
                                                                                                                                                                                             Região                                                                                                                                                 Northwest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Zone  Centre  &Semenawi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    southwest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Gash-Barka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (G4)         KeihCyangugu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pla teaux
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CentraleBahri     LakeAtacora
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Central   East Oromiya Moheli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zinda/Diffa Niassa Mopti
                                                                                                             Zone Fleuve      (G2)              ToamasinaRSForest
                                                                                                                                           Ben-Gumz                INorthern
                                                                                                                                                                          Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                      Western                                                                                                                                                                                                  North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Antsiranana     Eastern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Savanes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Southern    Highlands            Affa r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Guinea-Bissau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gisenyi                             Zambezia
                                                                                                                         Kgalagadi        Central   Guinea                         Kibungo    Cabo D elgado                                                                                                                                                                          Western
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Anj   North
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ouan  Debubawi Dosso   North/East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Keih
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BurundiBahri Nyanza                     Maradi
                                                                                                              N .Darfur Zone Nord (G3)             NSout   hern
                                                                                                                                                      ort hern    Gam bela
                                                                                                                                                               Chad        Tahoua/Agadez
                                                                                                                                                                            Zinda/Dif faNiassa                                                                                                                                                                         Zone Sud (G1) MacCarthy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Somali       Island  SNNP                        CaboSieDelgado
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rra Leone
                                                                                                                                   North Eastern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2




                                                                                                                   Ghanzi                     SomaliMahajanga                     Byumba                                                                                                                                                                                                  Eastern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Toamasina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Southern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mahajanga     RS II
                                                                                                                                                         Debubawi
                                                                                                                                                            Toliary     IINorth/East
                                                                                                                                                                    RSKeih   Bahri                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Amhara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Forest  Guinea
                                                            -5




                                                                                                                                                             Fianarantsoa
                                                                                                                                                          Kibuye           Central/South                                                                                                                                                                                                 Central GuineaToliary
                                                                                                                                                                       Gao/Kidal/Tombouct      ou                                                                                                                                                                        RS IV                                           Gitarama
                                                                                                          Zone Centre (G4)                                  U mutara                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WesternRuhengeri                Butare
                                                                                                                               Zone Sud (G1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RS   V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Northern            Central/South
                                                                                                                                                        RS III
                                                                                                                                                               RS V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RS III Fianarantsoa
                                                                                                                                 RS IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kibungo

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Umutara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Byumba
                                                            -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kibuye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6




                                                                       0                                50                                   100                                   150                                  200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -100                              -50                           0                                         50                                 100
                                                                                                      Infant Mortality per African Region                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Infant Mortality per African Region



                                                                                                                     Figure 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 4
  3
      The data is available at: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/povmap/



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
Luminosity and Household Wealth across Clusters (DHS) within Countries
  To further illustrate how well satellite light density reflects comparative economic develop-
ment at finer levels of aggregation, we used geocoded data from the Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS). Conducting household questionnaires on a variety of economic indicators the
DHS team in each country produces a composite wealth index.4 We calculated average light
density in the surrounding area of each DHS cluster using a radius of 10 and we then ex-
amined the association between luminosity and the average wealth index across all households
interviewed in the cluster. Figures 5 − 5 plot the correlation between household wealth and
light density in four large countries from diﬀerent parts of Africa (namely Tanzania, the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo (Zaire), Zimbabwe, and Nigeria). The correlation is strong, around
080, further showing that luminosity is a robust predictor of economic development. Note that
the scatter plots partial out the eﬀect of population density so the observed relationship does
not mask underlying diﬀerences in urbanization rates across the DHS clusters.


                                               Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Tanzania                                                          Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Zimbabwe
                                                             Conditional on Population Density in 2000                                                                             Conditional in Population Density in 2000
                                                                                                                                                                 2
     Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster




                                                                                                                         Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster
                                         3




                                                                                                                                                      1
                                 2




                                                                                                                                           0
             0         1




                                                                                                                                -1
    -1




                                                                                                                       -2




                                               -2                    0                        2               4                                                        -4         -2              0           2            4        6
                                                        Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster                                                                   Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster



                                                                     Figure 5                                                                                                             Figure 5
   4
     The DHS wealth index is composed taking into account consumer durables, electricity, toilet facilities,
source of drinking water, dwelling characteristics and other country-specific attributes like whether there is a
domestic servant, for example. The measure is derived using principal component analysis to assign indicator
weights resulting in a composite index which is standardized for each country. DHS data are available at:
http://www.measuredhs.com




                                                                                                                  11
                                                Household W ealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Congo, DRC                                                        Household Wealth and Light Density: DHS Clusters in Nigeria
                                                               Conditional in Population Density in 2000                                                                            Conditional in Population Density in 2000




                                                                                                                                                                   3
      Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster




                                                                                                                           Household Wealth Index of a DHS Cluster
                                          2




                                                                                                                                                         2
                               1




                                                                                                                                        0        1
                  0




                                                                                                                                -1
       -1




                                                                                                                         -2
                                                  -4             -2                0               2            4                                                        -4           -2             0          2            4       6
                                                          Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster                                                                  Log Light Density in a 10km Radius of a DHS Cluster



                                                                       Figure 5                                                                                                            Figure 5

Luminosity and Development within Partitioned Ethnicities (Afrobarometer)
  Although the strong correlation between luminosity and the DHS wealth index reveals that
satellite images of light density reflect economic activity at a fine level, one may still wonder
whether luminosity captures diﬀerences in development across the national border. We thus
used data on access to clean water and education from the Afrobarometer to explore whether
within-ethnicity (across the border) diﬀerences in luminosity correlate with diﬀerences in these
two development proxies. The Afrobarometer surveys are based on interviews conducted in a
random sample of either 1 200 or 2 400 individuals of voting age in 17 Sub-Saharan African
countries.5 Following Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) for each country we assign the current
location of the respondents to the respective historical ethnic homeland and we then estimate
the average of the responses across individuals at the ethnicity-country level. Figure 6 shows
the relationship between log light density and average education of the respondents partialling
out diﬀerences in population density and ethnicity fixed eﬀects. Partitions of the same ethnic
homeland across the border exhibiting higher light density are inhabited by more educated
people. Similarly, Figure 6 depicts the relationship between log light density and access to
piped water.
  5
   These countries are: Benin, Botswana, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.




                                                                                                                    12
                                                             Light Density and Education Levels Across Border within Ethnicities                                                                                                                  Light Density and Piped Water Across Border within Ethnicities
   Log Light Density 2007-2008 in Ethnicity i in Country c




                                                                                                                                                                                        Log Light Density 2007-2008 in Ethnicity i in Country c
                                                                                       Conditional on Log Population Density and Ethnicity FE                                                                                                                     Conditional on Log Population Density and Ethnicity FE
                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                SUBIA-BWA      EGBA-N GA                                                                                                                                                   EGBA- NGA      SUBIA-BWA
                                                                                                                                              NYANJA-MW I                                                                                                                                           NYAN JA-MWI
                                                                                                                                                                    T HONGA-Z AF                                                                                                                            TH ONGA-ZAF
                                                                                                              KOBA-BWA                                                                                                                                                                                                                KOBA-BW A
                                                                                                                                 KGATL A-ZAF LUN GU-Z MB                                                                                                          LU NGU-Z MB   KGATLA-ZAF
                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                          LAMBYA-MWI
                                                                                           N DAU-MOZ                                                                                                                                                                                           NDAU -MOZ                                LAMBYA-MWI
                                                                                                          GU SII- TZA
                                                                                                                    RONMWI
                                                                                                                        GA- MOZ             BU
                                                                                                                                     SOT HO-Z  SA-N GA
                                                                                                                                              AF                                                                                                                                    SOTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GU SII- TZAO- ZAF                 RONGA-MOZ             BUSA-N GA
                                                                                                           TUMBUKA-     TAW   ARA-MOZ                                                                                                                                  TAW AR A-MOZ                                             T UMBUKA-M WI
                                                                                                    KUND A-MOZ        MBU KUSHU-BWA                                                                                                                                                      KUN DA- MOZ                                 MBU KUSH U-BW A
                                                                                                                         T LOKW A-ZAF                                                                                                                                   TLOKWA-ZAF
                                                                                              CH EWA-MWI    MAL IN KE-MLI                                                                                                                                         CHEW A-MWI                     MAL INKE-MLI
                                                                                                        MANYIKA-MOZ                                                                                                                                                   MAN YIKA- MOZ
                                                                                                     GOMANWANGA-U
                                                                                                             I-MWIZIMBA- MW I NU SAN-SON INKE-SEN         MPEZENGUN-NGA
                                                                                                                                                                 I- Z MB                                                                  GOMANI-MW I W ANGA-UGA                      ZIMBA-MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SON YAO-MWI MPEZENI-ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INKE-SEN
                                                                                                              YAO-MWI  GA                 NAM HLENGW E-ZW E                                                                                                                                                        HLENGWE-ZW E MASAI- TZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NUSAN-NAM
                                                                                              MAKOND E-MOZ MASAI-T ZA   MASAI-KEN        MAKONDE- TZA                                                                                MAKON DE-MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MASAI-KEN                                                                               MAKONDE- TZA A
                                                                                     HLENGW E-MOZ     NU SAN-Z AF        WANGA-KEN
                                                                                                                           YAO-MOZ                                                                                       N USAN- ZAF        HL ENGWE-MOZ           YAO-MOZ                               W ANGA-KEN GOMAN I-MOZ
                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                         GUN -BENENI-MW
                                                                            MPEZ        I         SON INKE-MLI        ZIMBA-MOZ GOMAN I-MOZ                                                                                                             MPEZEN I-MWISON INKE-MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Z IM BA-MOZ
                                                                                                                           MAN YIKA-Z WE                                                                                                                                               MAN YIKA- ZWE
                                                                                                                        MALINKE-SEN CH EWA-MOZ                                                                                                                 MALINKE-SEN                    CH EWA-MOZ
                                                                                                          TLOKW A-BWA                                                                                                                                                                 TLOKW A- BWA
                                                                                                          MBUKU SHU- NAM            KU NDA-ZMB                                                                         MBUKUSH U- NAM                                   KUND A-ZMB
                                                                                              SUBIA-NAM    T AWARA-ZRONWE
                                                                                                                        TUM  BU
                                                                                                                        GA- ZAF
                                                                                                                              GUKA-Z   MB
                                                                                                                                  SII- KEN                                                                                   TUMBUKA-ZMB SUBIA-N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RONAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA-ZAF                              TAW ARA-Z WE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GUSII-KEN
                                                                                              BUSA-BEN
                                                                                                   SOTH O-LSO               SUBIA-Z MB                                                                                   BUSA- BEN                                         SOTHO-L   SO Z MB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUBIA-
                                                                                                                                             LAMBYA-ZM
                                                                                                                                              ND AU-ZWE B                                                               LAMBYA-Z MB                                ND AU-Z WE
                                                                                          LU NGU-TZA KGATL A-BWA                                                                                                                                                                            KGATL A- BWA      LU NGU- TZA




                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                 -1




                                                                                                                          KOBA-N AM                                                                                       KOBA-N AM
                                                               TH ON GA- MOZ                                                                                                                                                                         T HONGA-MOZ
                                                                                     N YAN JA- MOZ                                                                                                                                                                         NYANJA-MOZ
                                                                                      EGBA-BEN                                                                                                                                                                         EGBA-BEN




                                                                                                                                                                                           -2
      -2




                                                              -2                   -1                0                    1                                                    2                                                                  -.5                                 0                                      .5
                                                                          Average Education of Respondents in Ethnicity i in Country c                                                                                                               % of Respondents with Access to Piped Water in Ethnicity i in Country c



                                                                                                     Figure 6                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6

                                                              The uncovered robust association between luminosity and various development proxies
across African countries, administrative regions and villages within countries, as well as areas
across national boundaries belonging to the historical homeland of the same ethnicity, suggests
that in absence of alternative comprehensive measures of regional economic performance, light
density is an informative proxy of local economic conditions for African regions.

2.3                                                            Ethnic Institutional Traits

In work following the mapping of African ethnicities, Murdock (1967) produced an Ethno-
graphic Atlas (published in the anthropological journal Ethnology) that coded around 60 vari-
ables, capturing cultural, geographical, and economic characteristics of 1 270 ethnicities around
the world. We assigned the 835 African ethnicities of Murdock’s Map of 1959 to the ethnic
groups in his Ethnographic Atlas of 1967. As the two sources do not always use the same name
for identifying ethnic groups we employed several sources and the updated version of Murdock’s
Atlas produced by J. Patrick Gray to match a total of 534 ethnicities.
                                                              Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007) we proxy pre-colonial political institutions
using Murdock’s (1967) "Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond the Local Community Level" index.
This is an ordered variable, ranging from 0 to 4, that describes the number of political jurisdic-
tional hierarchies above the local (usually village) level for each society. A zero score indicates
stateless societies “lacking any form of centralized political organization”. Scores 1 and 2 des-
ignate petty and larger-paramount chiefdoms, while 3 and 4 indicate groups that were part of
large organized states. Murdock (1967) explicitly excludes colonial regimes (such as protec-
torates) and attempts to capture political complexity before Europeans started the settlement
of Africa. Figure 7 illustrates the significant heterogeneity in political centralization across
African groups. Examples of ethnicities without any level of political organization above the


                                                                                                                                                                                   13
local level include the Bura and the Lango in Uganda. Examples of tribes belonging to small
chiefdoms are the Mende in Sierra Leone and the Ibo of Nigeria. The Mbundu in Angola and
the Zerma in Niger were part of large paramount chiefdoms, while the Yoruba in Nigeria and
the Mossi in Burkina Faso are societies that were parts of large states before colonization. The
Bubi in Equatorial Guinea and the Beduin Arabs in Morocco and Tunisia are classified as
having been part of large complex states.

      Cross-validation of Murdock’s Jurisdictional Hierarchy Index We also per-
formed a cross-validation of Murdock’s data on the degree of political centralization of ethnic-
ities going over numerous works in African historiography and political science. Our reading
of the literature suggests that the jurisdictional hierarchy index is in accordance with works
describing the degree of political complexity in pre-colonial Africa. Murdock (1967) classifies
as centralized the dominant ethnic groups of all major pre-colonial African states. For exam-
ple, the Ankale and the Buganda, which were the central ethnic groups in the strong states of
Eastern Africa (in contemporary Uganda) get a score of 3 in the jurisdictional hierarchy index.
The same applies for other ethnic groups that were part of large empires, such as the Zulu
and the Swazi in South Africa, the Yoruba in Nigeria, and the Shongai in Mali (see Fortes and
Evans-Pritchard (1940); Goody (1971).
      Murdock also seems to correctly identify stateless ethnicities. The jurisdictional hierarchy
index equals zero or one for the Amba, the Konkomba, the Tiv, the Dinka, and the Lugbara,
in line with the analysis of Middleton and Tait (1958), who use them as examples of stateless
societies. Regarding the Amba, for example, Winter (1958) writes that “the village is the
largest unilateral unit of power ” whereas Tait (1958) characterizes the Konkomba as an ethnic
group that is “organized locally, without formal laws, and central authority.” Likewise the Lobbi
is classified as stateless in line with Goody (1971) who characterizes them as “people with no
state organization at all ”.
      The classification seems also to identify quite accurately societies with intermediate levels
of political centralization (paramount chiefdoms and small states). The Ashanti that were part
of a loose confederation get a score of 2; likewise the Nupe in Northern Nigeria, the Bemba in
Zambia, and the Ngwato in Botswana which were also part of small states get a score of 2 (see
Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940)).

2.4   National Institutions

For national institutions we rely on the World Bank’s Governance Matters Database (Kauf-
mann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2005)). The World Bank assembles numerous de facto institu-
tional quality measures (originally compiled by various non-governmental organizations and

                                               14
risk assessment agencies) and aggregates them into six categories via a principal component
analysis. For our benchmark estimates we use the rule of law index that reflects the eﬀective-
ness of the judiciary and the quality of property rights protection. As many studies on African
development focus on graft, we also report results using the control of corruption index. Both
variables have a theoretical minimum and maximum of −25 and +25, respectively, with higher
values indicating better functioning institutions and less corruption. Results are qualitatively
similar if we use alternative measures of national institutions, like the ICRG risk of expropria-
tion, the Polity’s executive constraints index, or measures from World Bank’s Doing Business
around the World Project. In our sample the countries with the lowest rule of law are Somalia
(−191) and the Democratic Republic of Congo (−184), while Namibia (064) and Botswana
(071) are the most institutionally developed countries (see Figure 7).




                                                         National Boundaries in 2000
                                                    Rule of Law 1996-2004
 Pre-Colonial Jurisdictional
                                                         -1.912 - -1.585
 Hierarchy Beyond Local
 Community Across Groups                                 -1.584 - -1.257

      Ethnicities' Homelands                             -1.256 - -0.930
      0                                                  -0.929 - -0.602




                Ü                                                           Ü
      1                                                  -0.601 - -0.275
      2                                                  -0.274 - 0.053
      3
                                                         0.054 - 0.381
      4
                                                         0.382 - 0.708




                                                                                       Figure 7
                           Figure 7

2.5     General Empirical Framework

Our analysis on the relationship between contemporary national and pre-colonial ethnic insti-
tutions and regional development is based on variants of the following specification:

                                                    0
                   = 0 +  +   +  Φ +   + [ +  ] +             (1)

        The dependent variable,  , is the level of local economic activity in the historical
homeland of ethnic group  in country , as proxied by light density at night.  denotes
institutional quality of country  (as reflected in the rule of law and the control for corruption

                                                   15
measures). For ethnicities that fall into more than one country, each area of the partitioned
group is assigned to the corresponding country . For example, regional light density in the
part of the Ewe in Ghana is matched to the institutional quality of Ghana, while the adjacent
region of the Ewe in Togo is assigned the value of Togo.   denotes local ethnic
institutions as reflected in the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local level.
      Since the correlation between luminosity and proxies of development strengthens when we
condition for urbanization in many specifications we control for log population density (  )
though population density is likely endogenous to national or/and ethnic institutional develop-
ment. Moreover, when we control for population density the regression estimates capture the
relationship between institutions and economic development per capita.
      A potential merit of our regional focus is that we can account properly for local geography
and other factors (captured in vector  ). This is non-trivial as there is a fierce debate in
the literature on the institutional origins of development on whether the strong correlation
between institutional and economic development is driven by geographical features and the
disease environment (e.g. Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999), Easterly and Levine (2003)).
In many specifications we include a rich set of geographic controls, reflecting land endowments
(elevation, area under water), ecological features (malaria stability index, land suitability for
agriculture), and natural resources (diamond mines and petroleum fields).
      There are several studies that suggest the inclusion of these variables. First, Nunn and
Puga (2011) show that elevation and terrain ruggedness have aﬀected African development both
via goods and slave trades. Second, the inclusion of surface under water accounts for blooming
in the light image data and for the potential positive eﬀect of water streams on development
via trade. Third, controlling for malaria prevalence is important as Gallup and Sachs (2001)
and subsequent studies have shown a large negative eﬀect of malaria on development. Fourth,
there is a vast literature linking natural resources like oil and diamonds to development and civil
conflict (e.g. Ross (2006)). Fifth, Michalopoulos (2011) shows that diﬀerences in land suitability
and elevation across regions lead to the formation of ethnic groups, whereas Fenske (2009)
and Ashraf and Galor (2011) show that land quality is strongly correlated with pre-colonial
population densities. We also control for the distance of the centroid of each ethnic group 
in country  from the capital city, the national border, and the coast. As most contemporary
capital cities in Africa were established by Europeans during the colonial period, the coeﬃcient
on distance from the capital may reflect the impact of colonization and the limited penetration
of national institutions due to the poor infrastructure (we formally explore this possibility
below). Distance to the border captures the potentially lower level of development in border
areas. Distance to the sea coast captures the eﬀect of trade, but to some extent also the


                                                16
penetration of colonization. This is because during the colonial era (and the slave trades)
Europeans mainly settled in coastal areas.
       In our analysis on the impact of national institutions we include ethnicity fixed eﬀects
( ) to eﬀectively control for cultural and unobserved geographical features of ethnic homelands,
whereas in Section 4 where we examine the role of ethnic institutions we include country fixed
eﬀects ( ) to account for national policies and institutions, as well as other countrywide factors.

2.6    Technical Remarks

       Estimation First, the distribution of luminosity is not normal, as (i) a significant
fraction (around 30%) of the observations takes on the value of zero6 and (ii) we have a few
extreme observations in the right tail of the distribution (see Appendix Figure 1). While the
mean of satellite light density is 0364 the median is more than twenty times smaller, 0017.
This occurs because there are a few ethnic areas where light density is extremely high. For
example, we have 13 observations (1%) where light density exceeds 64 and 26 observations
(2%) where light density exceeds 467.
       To account for both issues we use as the dependent variable the log of light density
adding a small number (( ≡ ln(001 +  ) see Appendix Figure 1).7 This
transformation assures that we use all observations and that we minimize the problem of
outliers. We also estimate specifications ignoring unlit areas ( ≡ ln( )), as
in this case the dependent variable is normally distributed (see Appendix Figure 1). Looking
at the "intensive margin" also guarantees that we investigate the role of (national and ethnic)
institutions in explaining variation in economic performance across densely populated regions
displaying non-trivial economic activity (non-lit areas have a median population density of
882 people per square kilometer whereas regions with positive light density have a median of
2763).8

       Inference Second, in all specifications we employ the approach of Cameron, Gelbach,
and Miller (2006) and cluster standard errors both at the country and at the ethnic-family level
(Murdock assigns the 835 groups into 96 ethnolinguistic clusters/families), as this accounts
for two main concerns related to non-adjusted standard errors. First, within each country
   6
     A zero level of light density occurs either because the area is extremely sparsely populated without any
electricity or because the satellite sensors cannot capture dimly lit areas.
   7
     In the previous draft of the paper we added one to the luminosity data before taking the logarithm finding
similar results.
   8
     The results are similar ignoring the top 1%, 2% or 5% of the luminosity data. Moreover, in the previous
version of the paper we reported Poisson ML specifications finding analogous results. We also estimated OLS
models in levels, Tobit specifications that account for censoring in the dependent variable and also performed
least absolute deviation (median) regressions using all data to account for outliers. These alternative estimation
techniques deliver quite similar results.


                                                       17
we have several ethnicities where the country-level rule of law and the control-of-corruption
measures take the same value and thus clustering at the country-level is required (Moulton
(1986)). Likewise, partitioned ethnicities appear more than one time in our sample and thus
clustering at the ethnic family accounts for unobserved features within each ethnolinguistic
family.9 As we report specifications using the ethnicity-level indicators that exhibit within-
ethnic-family correlation, it is appropriate to also cluster standard errors at the ethnic-family
level. Second, the multi-way clustering method accounts for arbitrary residual correlation
within both dimensions and thus accounts for spatial correlation (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller
(2006) explicitly cite spatial correlation as an application of the multi-clustering approach).
We also estimated standard errors accounting for spatial correlation of an unknown form using
Conley’s (1999) method. The two approaches yield very similar standard errors; and if anything
the two-way clustering produces somewhat larger standard errors yielding the most conservative
inference. Moreover, as in many specifications we include country or ethnicity fixed eﬀects this
soaks up further the spatial correlation at each dimension.

2.7    Preliminary Evidence

Table 1 reports summary statistics for the variables employed in the empirical analysis. Table 2
reports cross-sectional LS specifications that associate regional development with contemporary
national and pre-colonial ethnic institutions. Below the estimates we report both double-
clustered (in parentheses) and Conley’s (in brackets) standard errors.10 Column (1) shows
that there is a positive and significant correlation between the rule of law index and regional
development. In column (2) we add population density, whereas in column (3) we control
for distance to the capital city, distance to the border, and distance to the coast. While all
distance terms enter with significant coeﬃcients, the estimate on rule of law retains its economic
and statistical significance. In (4) we control for population density, location, and a rich set of
geographic controls. Conditioning on geography reduces the magnitude of the coeﬃcient but the
estimate retains significance at conventional levels.11 Overall, the correlations in (1)-(4) echo
    9
      Clustering at the ethnicity level rather than at the ethnic family level produces similar standard errors. We
prefer to cluster at the broader ethnic-family level, because the consistency of the standard errors improves with
the number of within-cluster observations (Cameron, et al. (2006)).
   10
      Conley’s correction method requires a cut-oﬀ distance beyond which the spatial correlation is assumed to
be zero; we experimented with various cutoﬀ values between 100km and 3000km choosing the cutoﬀ of 2000km
which delivers the largest in magnitude standard errors.
   11
      Land suitability for agriculture, which reflects climatic (temperature and precipitation) and soil conditions,
enters most models with a positive and significant estimate. The malaria stability index enters in all specifica-
tions with a statistically negative estimate. The coeﬃcient on land area under water is positive and in many
specifications statistically significant. Elevation enters with a negative estimate which is significant in some
models. The petroleum dummy enters always with a positive and significant coeﬃcient, most likely because
the satellite captures fires from oil facilities. The diamond dummy enters in most specifications with a negative
coeﬃcient.


                                                        18
the findings of cross-country works; although the association between institutional quality and
development weakens somewhat when one accounts for geography, it remains highly significant.
         In columns (5) to (8) we associate regional development with ethnic pre-colonial political
institutions. Column (5) reports unconditional estimates. The coeﬃcient on jurisdictional hi-
erarchy index is positive and significant at the 99% confidence level. Controlling for population
density, location, and the rich set of geographic controls (in columns (6)-(8)) has a noticeable
eﬀect on the coeﬃcient which nevertheless remains at least two standard deviations above zero
in all permutations.
         In columns (9)-(12) we regress regional light density on both national and ethnic insti-
tutions. Given the positive correlation (016) between rule of law and jurisdictional hierarchy,
it is useful to investigate the stability of the previous results. Column (9) introduces both the
rule of law index and the jurisdictional hierarchy measure. The unconditional estimate of rule
of law in the sample of 680 ethnicity-country observations is 014 (specification not shown).
Once we control for the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy the estimate on rule of law retains its
significance and falls by 15%. Likewise, the coeﬃcient on jurisdictional hierarchy is positive and
highly significant, though its magnitude is somewhat smaller compared to the analogous speci-
fication in (5).12 A similar pattern obtains when we control for location (distance to the border,
the sea coast, and the capital city), population density, and the set of geographic-ecological
controls (in (10)-(12)).
         The coeﬃcient in column (12) implies that a one point increase in the rule of law in-
dex (moving approximately from the institutional quality level of Angola to that of Gabon)
is associated with a 73% increase in regional luminosity. Turning now to the magnitude of
pre-colonial institutions, the most conservative LS estimate (017) implies that regional de-
velopment increases by approximately 50% as one moves from areas where stateless societies
reside to regions with ethnic groups featuring centralized pre-colonial institutions (i.e. have
a jurisdictional hierarchy index equal to 3). The preliminary results in Table 2 are informa-
tive about the broad data patterns. Yet these estimates do not identify the one-way eﬀect of
neither contemporary national institutions nor ethnic historical institutional traits on regional
development. This is the task of the next two sections.


3        National Institutions and Regional Development
Identifying the causal impact of contemporary institutions on regional development is a de-
manding task, because, among other challenges, there are rarely otherwise identical cultures
    12
    Compared to the specifications in columns (5)-(8), we lose three observations when we include the rule of
law index, because we lack data on Western Sahara (the results are almost identical if we assign the rule of law
index of Morocco to the Western-Saharan ethnic regions).


                                                      19
exposed to diﬀerent institutional settings. The arbitrary design of borders in Africa oﬀers
an ideal setting to isolate the eﬀect of nationwide institutions from cultural traits and ethnic
institutions.
      There is significant variation in both the rule of law and luminosity across African bor-
ders. Sharp border discontinuities in rule of law appear in several parts of Africa. For example,
in the Botswana and Zimbabwe border (where the Hiechware, the Subia, and the Tlokwa are
partitioned); across the Namibia and Angola border (where the Ambo are split); between Kenya
and Somalia (where the Bararetta group resides); or between Gabon and Congo (where the
Duma live). Likewise, there are changes in luminosity across the border within the historical
homeland of the same partitioned ethnic group (see Figure 8). On the one hand, in around 30%
of the sample there are no diﬀerences in light density across the border within ethnic groups; on
the other hand in about 40% of the partitions there are more than one log point diﬀerences in
luminosity. For example, large jumps in luminosity appear in the Egypt-Sudan border (where
the Ababda and the Barabra groups are partitioned), in the border between Ghana and the
Ivory Coast (where the Assini reside), and between Benin and Togo (where the Popo are split).
      To the extent that national institutions aﬀect regional development, one should expect
to find that the part of the ethnic group that belongs to the high institutional quality country
would outperform economically the adjacent region of the same historical homeland that falls
into the country with the relatively worse national institutions.
                              30
                              20
                    Percent
                              10
                              0




                                   0       1           2            3           4           5
                        Pairwise Absolute Differences in Log Light Density within Partitioned Groups


                                                       Figure 8




                                                           20
3.1                                                                                        Within-Ethnicity Results

In this section we examine the cross-sectional and the within-ethnicity correlation between na-
tional institutions and luminosity in the group of partitioned ethnicities. In the odd-numbered
columns of Table 3 we report cross-sectional estimates, while in the even-numbered specifi-
cations we add ethnicity fixed eﬀects to account for local geography and culture. The cross-
sectional estimates in columns (1) and (3) echo the findings of Table 2. Along border regions
partitions of ethnic groups that belong to countries with higher institutional quality display
systematically higher levels of development. Yet when we solely exploit the within-ethnicity
variation (i.e. estimating equation (1) with  ), the coeﬃcients on rule of law and control of cor-
ruption drop sizably and become statistically indistinguishable from zero. The insignificance is
not driven by a decrease in the precision of the estimated coeﬃcients since the standard errors
remain largely unchanged. In both permutations (as well in most subsequent specifications),
two-standard-error bands in the within-ethnicity estimates exclude the cross-sectional ones.
                                                                                          In columns (5)-(8) we repeat estimation across lit partitions. The cross-sectional es-
timates show that across lit border areas there is a strong correlation between institutional
quality and regional development. Yet once we include ethnicity fixed eﬀects the coeﬃcients on
rule of law and control of corruption drop by more than a half and turn insignificant. Figures
9 and 9 below illustrate the lack of a systematic within-ethnicity correlation between light
density and institutional quality at the national level.
   Difference in Ln Light Density Within a Group Partitioned By National Borders




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Difference in Ln Light Density Within a Group Partitioned By National Borders




                                                                                        Ethnicities Partitioned Across Countries: Does Rule of Law Matter?                                                                                                                                             Ethnicities Partitioned Across Countries: Does Corruption Matter?
                                                                                                                                   Unconditional Re lation ship                                                                                                                                                                                         Uncon dition al Relationship
                                                                                                        GADAMES                                                                                                                                                                                                            GADAMES
                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                                                             BANYUN                                                                                                                                                                                        BANYUN

                                                                                                                                                AZJER
                                                                                                                                                ESA    BASHI                                                                                                                                                                                           ESA     AZJER                           BASHI
                                                                                                                                                     RUANDA                   TIGRINYA                                                                                                                                                                                                       RUANDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TIGRINYA
                                                                                                                                                       FANG                                                                                                                                                                                                      FANG
                                                                                                                          KONGO           RUNDILAMBYA                                                                                                                                                                                    KONGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RUNDI                                 LAMBYA
                                                                                                                      DIALONKE KGATLAKAPSIKI                                 FANGATTA
                                                                                                                                                                                   BWAKA        ABABDA                                                                                                                                                 KGATLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DIALONKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KAPSIKI       FANG         BWAKAATTA ABABDA
                                                                                                                                                                CHEWA GURENSI
                                                                                                                                                           BIRIFON           DUMA                                                                                                                                                                              CHEWA   BIRIFON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DUMA GURENSI
                                                                                                       RUANDA BUSA  BASHI              GADAMES
                                                                                                                                    NGUMBA                    RUNDI                                                                                                                                                              RUANDA  NGUMBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RUNDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BASHIGADAMES
                                                                                                                                   MINIANKA                                                                                                                                                                                                              MINIANKA
                                                                                                                   CHAKOSSI
                                                                                                                 TIENGA            TIENGA KONO                BWAKA
                                                                                                                                                                SHAMBALA            THONGA
                                                                                                                                                                                         CHIGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TIENGA  KONO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CHAKOSSI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TIENGA BWAKA     SHAMBALA                      CHIGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         THONGA
                                                                                                                      TEKE       KANEMBU     KPELLE
                                                                                                                                        MAMBILAKONYANKELOBI                                     TLOKWA                                                                                                                                                     MAMBILA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TEKE   KPELLE  LOBI
                                                                                                  KAONDE                              TUBURI
                                                                                                                                   HAUSA                     CHOKWE MENDEBALANTE                                                                                                                                                    KAONDE KANEMBU         TUBURI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KONYANKE        BALANTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHOKWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TLOKWA
                                                                                                                           TEKEDAGARI
                                                                                                                                   NYASA TIGONSAMO
                                                                                                                                       AULLIMINDEN
                                                                                                                                                 BOBO        NSENGA                 BASHI      BARABRA
                                                                                                                                                                                              AUSHI                                                                                                                                        TEKE HAUSA AULLIMINDEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NSENGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TIGONDAGARI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAMO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BOBO      MENDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NYASA               BARABRA BASHI
                                                                                                SHEBELLE  HLENGWE                       RUANDA
                                                                                                                                   MINIANKA
                                                                                                                                          KANEMBU                ZIMBA NAFANAMALINKE                                                                                                                                    HLENGWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SHEBELLE                          MINIANKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KANEMBU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZIMBANAFANA      RUANDA AUSHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MALINKE
                                                                                                 SUBIA       RUANDA  ATYUTI
                                                                                                                     TOMA                     MINIANKA
                                                                                                                                              MALINKE     SONINKE
                                                                                                                                                             NGWAKETSE
                                                                                                                                                            MAKONDE            ANUAK         HIECHWARE                                                                                                             SUBIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RUANDA      TOMA            ATYUTISONINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAKONDE MINIANKA  NGWAKETSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MALINKE                ANUAK                HIECHWARE
                                                                                                                        TENDA              LAKAUDALAN
                                                                                                                                           NYAKYUSA     YOMBE
                                                                                                                                                   (ADAMAWA
                                                                                                                                                   KISSI   MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                        CHIGA     BORAN KOTA  KISSI     LUGBARA
                                                                                                                                                                                   LUVALE                                                                                                                                                      CHIGA         TENDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NYAKYUSA     UDALAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LAKA    MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          YOMBELUVALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (ADAMAWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KOTA         BORAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KISSI   LUGBARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KISSI
                                                                                                                             RUNDI   SABEI
                                                                                                                                  PANDE
                                                                                                                                NUSAN
                                                                                                                            DENDI     PUKU
                                                                                                                                         ASBEN HLENGWE DZEM FANG               GREBO          LAMBA                                                                                                                                        PUKU  DENDI SABEI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RUNDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NUSAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ASBEN HLENGWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DZEMPANDE                 FANGLAMBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GREBO
                                                                                                                  KONKOMBA             GURMA
                                                                                                                                   MALINKE
                                                                                                                                         BAYA     NGERE
                                                                                                                                             MANYIKA
                                                                                                                                                YALUNKASAHOUDALAN   GUSII
                                                                                                                                                                      GURMA
                                                                                                                                                                       EGBA    BARARETTA                                                                                                                                                      KONKOMBA              GURMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NGERE  GUSII GURMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MANYIKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BAYA           BARARETTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UDALAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EGBASAHO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YALUNKA
                                                                                                                      BRONG       LAKA
                                                                                                                                    YAO(ADAMAWA
                                                                                                                                  NUSAN
                                                                                                                                  SANGA             LAKA
                                                                                                                                               KORANKO
                                                                                                                                                  IWA      (ADAMAWA
                                                                                                                                                        AZJER
                                                                                                                                                     MATAKAM          BONDJO                  TABWA
                                                                                                                                                                         MALINKENDEMBU BARARETTA                                                                                                                                                           LAKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BRONGLAKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (ADAMAWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NUSAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SANGA(ADAMAWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MATAKAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MALINKE   AZJER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YAO   KORANKO   TABWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BONDJO     BARARETTA
                                                                                                          SUBIA             BARARETTA
                                                                                                                               KARA      TIGRINYA
                                                                                                                                              MBERE     FOUTADJALON
                                                                                                                                                        AULLIMINDEN    YOMBE                     ESA
                                                                                                                                                                                      NUKWE BIDEYAT                                                                                                             SUBIA                    BARARETTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TIGRINYA    MBERE      FOUTADJALON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KARA         NDEMBU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AUL LIMINDENYOMBE         ESA NUKWE
                                                                                                             MBUNDA
                                                                                                             BIDEYAT
                                                                                                              YAKOMA
                                                                                                              AZANDE
                                                                                                              NUKWE
                                                                                                                 BONI
                                                                                                                   KOMADIDINGA
                                                                                                                    SURI
                                                                                                                     TRIBU
                                                                                                                      NYANGIYA
                                                                                                                      DZEM    AZANDE
                                                                                                                         NAUDEBA DIDINGA
                                                                                                                                KARAMOJONG
                                                                                                                                RESHIAT
                                                                                                                                   HOLO
                                                                                                                                   KOMONO
                                                                                                                                    DIDINGA
                                                                                                                                     NALU
                                                                                                                                      MUSGUMOMBERA
                                                                                                                                            BERABISH
                                                                                                                                             TAWARA
                                                                                                                                          BATA
                                                                                                                                           BIDEYATNUKWE
                                                                                                                                              NGAMA
                                                                                                                                              NYASA
                                                                                                                                              KOBA GULA
                                                                                                                                                     TEDA
                                                                                                                                                       FUNGON
                                                                                                                                                         WUM
                                                                                                                                                           DIALONKE
                                                                                                                                                            BARGU
                                                                                                                                                               JIE  BIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                    RUNGA
                                                                                                                                                                BIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                BABUKUR
                                                                                                                                                                 RESHIAT
                                                                                                                                                                  MUNDU                                                                                                                                                                     AZANDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MBUNDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DIDINGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BERABISH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOMBERA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DIDINGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TAWARA BIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RUNGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NUKWE
                                                                                        NUKWE            ALUR FANG    IMRAGENRONGA
                                                                                                                             AZANDE
                                                                                                                                  KUNDA
                                                                                                                              GRUNSHI
                                                                                                                                GOMANI
                                                                                                                                 LUVALE
                                                                                                                                    WANGA
                                                                                                                                             SONINKE
                                                                                                                                                 NDUKA
                                                                                                                                              SUBIA
                                                                                                                                          SANGA
                                                                                                                                                     DAZA
                                                                                                                                               MBUKUSHU
                                                                                                                                               LAMBYA
                                                                                                                                                 TEDATEDA SHUWA    KREISHMADI
                                                                                                                                                                YAKA
                                                                                                                                                           MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                                            AVATIME
                                                                                                                                                                             KISSI
                                                                                                                                                                              RESHIAT
                                                                                                                                                                                 NZANKARA
                                                                                                                                                                                   BANZIRI
                                                                                                                                                                                   NDOGO
                                                                                                                                                                                    MASHI
                                                                                                                                                                                    KARE
                                                                                                                                                                                ZEKARA                                                                                                                       NUKWE              RONGABIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KOMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YAKOMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AZANDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SURI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BONI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KARAMOJONG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HOLO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NAUDEBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NYANGIYA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NUKWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TRIBU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DIDINGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LUVALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NYASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KOBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KOMONO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NALU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NGAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MUSGU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DZEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SONINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IMRAGEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SUBIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RESHIAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TEDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DIALONKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DAZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AZANDEFUNGON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KREISH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GRUNSHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GOMANI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WUM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GULA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NDUKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KUNDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SHUWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MBUKUSHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SANGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVATIME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MADI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MASHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KISSI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BARGU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BABUKUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NZANKARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MUNDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RESHIAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YAKABANZIRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NDOGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RESHIAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZEKARABIDEYAT
                                                                                                                                                                        ANA KPELLE SUBIA                                                                                                                                            FANG              WANGA        TEDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAMBYA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TEDA                      KPELL E
                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                               DIGO
                                                                                                                          ZAGHAWA
                                                                                                                           SUNDI    GURMAMPEZENI RUNGA
                                                                                                                                                   NUSAN   UDALAN
                                                                                                                                                              KONGO                                                                                                                                                                           GURMAZAGHAWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SUNDI               DIGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MPEZENI       RUNGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NUSANANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UDALAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KONGO                       SUBIA
                                                                                                                                   SOTHO      TAJAKANT
                                                                                                                                   SONGHAIMASINA         SANGA
                                                                                                                                                           SONGHAI   TAMA
                                                                                                                                                                        FANGEWE   BAJUN                                                                                                                                                       SOTHO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SONGHAI         TAJAKANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SANGA     TAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FANG  EWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SONGHAI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BAJUN
                                                                                                                          BWAKA
                                                                                                                      TAJAKANTGURENSI                 IFORA  MANGA
                                                                                                                                                               YOMBE
                                                                                                                                                             SUBIA MASAI ASSINI                                                                                                                                                          BWAKA         MASINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TAJAKANT     GURENSI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SUBIA       IFORA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MASAI     MANGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  YOMBE
                                                                                                                                       MANDARA
                                                                                                                                       DARI LUNGUFOUTADJALON
                                                                                                                                 MALINKE                      CHEWANDOGO
                                                                                                                                                                     FOUTADJALON                                                                                                                                                                          MANDARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHEWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DARI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LUNGU     ASSINI AFAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FOUTADJALON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FOUTADJALON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NDOGO
                                                                                                                   KRAN
                                                                                                                LIGBI, DEGHA (SE) GURMA
                                                                                                                                   SONINKE    KUNG
                                                                                                                                             MALINKE
                                                                                                                                    TUKULORMASINA      AFAR  KUNDA
                                                                                                                                                                BIRIFON                                                                                                                                                            KRAN         GURMA    KUNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KUNDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BIRIFON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LIGBI, DEGHA MALINKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SONINKE  TUKULOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (SE)
                                                                                                                                                  NDAU           LUGBARA           GIL         SUBIA                                                                                                          AMBO                                                NDAU               LUGBARA GIL           SUBIA
                                                                                      AMBO
                                                                                    MBUKUSHU                         NGERE FON NSENGA              AFAR MUNDANG
                                                                                                                                                     KUNTA     NAMA
                                                                                                                                                                 NYASA       ANYI AMER         ISHAAK                                                                                                       MBUKUSHU             NGERE                FON MASINA     MUNDANG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NYASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NAMA KUNTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NSENGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ANYI       AFAR              AMER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ISHAAK
                                                                                                        KONJO                        AULLIMINDEN
                                                                                                                                        SHUWABULOM
                                                                                                                                    TONGA                BOKI           TEM VAI                                                                                                                                                   KONJO             AULLIMINDEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SHUWATONGA  BOKI     TEM  BULOM
                                                                                                                 BARGU                        IMRAGEN                                                                                                                                                                                                           IMRAGEN           VAI
                                                                                                                   BERTA BARGU BARGU
                                                                                                                   NGERE                              NSUNGLI
                                                                                                                                                         EKOINDEMBU   KABRE
                                                                                                                                                                    MASAL  IT TAJAKANT
                                                                                                                                                                                  HLENGWE    NDEMBU                                                                                                                                  BARGU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NGERE   BERTA  BARGU              BARGU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EKOI KABRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NSUNGLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MASALIT              NDEMBU HLENGWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TAJAKANT
                                                                                                               JERIDADELE
                                                                                                                      LUGBARA                                                             AMBA                                                                                                                                   JERID            LUGBARA                        NDEMBU          AMBA
                                                                                    KWANGARE                  DIOLA                                  TAJAKANT
                                                                                                                                                         AFAR
                                                                                                                                                         MBERE                                                                                                                                              KWANGARE                                 DIOLA MBERE TAJAKANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ADELE                                           AFAR
                                                                                                                                                      WAKURA                                                                                                                                                                                                         WAKURA
                                                                                                                  SEKE        CHAGA                         DIALONKE             GADAMES                                                                                                                                            SEKE                     CHAGADIAL ONKE                     GADAMES
                                                                                                                                  YAO                                                                                                                                                                                                                               YAO
                                                                                                                     BUEM            KOTOKO TUMBUKA                                                                                                                                                                                                BUEMTUMBUKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KOTOKO
                                                                                                            TIGRINYA                         LAMBYA                                                                                                                                                                         TIGRINYA                       LAMBYA
                                                                                                                                             CHEWA          RUANDA                                                                                                                                                                      RUANDA             CHEWA
                                                                                                    ESA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESA
                                                                                                                                NYANJAAZJER                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AZJERNYANJA
                                                                                                                                                        GUDE                                                                                                                                                                                                         GUDE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -5
                                                                                   -5




                                                                                           -2                    -1                       0                     1                                        2                                                                                             -2                           -1                       0                      1                                     2
                                                                                                                 Differences in Rule of Law Within a Country Pair                                                                                                                                                               Differences in Control of Corruption Within a Country Pair




                                                                                                                            Figure 9                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 9

                                                                                          In light of the results reported in Table 2 that the correlation between rule of law and
light density weakens but remains significant when one controls for ethnic institutions, the
findings in Table 3 suggest that the ethnicity fixed eﬀects capture on the top of the measured
tribal institutions other cultural and unobserved ethnic features. To gauge, for example, how
much of the decline in the fixed-eﬀects estimate of rule of law is due to the inclusion of the

                                                                                                                                                                                                             21
pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy consider the following: In the specification of column (1) in
Table 3 when we restrict the estimation on partitioned groups for which information on tribal
institutions is available the OLS estimate on rule of law is 072. If we introduce ethnicity fixed
eﬀects (Table 3-column 2), then the coeﬃcient drops by 54% (033) and becomes insignificant.
If we add the jurisdictional hierarchy index instead, the estimate on rule of law drops by 14%
to 061 So, from the 54% drop in the magnitude of rule of law that is due to ethnicity fixed
eﬀects a quarter of the decline can be ascribed to variation in pre-colonial ethnic institutions.

3.2    Validity of the Regression Discontinuity Design

The partitioning of several African groups in diﬀerent countries enables us to investigate the
role of national institutions in a regression discontinuity framework by exploiting changes in
the quality of national institutions at the border. Before presenting the results it is necessary
to check the validity of the regression discontinuity design. The RD design requires that all
relevant factors besides the treatment -national institutions in our application- vary smoothly at
the border. So a concern is that the geography or historical development of ethnic partitions in
the relatively low institutional quality countries are systematically diﬀerent from the partitions
of the same group falling into the relatively high institutional quality ones. In this case the two
(or more) partitions of each ethnicity might not be appropriate counterfactuals.
       To investigate whether diﬀerences in institutional quality across the border correlate with
diﬀerences in various observable characteristics we estimate simple ethnicity fixed-eﬀects re-
gressions associating variables reflecting geography, the disease environment, natural resources,
urbanization at independence, and location with rule of law and control of corruption in the
ethnic groups partitioned by the national border.13
       Table 4 reports the coeﬃcient on the rule of law and the control of corruption index
with the double-clustered (at the country and the ethnic family-level) standard error for each
specification. The results support our identification design. First, diﬀerences in geography, the
disease environment, and natural resources across the border are small and most importantly
not systematically linked to diﬀerences in national institutions. Second, although estimates of
1960 population density have to be interpreted with caution, there is no statistical diﬀerence in
population density around independence across adjacent partitions of the same ethnic group.
In a Malthusian regime where richer areas are more densely populated, this implies that there
   13
      We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this implicit test for our RD design. We also investigated
whether partitions of ethnic groups diﬀer systematically from non-partitioned ethnicities with respect to their
location and geographic traits. Except for the fact that the partitions of ethnic groups are on average 425
kilometers further from the capital cities and 9250 kilometers closer to the borders there are no other significant
diﬀerences regarding geography, ecology, and population density in 1960. Overall, ethnic partitions are similar
to ethnic homelands unaﬀected by the border design along a host of observable characteristics.



                                                        22
were no systematic diﬀerences in economic performance within split ethnicities whose partitions
following independence would come to be subject to diﬀerent national level institutions. Third,
the only covariate that is significantly correlated with the treatment is distance from the capital
city. Partitions falling in the relatively high rule of law countries are closer to the capital city of
that country. This correlation is driven by Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo, two
of the largest in terms of size countries in Africa that score low in institutional development.

3.3    Regression Discontinuity

In this subsection we report the results from the regression discontinuity approach that iden-
tifies the eﬀect of national institutions at the border. In our context the assignment (run-
ning/forcing) variable is the distance from the centroid of an ethnic area to the national border
( ). We thus estimate specifications adding a cubic RD-polynomial in distance to the
border ( ( )); the polynomial takes on positive values for the partition that falls in the
relatively more institutionally developed country and negative values for the partition of the
same ethnic group that falls in the relatively less institutionally developed one. We also add in-
teraction terms between the proxy measures of national institutions () and the polynomial
terms. Rewriting equation (1), our specification reads:


                                                                            0
   = 0 +  +  ( ) +  ( ) ∗  +   +  Γ +  +  (2)

       This RD-type design (see Imbens and Lemieux (2008); Lee and Lemieux (2010)) exploits
the discontinuity in the quality of national institutions at the border to identify institutions’
local average treatment eﬀect (LATE).14 The underlying idea is that by comparing regional
development in the historical homeland of the same ethnicity exactly at the border, where only
the quality of national institutions diﬀers, one accounts for all characteristics that may aﬀect
regional development. The results from Table 4 suggest that there are no diﬀerences in geog-
raphy, ecology, and natural resources within ethnic partitions. Previous research has employed
variants of the regression equation (2) using diﬀerent control functions of the running variable
(distance to the border in our application) and limiting estimation close to the discontinuity
using diﬀerent neighborhoods (bandwidth). At the one end, some researchers use all observa-
tions, both far and close to the discontinuity, as this approach maximizes the sample and is
more eﬃcient (e.g. Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004)). On the other end, others estimate local
  14
    Strictly speaking we do not have a discrete "treatment" group since the national institutions variable is
continuous. We also estimated specifications defining indicator variables that take on the value 1 in the country
where the rule of law and the control of corruption measures are relatively higher. The results (not reported for
brevity) are similar.



                                                       23
linear regressions limiting their analysis to an area close to the discontinuity (e.g. Angrist and
Lavy (2001)). Table 5 presents estimates with both approaches. Panel  reports estimates
with a global polynomial control function using all pixels belonging to partitioned ethnicities.
Panel  reports local linear regression estimates narrowing the analysis in areas close to the
border using a cutoﬀ of 25 and 50 on each side of the border.


       Global Polynomial Function Approach In Table 5 Panel  the sample size is 454
partitions since we focus on the two major partitions of each of the 227 split groups. The cross-
sectional estimates in columns (1) and (5) on the rule of law and the control for corruption
indicators are positive and more than 3 standard errors larger than zero. The respective
coeﬃcients are comparable to the analogous estimates in Table 3 where we did not include the
RD polynomial in distance to the border and its interactions with the national institutions.
Nevertheless, once we include ethnicity fixed eﬀects (in columns (2) and (6)) the estimates
drop and become statistically indistinguishable from zero. The same pattern applies when we
control for geography, natural resources, location, and the ecology of the terrain (in (3), (4),
(7), and (8)). Across all permutations the within-ethnicity estimate on national institutions
is insignificant and in all but one instance the two-standard-error band excludes the between-
ethnicity estimates.


       Local Linear Regressions In Panel  we restrict estimation in the ethnic areas close
to the border using either a 25 buﬀer zone (in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8)) or a 50 buﬀer
zone (in (1)-(2) and (5)-(6)) on each side of the border. When we limit our attention to these
regions the polynomial terms and their interactions with the national institutions measures are
insignificant; thus we omit them from the specification noticing that this has no eﬀect on the
results.
       The local-regression estimates yield results similar to those in Tables 3 and 5 where
we used all pixels of the ethnic homelands partitioned by national boundaries. While in the
cross section there is a strong positive association between national institutions and regional
development, once we account for unobserved cultural and geographic features focusing on the
sides of the border populated by the same ethnic group, the within-ethnicity coeﬃcients of
rule of law and control for corruption become statistically indistinguishable from zero. For
example, the cross-sectional estimate in the rule of law index is around 065 when we focus
on the areas within 25 and a 50 from the borders. Its magnitude drops by more than
two thirds once we add ethnicity fixed eﬀects and becomes insignificant casting doubt on the
causal interpretation of the simple cross-sectional association between national institutional
quality and regional development. Similar to our previous estimates the insignificance is not

                                               24
driven by an increase in the standard errors. In all permutations two-standard-error bands in
the within-ethnicity estimates reported in the even-numbered columns exclude the analogous
cross-sectional ones in the odd-numbered columns.

3.4     Sensitivity Analysis
3.4.1    Migration

African scholars and anecdotal evidence suggest that national boundaries across Africa are
poorly enforced; this is due to poor demarcation, geographic conditions (desert areas in the
North, rainforest in Central Africa), and lack of border patrolling. This poses a threat to
our identification strategy. If people migrate to take advantage of higher incomes in regions
with higher levels of institutional quality, mobility across national boundaries may attenuate
income diﬀerences across the border. Furthermore, to the extent that mobility barriers are
lower within the same ethnicity compared to moving across diﬀerent ethnic homelands, once
we focus within the same ethnic group, then the ease of mobility would further attenuate
any diﬀerences in regional development caused by changes in the national level institutions.
This scenario predicts that if institutions matter, then as a result of the migration towards
the partitions located in the high institutional quality country, population density should be
systematically higher in the latter. Alternatively it may be the case that population in the
low institutional quality country clusters near the border to migrate to the high institutional
quality country every day to work. Although we have controlled for population density, we
explore in detail the issue of migration with two diﬀerent approaches.
        First, in Table 6 we directly examine the eﬀect of national institutions on population
density using data from the United Nations Environmental Programme.15 There seems to be no
systematic association between the quality of national institutions and log population density
in border areas where partitioned ethnicities reside; this applies both to the cross-sectional and
the within-ethnicity estimation, suggesting that the insignificant within-ethnicity relationship
between country-level institutions and regional development is not driven by migration. Note
also that the coeﬃcient is small and even changes sign across permutations. Moreover, to the
extent that population density reflects regional development, the insignificant within-ethnicity
  15
     The UNEP dataset imputes population at the grid level using information on roads,
railroads and navigable rivers as well as information on urban centers (see details at:
http://na.unep.net/siouxfalls/globalpop/africa/part2.html#construct).       To further assuage concerns re-
lated to measurement error in the population estimates, we also experimented with an alternative measure
from the Gridded Population of the World (http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/) which does not reallocate
the population, finding again no association between national institutional quality and population density.
Concerns of measurement error in the population density are further toned down because in line with a large
body of work in African historiography we do find a positive association between pre-colonial ethnic institutions
and contemporary population density (see Supplementary Appendix Table 7).



                                                       25
coeﬃcient on rule of law and control of corruption provides additional evidence that national
level institutions are not systematically related to regional economic performance.
        Second, we re-estimated our benchmark specifications associating light density with na-
tional institutions across partitioned ethnic homelands excluding areas very close to the border.
Doing so we account for potential temporary migration flows across the border as well as for
local trade around border regions. By excluding pixels close to the national border we also
account for potential stealing and bleeding (and/or blooming) in the luminosity data. Ta-
ble 6 reports cross-sectional (in odd-numbered columns) and within-ethnicity specifications
(in even-numbered columns) associating satellite light density and national institutions across
partitioned ethnic groups excluding the areas close to the border. In columns (1), (2), (5),
and (6) we exclude areas within 25 kilometers from each side of the national border (total 50
kilometers), while in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we exclude from each side regions within
50 kilometers of the national boundary (total 100 kilometers). The results are similar to the
estimates in Tables 3 and 5. While in the cross section there is a strong positive correla-
tion between institutional quality and luminosity, the coeﬃcient drops sizably and becomes
statistically indistinguishable from zero when we add ethnicity fixed eﬀects.

3.4.2    Penetration of National Institutions

African historians and political scientists (e.g. Herbst (2000)) have long argued that the Eu-
ropean’s presence in Africa with some exceptions was limited to the coastline and the capital
cities. Hence, colonial institutional arrangements, reflected through persistence on today’s in-
stitutional quality, would have limited reach far from the capital cities. Along the same lines,
several scholars have argued that due to the lack of the necessary infrastructure (roads, trans-
portation system) and limited state capacity, nationwide institutions have minimal impact far
from the capital cities.16 We explore this hypothesis searching for potential heterogeneous
eﬀects of national institutions in ethnic areas far and close from the capital cities.
        Table 7 reports estimates with the two RD approaches, the global polynomial control
function approach in columns (1) and (2) and the local linear regression method in columns (3)
and (4). In Panel  we focus on two-way split ethnic groups which have both their partitions
close to or far from the capital city (using as a threshold the median distance from the respective
capital city). The cross-sectional correlation between rule of law and luminosity is twice as
  16
     Herbst (2000; pp. 16) notes that "rather systematically, Europeans created capitals that moved power toward
the ocean and away from the interior centers of power that Africans had slowly created ". Herbst lists many
examples where colonizers decided to ignore local needs and established capital cities outside preexisting polities.
As extreme examples he lists Mauritania and Bechunaland (Botswana) that were ruled during colonization by
capitals outside their nominal territories (Saint-Louis and Mafeking, respectively). Moving the location of the
capital was a key question for African leaders at independence. Yet with a few exceptions (Tanzania, Malawi,
and Nigeria), most countries did not relocate the capital city.


                                                        26
strong for partitions close to the capital vis a vis partitions far from the capital. When we
add ethnicity fixed eﬀects in columns (2) and (4) the coeﬃcients of interest drop by more than
50% and become insignificant at conventional levels. Similar pattern obtains when we use all
partitioned groups in Panel . In columns (1) and (2) we focus on the two major partitions
of all split groups and in columns (3) and (4) we use all 526 partitions. The cross-sectional
coeﬃcient on rule of law is positive and significant whereas the interaction between capital
distance and rule of law is negative. For example, combining the coeﬃcients of column (1) of
Panel B we get that for ethnic partitions that are further than 1 070 kilometers from the capital
city (this is the case for 10% of the partitions) the cross-sectional correlation is statistically
insignificant.
        The evidence is consistent with works from the African historiography that stress the
limited penetration of national institutions far from the capital cities and it complements the
literature on optimal country size (e.g. Alesina and Spolaore (2003)) and state capacity (e.g.
Acemoglu (2005); Besley and Persson (2009, 2010)). Finally, the diminishing eﬀect of national
institutions cautions against generalizing the finding on the non-eﬀect of national institutions
for areas around the capital cities in Africa.17

3.4.3    Further Robustness Checks

We performed several sensitivity checks to explore the robustness of the sharp diﬀerence be-
tween the cross-sectional and the within-ethnicity estimates.


        Sub-Saharan Africa only First, we repeat estimation excluding North Africa from
the analysis to account for the diﬀerent timing and type of colonization. The Europeans had
established relationships from the ancient times with North Africa while contacts with most
Sub-Saharan regions were limited till mid-19th century. Appendix Table 1 reports the results.
The cross-sectional coeﬃcient on national institutions is quite similar to the estimate in the
full sample (Table 3). Yet once we include ethnicity fixed eﬀects, the coeﬃcients on rule of law
and control of corruption decline significantly and become statistically indistinguishable from
zero.


        Large diﬀerences in institutional quality Second, we explore whether the lack of
within-ethnicity correlation between national institutions and regional development is driven
by the small diﬀerences in institutional quality among African countries. In Appendix Table 2
  17
     Measurement error in the institutional quality index may also explain the weakening correlation between rule
of law and regional development in areas far from the capital. Since most institutional variables are measured
in the capital cities capturing the rules governing activities of the formal economy, they might not reflect very
accurately the institutional features in rural areas that depend on agriculture (Pande and Udry (2006)).


                                                       27
we report specifications estimated for two-way partitioned ethnic groups residing across country
pairs with large (defined as higher than the median) diﬀerences in rule of law. Once again while
the cross-sectional correlation between rule of law or control of corruption and log light density
is positive and significant, it weakens considerably and becomes insignificant when we include
ethnicity fixed eﬀects.


       Cross-validation with Ethnologue’s language mapping Third, we repeat the
analysis using the mapping of languages by Ethnologue (2005)’s WLMS (2006) database that
reports the spatial distribution of linguistic groups in the early/mid 1990s.18 The advantage of
using a contemporary dataset is that it is likely to contain less error than Murdock’s pre-colonial
map. The disadvantage is that the current location of ethnic groups is likely to have been
aﬀected by the border drawing and the quality of (colonial and national) institutions. Appendix
Table 3 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity specifications; we control always for a third-
order RD polynomial of distance to the border and we also condition on log population density.
Specifications (1)-(4) are estimated across ethnic groups that are partitioned between two
countries.19 Ethnic partitions belonging to the relatively more institutionally developed country
are also more economically developed. However, once we condition on ethnicity fixed eﬀects the
coeﬃcients on the rule of law and the control for corruption measures drop substantially and
become statistically insignificant. The pattern is similar in columns (5)-(8), where we include
all partitioned ethnic groups and focus on the two major partitions.


       Cross-validation with Afrobarometer data Fourth, using household data from
the Afrobarometer survey we examined whether diﬀerences across the border on household’s
access to piped water and education are correlated with diﬀerences in national institutions.
Unfortunately data coverage is limited and we end up having only 32 ethnic groups that are
partitioned across the 17 countries that Afrobarometer covers. Nevertheless, it is useful re-
peating the analysis to cross-validate our estimates based on satellite images with micro-data.
Appendix Table 4 reports the results. In columns (1)-(4) the dependent variable takes the
value of 1 if a household located in the historical homeland of a partitioned ethnic group  in
country  has access to piped water. In columns (5)-(8) the dependent variable equals 1 if the
respondent reports having some formal education. The cross-sectional estimates in columns (1)
and (3) reveal that household’s access to clean water is greater in countries scoring higher in
the two institutional quality proxies. However, once we add ethnicity fixed eﬀects in columns
  18
     We thank an anonymous referee for proposing this cross-validation check.
  19
     According to the Ethnologue, there are a few regions where linguistic groups overlap. Hence, the statistics
for each partition are derived excluding such regions. Including these areas yields similar results.



                                                      28
(2) and (4) to exploit across-the-border variation among households of the same ethnic group,
this relationship weakens considerably and even reverses sign. We obtain a similar pattern,
albeit less precisely estimated, once we examine the within-ethnicity association between edu-
cation and national institutions. The micro-based results with the Afrobarometer data suggest
that our benchmark estimates with satellite light density as the dependent variable are not an
artifact of the luminosity data.


4        Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Development
4.1      Benchmark Estimates

The preliminary results in Table 2 reveal a significant association between the complexity
of pre-colonial political structures and regional development. The correlation between pre-
colonial ethnic institutions and regional development retained significance when we controlled
for geography, the disease environment and urbanization. Yet the positive correlation between
local institutions and regional development may be driven by country-level characteristics,
reflecting national policies, or the type of colonization, etc. In Table 8 we estimate within-
country specifications associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions.
Panel  reports estimates using all observations, while in Panel  we focus on the intensive
margin.


         Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond the Local Community Level The coeﬃcient
on the jurisdictional hierarchy index in column (1) is 033 and more than three standard
deviations larger than zero.20 The estimates are only slightly smaller than the analogous
unconditional specifications (reported in Table 2 column (5)), suggesting that common-to-all-
ethnicities country factors are not driving the positive correlation. In column (2) we augment
the specification with distance to the coast, distance to the border, distance from the capital
and the rich set of geographic controls. The coeﬃcient on the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond
the local community level retains its statistical and economic significance. In column (3)
we control for population density only, while in column (4) we control jointly for geography,
location and population density. The estimate on the jurisdictional hierarchy index retains
statistical significance, although it falls by almost a half; this is not surprising as according to the
African historiography (see Stevenson (1968), Herbst (2000)) there is a strong interplay between
    20
    Note that in the pre-colonial sample when we add country fixed eﬀects we lose one observation (instead
of 683 observations of column (5) in Table 2 we have 682 ethnicity-country observations). This is because for
Swaziland we have only one group with information on pre-colonial institutions, the Swazi.




                                                     29
geography, population density and political complexity.21 The most conservative estimate
in Panel  of Table 8 implies that across lit ethnic area, regional development increases by
approximately 45 percent when one moves from the homeland of a stateless society (e.g. Luo
in Uganda) to the historical homeland of an ethnicity with a hierarchical political structure
beyond the local level (e.g. Ganda in Uganda).


       Political Centralization In columns (5) and (8) we use an alternative binary indica-
tor of pre-colonial institutions, based on the jurisdictional hierarchy index. Following Gennaioli
and Rainer (2006, 2007) we construct a dummy variable of pre-colonial political centralization
(statehood) that takes the value of zero when Murdock’s jurisdictional hierarchy indicates that
the tribe lacks a centralized political organization or is part of a small chiefdom. Experiment-
ing with the re-scaled index is useful, because the aggregation may account for measurement
error in the jurisdictional hierarchy index.22 Moreover, the binary classification is more in line
with the distinction of African ethnic political systems into strong ones, "which have central-
ized authority, administrative machinery, and judicial institutions" and societies lacking such
structures (Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940)).23 The within-country coeﬃcient on the po-
litical centralization indicator variable is positive and highly significant. The estimate retains
significance, when we control for geography (in (6)), current levels of population density (in (7))
or both (in (8)). The magnitude of political centralization in column (8) in Panel  suggests
that luminosity is 30 percent ((026) − 1 = 030) higher in ethnic homelands where politi-
cally centralized societies reside (e.g. Yoruba in Nigeria), as compared to stateless societies or
small chiefdoms (e.g. the Sokoto or the Tiv in Nigeria).
       Overall, these results advance the findings of Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), by showing
that even when one accounts for regional geographic endowments and country fixed eﬀects,
the correlation between pre-colonial political centralization and regional development remains
  21
     Note that since population density may be both a cause and an eﬀect of ethnic institutions, the specifications
where we also control for population density (in (3), (4), (7), and (8)) should be carefully interpreted. Following
Angrist and Pishcke’s (2008) recommendation we also used lagged (at independence) population density as a
control. In these models (not reported) the estimates on the ethnic institutions measures are somewhat larger
(and always significant at the 95% confidence level).
  22
     To further examine the impact of precolonial local institutions, we estimated specifications with four indicator
variables that take on the value one when the jurisdictional hierarchy index takes the value 1, 2, 3, and 4
respectively and zero otherwise (the omitted category consists of stateless societies). In line with the results
of Table 8 the unrestricted specifications with the four indicator variables show that the higher the degree of
pre-colonial centralization the higher light density is today.
  23
     Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940) argue that "the political systems fall into two main categories. One group
consists of those societies which have centralized authority, administrative machinery, and judicial institutions-
in short, a government-and in which cleavages of wealth, privilege, and status correspond to the distribution of
power and authority. This group comprises the Zulu, the Ngwato, the Bemba, the Banyankole, and the Kede. The
other group consists of those societies which lack centralized authority, administrative machinery, and judicial
institutions-in short which lack government-and in which there are no sharp divisions of rank, status, or wealth.
This group comprises the Logoli, the Tallensi, and the Nuer."


                                                         30
strong. The estimates are supportive of an old conjecture among African scholars that dates
at least back to Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940) on the importance of pre-colonial ethnic
institutions in the process of African development. Moreover, these results are in line with the
cross-country evidence of Bockstette, Chanda, and Putterman (2002) on the role of statehood
experience on contemporary development.

4.2    Institutions or Other Ethnic Traits?

One concern with the estimates in Table 8 is that some other deeply-rooted ethnic feature, re-
lated to the organization of the economy, social norms, early development, or societal structure,
is driving the positive correlation between luminosity and pre-colonial political centralization.
We thus examined whether political centralization rather than some other ethnic trait corre-
lates with contemporary development utilizing information from Murdock (1967). In Table 9
we report within-country specifications associating log light density with around twenty diﬀer-
ent variables from Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas (see the Data Appendix for detailed variable
definitions);24 these measures reflect the type of economic activity (dependence on gathering,
hunting, fishing, animal husbandry, milking of domesticated animals, and agriculture), societal
arrangements (polygyny, presence of clans at the village level, slavery), early development (size
and complexity of pre-colonial settlements), and some proxies of local institutional arrange-
ments (namely an indicator for the presence of property rights, elections for local headman,
ethnic class stratification and jurisdictional hierarchy within the local community).
       In Specification  (reported in the first two columns) we regress regional light density
on the ethnic-level variables, simply conditioning on country fixed eﬀects and on population
density (the results are similar if we omit population density). Most of the additional variables
enter with statistically indistinguishable from zero estimates. An indicator that takes the value
1 for societies that fishing contributes more than 5% in the pre-colonial economy enters with
a positive coeﬃcient as current economic development is higher in areas close to the sea and
other streams and potentially because of blooming. An agricultural intensity index ranging
from 0 to 9 where higher values indicate higher dependence is negative and significant but the
correlation between pre-colonial agricultural intensity and regional development is not robust
to an alternative index of agricultural intensity. More importantly, the results in columns
(1)-(2) show that ethnic class stratification, a societal trait that has been linked to property
rights protection (e.g. Rudmin (1995)), correlates significantly with luminosity, suggesting that
regional development is higher in areas where historically highly stratified societies reside. The
   24
      Murdock (1967) reports data on around 60 variables. We include in the analysis around 20 because, there are
a lot of missing observations for the remaining variables. We are grateful to an anonymous referee for proposing
this test.



                                                       31
positive association between class stratification and regional development, though surprising
at first glance, is in line with recent works in Latin America (e.g. Acemoglu, Bautista, Queru-
bin, and Robinson (2008), Naritomi, Soares, and Assunção (2009), Dell (2010)). The main
explanation is that in weakly institutionalized societies inequality may lead to some form of
property rights protection, as the elite has the incentive to establish constraints (see Goldstein
and Udry (2008) who show a positive link between political power inside the local community
(class stratification) and land tenure (property rights) in rural Gambian communities).
       In Specification , reported in columns (3)-(5), we add the jurisdictional hierarchy be-
yond the local community index to test whether pre-colonial ethnic political centralization
correlates with current regional development conditional on the other historical ethnic traits.
In all specifications the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community level index enters
with a positive and quite stable coeﬃcient (around 020). The estimate is always significant
at standard confidence levels (usually at the 99% level). The results in Table 9 imply that the
positive within-country association between the complexity of pre-colonial political institutions
and contemporary regional development is not driven by other deeply rooted ethnic traits.

4.3    Contiguous-Ethnic-Homeland Analysis

Another concern with the within-country estimates in Tables 8 and 9 is that in spite of employ-
ing a rich conditioning set, some unobservable geographic conditions are driving the results. To
account for this in Table 10 we report results from a contiguous-homelands analysis where we
compare regional development across adjacent ethnicities with diﬀerent degrees of pre-colonial
political centralization.25 This approach is conceptually similar to the framework employed
to estimate the role of national institutions across the border. The idea behind this type of
adjacent-region analysis is that it will neutralize the eﬀect of hard-to-account-for geographi-
cal/ecological features that vary smoothly across contiguous areas. Our specification reads:

                                                            0
                             ∆ = 0 + ∆  + ∆ Φ +  

       The dependent variable is the diﬀerence in log luminosity between the historical homeland
of ethnicity  and the adjacent ethnic homeland of ethnicity .26 The estimate of interest is
the  coeﬃcient, i.e. the diﬀerence in the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community
index between ethnicity  and the contiguous ethnic group . Panel  reports estimates without
  25
     In some sense this approach extends the pioneering case study of Douglas (1962), who attributed the large
diﬀerences in well-being between the Bushong and the Lele to their local institutions. We are thankful to Jim
Robinson for providing us with this reference.
  26
     Note that in the adjacent-ethnic-group regressions the unit of analysis are pairs of ethnic homelands for
which there is information on pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy, see Figure 7. So, all relevant statistics are
derived at the ethnicity level. For example, ∆ = ln(001 +  ) − ln(001 +  )


                                                        32
conditioning on (diﬀerences in) log population density while in Panel  we control for diﬀerences
in log population density.
      In columns (1) and (2) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups
to examine how diﬀerences in jurisdictional hierarchy translate into diﬀerences in regional devel-
opment. The estimates show that luminosity is significantly higher in the historical homeland of
ethnicities with more complex pre-colonial political institutions. Controlling in column (2) for
diﬀerences in location, geography/ecology, and natural resources has no eﬀect on the estimate
in diﬀerences in pre-colonial ethnic institutions. In columns (3) and (4) we repeat the analysis
requiring that both contiguous ethnic areas ( and ) are in the same country. While we lose
a quarter of our sample the results remain intact. Regional development is significantly higher
in ethnic homelands where tribes with centralized pre-colonial institutions reside, as compared
to their neighboring groups within the same country lacking strong pre-colonial institutions.
      In columns (5)-(6) and (7)-(8) we restrict our analysis to contiguous areas where ethnici-
ties with large diﬀerences in jurisdictional hierarchy reside. This allows to account for potential
measurement error in Murdock’s data; it is also useful checking whether large diﬀerences in
pre-colonial institutions translate in significant diﬀerences in contemporary development. In
columns (5)-(6) we require a diﬀerence of at least two levels in the jurisdictional hierarchy in-
dex between neighboring ethnicities, while in (7)-(8) we compare development between adjacent
ethnic groups with the maximum diﬀerence in the respective index of pre-colonial institutions
(i.e. ∆  = 3 −3). The results show that there is a strong positive correlation
between diﬀerences in luminosity and diﬀerences in the degree of pre-colonial political institu-
tions. A couple of examples illustrate the results. In South Africa the average luminosity in
the historical homeland of the Sotho, a highly centralized group is 068, while luminosity in
the neighboring ethnic homeland of the Xam, a stateless society (Murdock’s measure equals
zero) is 013. Likewise, in Burkina Faso the average luminosity in the homeland of the Mossi,
the dominant ethnic group of the pre-colonial Mossi empire that gets a score of 3 in the juris-
dictional hierarchy index, is 027, while it is ten times smaller (0027) in the adjacent ethnic
area of the Samo that lack any level of political authority beyond the local community. Sim-
ilarly, average luminosity in the homeland of the Ganda, the central ethnic group of a strong
kingdom in Uganda that had a centralized authority (under the kabaka/king), is much higher
(048) compared to the neighboring territory of the stateless Lango (0023).
      It is important to note that in both Panels of Table 10 the introduction of geographic
and location controls across specifications does not aﬀect the stability of the coeﬃcient on the
diﬀerences in political complexity. This pattern assuages (albeit not entirely resolves) concerns
that the positive correlation between pre-colonial ethnic institutions and regional development


                                                33
is driven by unobserved characteristics related to local endowments and geography.

4.4   Sensitivity Checks

We performed several sensitivity checks to explore the robustness of the strong positive cor-
relation between pre-colonial political complexity and contemporary regional development. In
Appendix Tables 5, 6 and 7 the first four columns focus on the ethnic-country sample (and
are thus comparable to Table 8) whereas columns (5)-(8) employ pairs of adjacent ethnicities
(hence comparable to Table 10).


      Sub-Saharan Africa only First, we repeat estimation dropping North Africa. Ap-
pendix Table 5 reports a series of specifications illustrating that the positive correlation between
the jurisdictional hierarchy index and luminosity is not driven by groups located in North Africa.


      Capital Cities Second, we estimated specifications excluding ethnic homelands where
capital cities are located. This robustness check is motivated by the observation that capital
cities are populated by people from several ethnic groups and thus the ethnic-specific index
of jurisdictional hierarchy index may be inappropriate. Moreover, by excluding areas where
capitals fall, we account for outliers in the dependent variable. The results reported in Appendix
Table 6 suggest that the positive correlation between pre-colonial political centralization and
regional development remains intact.


      Population Density Third, we examined the eﬀect of pre-colonial ethnic institu-
tions on population density. Appendix Table 7 reports the results. While urbanization has
been linked to the emergence of complex political institutions before colonization (see Hopkins
(1973)) and thus these estimates may suﬀer from endogeneity, it is useful to see whether eth-
nic institutions correlate with contemporary population density for a couple of reasons. First,
in the African context one could think of population density as an alternative to luminosity
proxy of development. Second, in light of the lack of systematic relationship between national
institutions and population density (Table 6), one may worry that classical-error-in variables
or systematic biases in the construction of the population estimates at a fine grid somewhat
explain our results. The estimates in Appendix Table 7 show that there is a strong correlation
between pre-colonial ethnic institutions and contemporary population density across groups as
well as within pairs of adjacent ethnicities.




                                                34
5    Conclusion
We study the role of institutional quality in shaping contemporary comparative development in
Africa focusing both on formal nationwide structures and informal ethnic-specific arrangements.
We perform our analysis at the regional level utilizing anthropological and historical data on
the spatial distribution and local institutions of African ethnicities at the time of colonization.
To circumvent data unavailability on regional development in Africa we use satellite data
on light density at night to measure economic performance across ethnic areas. Exploiting
within-ethnicity across-country variation on contemporary country level institutions as well as
within-country across-ethnicity variation in ethnic pre-colonial institutions, we document new
empirical regularities on the role of institutional structures on African development.
      First, our cross-sectional specifications reveal a positive correlation between contempora-
neous nationwide institutions and regional development. Yet this correlation does not identify
the one-way eﬀect of the rule of law on development, as besides reverse causation there could
be other country or local characteristics that aﬀect both institutional and economic outcomes.
To push on the identification front, we take advantage of the fact that the arbitrarily drawn
national boundaries across the African landscape partitioned groups in diﬀerent countries, thus
subjecting identical cultures to diﬀerent country-level institutions. The analysis uncovers that
diﬀerences in economic performance within ethnic groups partitioned across diﬀerent countries
cannot be explained by countrywide diﬀerences in institutional quality. While this result does
not necessarily generalize to areas far from the national borders or other parts of the world,
it casts doubt on the causal interpretation of the cross-country positive correlation between
institutional quality and economic development in Africa.
      Second, we explore the significant heterogeneity of historical ethnic institutions and
examine their role on regional development. In line with an influential conjecture among
African scholars, we show that ethnic pre-colonial institutions correlate significantly with con-
temporary regional development, even when we control for geography at a fine level, country-
characteristics, and other ethnic traits. Since we do not have random assignment on ethnic
institutions, this correlation does not necessarily imply causation. Yet our result provides large-
scale formal econometric evidence in support of the African historiography that emphasizes the
importance of ethnic institutions and other historical features in shaping economic performance
suggesting that research on African development needs to focus at the ethnicity rather than
the country level.
      Moreover, our codification of partitioned ethnic groups and the combination of high reso-
lution proxies of development (such as satellite light density at night) with historical measures
on culture and institutions provide a platform for subsequent research. One could employ


                                                35
our approach to shed light on the perennial debate regarding the fundamental determinants
of comparative economic development across countries; examining for example the eﬀect of
human capital, public policies, and democracy on economic performance in areas close to the
national borders. Moreover, one could investigate how pre-colonial ethnic features interact with
contemporary public policies to determine regional development.




                                              36
6     Data Appendix
6.1   Variables at the ethnicity-country level

Light Density at Night: Light Density is calculated averaging light density observations
across pixels that fall within the unit of analysis. We use the average of the values in 2007 and
2008. In the regressions we use Log (0.01 + Average Luminosity) or Log (Average Luminosity).
Source: Available at http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/dmsp/global_composites_v2.html.
      Population Density: Log (0.01 + population density per sq. km. in 2000 and in 1960).
Source: Nelson, Andy, 2004. African Population Database Documentation, UNEP GRID Sioux
Falls. Available at: http://na.unep.net/siouxfalls/datasets/datalist.php
      Water Area: Log (1 + total area within an ethnic group district covered by rivers or
lakes in sq. km.). Source: Constructed using the "Inland water area features" dataset from
Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA. Global Ministry Mapping
System.
      Elevation: Average elevation in km. Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration (NOAA) and U.S. National Geophysical Data Center, TerrainBase, release 1.0 (CD-
ROM), Boulder, Colorado. http://www.sage.wisc.edu/atlas/data.php?incdataset=Topography
      Land Suitability for Agriculture: Average land quality for cultivation within the area
of each ethnic-country observation. The index is the product of two components capturing the
climatic (mean monthly temperature and precipitation between 1961-1990) and soil suitability
for cultivation. Source: Michalopoulos (2011); Original Source: Atlas of the Biosphere.
Available at http://www.sage.wisc.edu/iamdata/grid_data_sel.php.
      Malaria Stability Index: The index takes into account the prevalence and type of
mosquitoes indigenous to a region, their human biting rate, their daily survival rate, and their
incubation period. The index has been constructed for 05 degree by 05 degree grid-cells
globally. Source: Kiszewski, Mellinger, Spielman, Malaney, Sachs, and Sachs (2004)
      Distance to the Capital City: The geodesic distance of the centroid of each ethnic
group in a country from the capital city of the country it belongs, measured in 1000 of km’s.
Source: Calculated using the Haversine formula.
      Distance to the Sea Coast: The geodesic distance of the centroid of each ethnic group
in a country from the nearest coastline, measured in 1000 of km’s. Source: Global Mapping In-
ternational, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA. Series name: Global Ministry Mapping System.
Series issue: Version 3.0
      Distance to the Border: The geodesic distance of the centroid of each ethnic group
in a country from the closest border, measured in 1000 of km’s. Source: Calculated using the
Haversine formula.

                                               37
      Petroleum: Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if an oil field is found
in the region of ethnic group  in country . Source: The Petroleum Dataset v.1.1 contains
information on all known on-shore oil and gas deposits throughout the world.
http://www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/Geographical-and-Resource/Petroleum-Dataset/Petroleum-
Dataset-v11/
      Diamond: Indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a diamond mine is
found in the region of ethnic group  in country . Source: Map of Diamond Resources.
www.prio.no/CSCW/Datasets/Geographical-and-Resource/Diamond-Resources/
      Education: Average education across respondents living in homeland  in country 
The education categories across which ethnic-level education is estimated are the following:
(i) no formal schooling, (ii) informal schooling only, (iii) some primary schooling, (iv) primary
school completed, (v) some secondary school/high school, (vi) secondary school completed/high
school, (vii) postsecondary qualifications, but no university, (viii) some university, (ix) univer-
sity completed, and (x) postgraduate.
      Source: Afrobarometer available at http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/nunn/data_nunn
      Access to piped water: Percentage of respondents with access to piped water living
in homeland  in country 
      Source: Afrobarometer available at http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/nunn/data_nunn

6.2   Country-level variables

Rule of Law: The index is "capturing perceptions of the extent to which agents have confi-
dence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement,
property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence." The
standardized index ranges from −25 to +25 with higher values indicating better functioning
institutions. Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufman, Kraay,
and Mastruzzi (2005)). available at: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp
      Control of Corruption: Index on the control of corruption "capturing perceptions
of the extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and
grand forms of corruption, as well as capture of the state by elites and private interests." The
standardized index ranges from −25 to +25 with lower values indicating a higher degree of
corruption. Source: World Bank Governance Matters Indicators Database (Kaufman, Kraay,
and Mastruzzi (2005)). available at: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp




                                                38
6.3   Pre-colonial Ethnicity-level variables

Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community: Ordered variable ranging from 0
to 4 indicating the number of jurisdictional levels (political complexity) in each society above
the local level. A 0 indicates stateless societies, 1 and 2 indicate petty and large paramount
chiefdoms (or their equivalent), 3 and 4 indicate large states. Source: Murdock (1967); vari-
able code in the Entholinguistic Atlas v33; A revised version of Murdock’s Atlas has been made
available by J. Patrick Gray at:
http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/EthnographicAtlasWCRevisedByWorldCultures.sav.
      Centralization Indicator: This binary index takes the value 0 if the Jurisdictional
Hierarchy beyond Local Community variable equals 0 or 1. The index takes on the value 1
if the Jurisdictional Hierarchy Beyond Local Community variable equals 2, 3, and 4. This
aggregation follows Gennaioli and Rainer (2006, 2007). Source: Murdock (1967).
      Gathering: Binary index that indicates the reliance of the economy on "the collection
of wild plans and small land fauna." The index equals zero when the dependence is between
0% and 5%; the index equals one when dependence is greater than 5% dependence. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v1.
      Hunting: Binary index that indicates the intensity in hunting (including trapping and
fowling). The index equals zero when the dependence is between 0% and 5%; the index equals
one when dependence is greater than 5%. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethno-
graphic Atlas v2.
      Fishing: Binary index that indicates the intensity in fishing (including shell fishing and
the pursuit of large aquatic animals). The index equals zero when the dependence is between
0% and 5%; the index equals one when dependence is greater than 5%. Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v3.
      Animal Husbandry: Binary index that indicates the "care and tending of domestic
animals, including milking". The index equals zero when the dependence is between 0% and
5%; the index equals one when dependence is greater than 5%. Source: Murdock (1967);
variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v4.
      Milking: Binary index that equals zero when "domestic animals are milked more often
that sporadically" and zero when "little or no milking". Source: Murdock (1967); variable code
in the Ethnographic Atlas v41.
      Agriculture: 0 − 9 scale index reflecting the intensity of agriculture. "It includes
penetration of the soil, planting, tending the growing crops, and harvesting but not subsequent
food preparation". The index equals 0 when there 0% − 5% dependence; 1 when there is
6% − 15% dependence; 2 when there is 16% − 25% dependence; 3 when there is 26% − 35%


                                              39
dependence; 4 when there is 36% − 45% dependence; 5 when there is 46% − 55% dependence;
6 when there is 56% − 65% dependence; 7 when there is 66% − 75% dependence; 8 when there
is 76% − 85% dependence; and 9 when there is 86% − 100% dependence. Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v5.
      Agriculture Type: 0 − 4 scale index reflecting the type of agriculture. The index
equals 0 when there is "no agriculture"; 1 when there is "causal agriculture"; 2 when there is
"extensive or shifting agriculture"; 3 when there is "intensive agriculture"; and 4 when there
is "intensive irrigated agriculture." Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic
Atlas v28.
      Polygyny: Indicator that equals one when polygyny is practised and zero otherwise.
The indicator equals one when the original variable indicates that polygyny is common and
when large extended families are present. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethno-
graphic Atlas v8.
      Alternative Polygyny: Alternative indicator that equals one when polygyny is prac-
tised and zero otherwise, based on Murdock’s domestic organization variable. The indicator
equals zero when "independent nuclear, monogamous families" are the norm and one when
polygyny is common. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v9; the
construction of the variable follows Fenske (2009).
      Clan Communities: Indicator that equals one when Murdock’s community marriage
organization variable (v15 ) equals 6 ("clan communities or clan barrios") and zero otherwise.
Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v15.
      Settlement Pattern: Ordered variable ranging from 1 to 8 quantifying "settlement pat-
tern of each group". 1 indicates fully nomadic (migratory) groups, 2 indicates semi-nomadic, 3
indicates semi-sedentary, 4 identifies groups that live in compact and impermanent settlements,
5 indicates societies those in neighborhoods of dispersed family homes, 6 indicates for groups
in separated hamlets forming a single community, 7 indicates societies living in compact and
relatively permanent settlements, and 8 denotes the groups residing in complex settlements.
Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v30.
      Complex Settlements: Indicator that equals one for ethnicities living in compact and
relatively permanent settlements (30 = 7) or in complex settlements (30 = 8), and zero
otherwise. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v30.
      Patrilineal Descent Type: Indicator that equals one if the society is characterized by
patrilineal descent and zero otherwise. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethno-
graphic Atlas v43.
      Jurisdictional Hierarchy of Local Community: Ordered variable ranging from 0 to


                                              40
2 reflecting the hierarchy of local community organization. A zero score indicates the theoretical
minimum of two (e.g., family and band), while a score of 2 indicates the theoretical maximum
of four levels (e.g., nuclear family, extended family, clan barrio, village levels). Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v32.
      Class Stratification: Ordered variable ranging from 0 to 4 quantifying "the degree of
class diﬀerentiation, excluding purely political and religious statuses". A zero score indicates
"absence of significant class distinctions among freemen, ignoring variations in individual re-
pute achieved through skill, valor, piety, or wisdom." A score of 1 indicates "the presence
of wealth distinctions, based on possession or distribution of property, which however have not
crystallized into distinct and hereditary social classes." A score of 2 indicates "elite stratification
in which an elite class derives its superior status from control over scarce resources, particularly
land, and is thereby diﬀerentiated from a propertyless proletariat or serf class". A score of 3
indicates a "dual stratification into a hereditary aristocracy and a lower class of ordinary com-
moners or freemen, where traditionally ascribed noble status is at least as decisive as control
over scarce resources. A score of 4 indicates "complex stratification into social classes corre-
lated in large measure with extensive diﬀerentiation of occupational statuses." Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v67.
      Class Stratification Indicator: Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) we define a
dummy stratification index that equals zero when Murdock’s variable equals zero indicating
"absence of significant class distinctions among freemen, ignoring variations in individual re-
pute achieved through skill, valor, piety, or wisdom," and one when Murdock’s class stratifica-
tion measure equals 1, 2, 3, or 4. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic
Atlas v67.
      Elections: Indicator that equals 1 when succession to the oﬃce of the local headman is
conducted via "election or other formal consensus, nonhereditary" and zero otherwise. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v72.
      Slavery: Indicator that equals one when some type of slavery (hereditary, incipient, or
significant) is present and zero when there is absence or near absence. Source: Murdock (1967);
variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v70; the construction of the index follows Fenske (2009).
      Property Rights: Indicator that equals one when some form of inheritance rule of real
property (land) is present; the binary indicator equals zero when there is "absence of individual
property rights". Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v74; the
construction of the index follows Fenske (2009).




                                                  41
References
Acemoglu, D. (2005): “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 52(7), 1199—1226.

Acemoglu, D., M. A. Bautista, P. Querubin, and J. A. Robinson (2008): “Economic
  and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia,” in Insti-
  tutions and Economic Performance, ed. by E. Helpman. Harvard University Press.

Acemoglu, D., and M. Dell (2010): “Productivity Diﬀerences Between and Within Coun-
  tries,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1), 169—188.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2003): “An African Success Story:
  Botswana,” in In Search of Prosperity: Analytical Narrative on Economic Growth, ed. by
  D. Rodrik. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

        (2005): “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Handbook of
  Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf, pp. 109—139. Elsevier North-Holland,
  Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Acemoglu, D., D. Ticchi, and A. Vindigni (2011): “Emergence and Persistence of Ineﬃ-
  cient States,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(2), 177—208.

Alesina, A., W. Easterly, and J. Matuszeski (2011): “Artificial States,” Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 9(2), 246—277.

Alesina, A., and E. Spolaore (2003): The Size of Nations. MIT Press.

Angrist, J., and V. C. Lavy (2001): “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil
  Learning,” Economic Journal, 112, 735—765.

Angrist, J., and J.-S. Pischke (2008): Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton University
  Press, Princeton, NJ.

Arbesu, H. A. L. (2011): “Colonialism and Economic Development: Evidence from a Natural
  Experiment in Colonial Nigeria,” mimeo MIT.

Ashraf, Q., and O. Galor (2011): “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch:
  Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Asiwaju, A. (1985): “The Conceptual Framework,” in Partitioned Africans, pp. 1—18. St.
  Martin Press, New York.


                                            42
Banerjee, A., and L. Iyer (2005): “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The
  Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review, 95, 1190—
  1213.

Bates, R. H. (1981): States and Markets in Africa. University of California Press, Berkeley,
  CA.

          (1983): “Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality of Politics in
  Contemporary Africa,” in State versus Ethnic Claims: African Policy Dilemmas, ed. by
  D. Rothchild, and V. A. Olunsorola. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.

Berger, D. (2009): “Taxes, Institutions and Governance: Evidence from Colonial Nigeria,”
  mimeo, New York University.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2009): “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights,
  Taxation and Politics,” American Economic Review, 99, 1218—1244.

          (2010): “State Capacity, Conflict and Development,” Econometrica, 78(1), 1—34.

Bockstette, V., A. Chanda, and L. Putterman (2002): “States and Markets: The
  Advantage of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7(4), 347—369.

Boone, C. (2003): Political Topographies of the African State: Territorial Authority and
  Institutional Choice. Cambridge University Press.

Bubb, R. (2009): “States, Law, and Property Rights in West Africa,” Working Paper, New
  York University School of Law.

Cameron, C. A., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2006): “Robust Inference with Multi-Way
  Clustering,” NBER Technical Working Paper No. T0327.

Chen, X., and W. D. Nordhaus (2010): “The Value of Luminosity Data as a Proxy for
  Economic Statistics,” Working Paper, NBER, No. 16317.

Conley, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
  Econometrics, 92, 1—45.

Dell, M. (2010): “The Persistent Eﬀects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78(6), 839—
  857.

Doll, C. N., J.-P. Muller, and J. G. Morley (2006): “Mapping Regional Economic
  Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery,” Ecological Economics, 57, 75—92.


                                             43
Douglas, M. (1962): “Lele Economy Compared with the Bushong: A Study of Economic
  Backwardness,” in Markets in Africa, ed. by P. Bohannan, and G. Dalton, pp. 211—233.
  Northwestern University Press, Evanston, ILL.

Easterly, W., and R. Levine (2003): “Tropics, Germs and Crops: the Role of Endowments
  in Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1), 1203—1250.

Elvidge, C., K. Baugh, E. Kihn, H. Kroehl, and E. Davis (1997): “Mapping of City
  Lights Using DMSP Operational Linescan System data,” Photogrammetric Engineering and
  Remote Sensing, 63, 727—734.

Englebert, P. (2000): “Precolonial Institutions, Post-Colonial States, and Economic Devel-
  opment in Tropical Africa,” Political Research Quarterly, 53(7), 7—36.

Englebert, P., S. Tarango, and M. Carter (2002): “Dismemberment and Suﬀocation: A
  Contribution to the Debate on African Boundaries,” Comparative Political Studies, 35(10),
  1093—1118.

Ethnologue (2005): Languages of the World, SIL International; Fifteenth edition.

Fenske, J. (2009): “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions,” mimeo Yale Uni-
  versity.

Feyrer, J., and B. Sacerdote (2009): “Colonialism and Modern Income: Islands as Natural
  Experiments,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2), 245—262.

Fortes, M., and E. Evans-Pritchard (1940): African Political Systems. Oxford University
  Press.

Franck, R., and I. Rainer (2009): “Does the Leader’s Ethnicity Matter? Ethnic Favoritism,
  Education and Health in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Working Paper, mimeo Bar Ilan University.

Gallup, J. L., and J. D. Sachs (2001): “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” The American
  Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 64(1), 85—96.

Gallup, J. L., J. D. Sachs, and A. Mellinger (1999): “Geography and Economic Devel-
  opment,” Working Paper, CID Working Papers 1.

Gennaioli, N., R. L. Porta, F. L. de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2011): “Human Capital
  and Regional Development,” mineo, Harvard University.




                                             44
Gennaioli, N., and I. Rainer (2006): “Precolonial Centralization and Institutional Quality
  in Africa,” in Institutions and Norms in Economic Development, ed. by M. Gradstein, and
  K. Konrad. MIT Press.

         (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,” Journal of
  Economic Growth, 12(3), 185—234.

Glaeser, E. L., R. L. Porta, F. L. de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2004): “Do Institutions
  Cause Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3), 271—303.

Glennerster, R., E. Miguel, and A. Rothenberg (2010): “Collective Action in Diverse
  Sierra Leone Communities,” Working Paper, NBER, No. 16196.

Goldstein, M., and C. Udry (2008): “The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural
  Investment in Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(6), 981—1022.

Goody, J. (1971): Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa. International African Insti-
  tute by Oxford University Press.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008): “Long Term Persistence,” Working Paper,
  NBER, No. 14278.

Henderson, V. J., A. Storeygard, and D. N. Weil (2011): “Measuring Economic Growth
  from Outer Space,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Herbst, J. (2000): States and Power in Africa. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Hopkins, A. G. (1973): An Economic History of West Africa. Columbia University Press,
  New York, NY.

Huillery, E. (2009): “History Matters: The Long Term Impact of Colonial Public Investments
  in French West Africa,” American Economic Journal - Applied Economics, 1(2), 176—215.

Imbens, G. W., and T. Lemieux (2008): “Regression discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
  Practice,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 615—635.

Iyer, L. (2010): “Direct versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-term Consequences,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 693—713.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi (2005): “Governance Matters IV : Gover-
  nance Indicators for 1996-2004,” Policy Research Working Paper Series, The World Bank.



                                             45
Kiszewski, A., A. Mellinger, A. Spielman, P. Malaney, S. E. Sachs, and J. Sachs
  (2004): “A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission,” American Journal of
  Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 70(5), 486—498.

La-Porta, R., and A. Shleifer (2008): “The Unoﬃcial Economy and Economic Develop-
  ment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Lee, D. S., and T. Lemieux (2010): “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 281—355.

Lee, D. S., E. Moretti, and M. J. Butler (2004): “Do Voters Aﬀect Or Elect Policies?
  Evidence from the U. S. House,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 807—859.

Mamdani, M. (1996): Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late
  Colonialism. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Michalopoulos, S. (2011): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
  Review, forthcoming.

Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2011): “The Long-Run Eﬀects of the Scramble
  for Africa,” mimeo Harvard University.

Middleton, J., and D. Tait (1958): Tribes without Rulers. Routlege and Kegan Paul, Lon-
  don.

Migdal, J. S. (1988): Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State
  Capabilities in the Third World. Princeton University Press.

Miguel, E. (2004): “Tribe or Nation? Nation-Building and Public Goods in Kenya versus
  Tanzania,” World Politics, 56(3), 327—362.

Miguel, E., and M. K. Gugerty (2005): “Ethnic Diversity, Social Santions, and Public
  Goods in Kenya,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(11), 2325—2368.

Miles, W. F. (1994): Hausaland Divided: Colonialism and Independence in Nigeria and Niger.
  Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London.

Min, B. (2008): “Democracy and Light: Electoral Accountability and the Provision of Public
  Goods,” Working Paper, mimeo UCLA.

Moulton, B. R. (1986): “Random Group Eﬀects and the Precision of Regression Estimates,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 32, 385—397.


                                               46
Murdock, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and Their Culture History. McGraw-Hill Book
  Company, New York.

           (1967): Ethnographic Atlas. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.

Naritomi, J., R. R. Soares, and J. J. Assunção (2009): “Institutional Development and
  Colonial Heritage within Brazil,” Working Paper, IZA DP No. 4276.

Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long Term Eﬀects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 123(1), 139—176.

           (2009): “The Importance of History for Economic Development,” Annual Review of
  Economics, 1(1), 65—92.

Nunn, N., and D. Puga (2011): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
  Africa,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Pande, R., and C. Udry (2006): “Institutions and Development: A View from Below,”
  in Proceedings of the 9th World Congress of the Econometric Society, ed. by R. Blundell,
  W. Newey, and T. Persson. Cambridge University Press.

Pinkovskiy, M. L. (2011): “Economic Discontinuities across Borders: Evidence from Lights
  Data,” mimeo, MIT, Department of Economics.

Posner, D. N. (2005): Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa. Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge, UK.

Robinson, J. A. (2002): “States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority and
  Control by Jeﬀrey I. Herbst: A Review Essay,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 510—519.

Ross, M. L. (2006): “A Closer Look on Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,” Anuual Review of
  Political Science.

Rudmin, F. W. (1995): “Cross-Cultural Correlates of the Ownership of Private Property:
  Two Samples of Murdock’s Data,” Journal of Socio-Economics, 24, 345—373.

Schapera, I. (1967): Government and Politics in Tribal Societies. Humanities Press, London:
  Watts.



                                               47
         (1970): “Tribal Innovators: Tswana Chiefs and Social Change, 1795-1940,” London
  School of Economics Monographs on Social Anthropology, (43).

Spolaore, E., and R. Wacziarg (2005): “Borders and Growth,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 10(4).

Stevenson, R. F. (1968): Population and Political Systems in Tropical Africa. Columbia
  University Press.

Sutton, P. C., C. D. Elvidge, and T. Ghosh (2007): “Estimation of Gross Domestic
  Product at Sub-National Scales Using Nighttime Satellite Imagery,” International Journal
  of Ecological Economics and Statistics, 8(7), 5—21.

Tait, D. (1958): “The Territorial Pattern and Lineage System of Konkomba,” in Tribes without
  Rulers, ed. by J. Middleton, and D. Tait, pp. 167—202. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.

Tilly, C. (1985): “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime,” in Bringing the State
  Back In, ed. by P. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer, and T. Skocpol. Cambridge University Press.

Winter, E. (1958): “The Aboriginal Political Structure of Bwamba,” in Tribes without Rulers,
  ed. by J. Middleton, and D. Tait, pp. 136—166. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.

WLMS (2006):          World Language Mapping System, Version 3.2 Available on-line at
  http://www.gmi.org/wlms/.




                                              48
                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics


variable                                        Obs.     mean       st. dev.     p25     median      p75       min      max


                                                                          Panel A: Full Sample

Light Density                                   1247     0.364       1.553     0.000      0.017 0.134 0.000 25.140
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)                       1247     -3.027      1.719     -4.605     -3.597 -1.937 -4.605 3.225
Ln (Light Density)                               898     -2.894      2.217     -4.299     -2.909 -1.491 -10.597 3.224
Ln (0.01 + Population Density)                  1247     2.608       2.097     1.730      2.992 3.980 -4.605            7.432
Ln (1 + Water Area)                             1247     0.273       0.427     0.004      0.101 0.340 0.000             3.119
Mean Elevation                                  1247     0.617       0.437     0.288      0.489 0.936 0.000             2.181
Land Suitability For Agriculture                1247     0.400       0.244     0.241      0.416 0.569 0.001             0.979
Malaria Stability Index                         1247     0.708       0.352     0.500      0.876 1.000 0.000             1.000
Oil Deposit Indicator                           1247     0.083       0.277     0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000             1.000
Diamond Mine Indicator                          1247     0.091       0.287     0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000             1.000
Distance to the Capital City                    1247     0.521       0.378     0.265      0.422 0.673 0.010             1.935
Distance to the Sea Coast                       1247     0.608       0.434     0.225      0.563 0.935 0.000             1.739
Distance to the Border                          1247     0.107       0.117     0.020      0.061 0.159 0.000             0.637
Rule of Law                                     1242     -0.843      0.586     -1.266     -0.888 -0.442 -1.912          0.708
Control of Corruption                           1242     -0.771      0.497     -1.048     -0.873 -0.468 -1.590          0.722
Jurisdictional Hierarchy                         683     1.215       0.965     0.000      1.000 2.000 0.000             4.000
Political Centralization                         683     0.356       0.479     0.000      0.000 1.000 0.000             1.000

                                                              Panel B: Pre-colonial Institutions Sample

Light Density                                    683     0.368       1.528     0.000      0.022 0.150 0.000 25.140
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)                        683     -2.946      1.701     -4.575     -3.429 -1.835 -4.605 3.225
Ln (Light Density)                               519     -2.887      2.173     -4.269     -2.909 -1.548 -10.597 3.224

                                                            Panel C: Partitioned Ethnic Groups Sample

Light Density                                    526     0.221       0.755     0.000      0.014 0.092 0.000 8.561
Ln (0.01 + Light Density)                        526     -3.193      1.575     -4.605     -3.745 -2.281 -4.605 2.148
Ln (Light Density)                               374     -3.176      2.183     -4.576     -3.116 -1.755 -10.597 2.147

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for all variables employed in the empirical analysis. Panel A reports summary statistics
for all variables in the maximum sample of country-ethnicity observations. Panel B reports summary statistics for the
dependent variable in the sample with data availability on pre-colonial ethnic institutions (from Murdock (1967)). Panel C
gives summary statistics for the dependent variable in the sample of partitioned ethnic groups. The Data Appendix gives
detailed variable definitions and data sources.
                                                               Table 2 - Preliminary Evidence
                                National Contemporary Institutions, Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions, and Regional Development

                                   National Contemporary Institutions                          Ethnic Pre-colonial Institutions                        National and Ethnic Institutions
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)            (9)           (10)        (11)          (12)


Rule of Law                  0.8514*** 0.8816*** 0.9177*** 0.7467***                                                                        0.8011*** 0.7806*** 0.8114*** 0.7293***
 Double-clustered s.e.        (0.2743) (0.2427) (0.2263) (0.1692)                                                                            (0.2862) (0.2552) (0.2484) (0.1903)
 Conley's s.e.                [0.2181] [0.2009] [0.1756] [0.1283]                                                                            [0.2238] [0.2096] [0.2051] [0.1668]

Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                                             0.4106*** 0.3483** 0.3213*** 0.2036*** 0.3411*** 0.2707** 0.2462*** 0.1729***
 Double-clustered s.e.                                                                (0.1246) (0.1397) (0.1026) (0.0735)    (0.0982) (0.1067) (0.0784) (0.0627)
 Conley's s.e.                                                                        [0.1294] [0.1288] [0.1014] [0.0691]    [0.1094] [0.1059] [0.0810] [0.0617]

Adjusted R-squared              0.085         0.251         0.362        0.463          0.056         0.246        0.361         0.461         0.123          0.308        0.415        0.498

Population Density                No          Yes           Yes           Yes            No            Yes          Yes           Yes           No             Yes          Yes          Yes
Location Controls                 No           No           Yes           Yes            No            No           Yes           Yes           No             No           Yes          Yes
Geographic Controls               No           No            No           Yes            No            No           No            Yes           No             No           No           Yes
Observations                     1242         1242          1242          1242           683           683          683           683           680            680          680          680

Table 2 reports OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns
(1)-(4), (9)-(12)) and pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) index of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index (in columns (5)-(12)). The
dependent variable is log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In the specifications in columns (2)-(4), (6)-(8), and (10)-(12) we control for log (0.01
+ population density). In columns (3), (4), (7), (8), (11), and (12) we control for location augmenting the specification with distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from
the capital city of each country, distance from the closest sea coast, and distance from the national border. The set of geographic controls in columns (4), (8) and (12) includes log (1 +
area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic
family dimensions. We also report in brackets Conley’s (1999) standard errors that account for 2-dimensional spatial auto-correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance with
the most conservative standard errors at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                     Table 3: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development
                                  across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups


                                 All Observations            Intensive Margin           All Observations             Intensive Margin
                                                                (Lit Areas)                                             (Lit Areas)
                                   (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)


Rule of Law                    0.6610*** 0.1170           0.8711*** 0.2909
 Double-clustered s.e.          (0.2139) (0.1825)          (0.2638) (0.2730)
 Conley's s.e.                  [0.1901] [0.1089]          [0.2467] [0.2121]

Control of Corruption                                                                 0.7898*** 0.0884             0.9997*** 0.4068
 Double-clustered s.e.                                                                 (0.2639) (0.2375)            (0.3319) (0.3801)
 Conley's s.e.                                                                         [0.2371] [0.1507]            [0.3111] [0.2707]

Adjusted R-squared                0.225        0.774         0.287        0.765          0.227        0.773          0.287        0.766

Ethnicity Fixed Effects            No           Yes           No           Yes            No           Yes             No          Yes
Population Density                 Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes
Observations                       526          526           313          313            526          526             313         313
Table 3 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control for corruption index
(in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable in columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) is the log (0.01 + light
density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level The dependent variable in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) is the log (light
density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In these specifications we thus ignore unlit areas focusing on the
“intensive” margin of luminosity. Odd-numbered specifications report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report
within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we
control for log (0.01 + population density).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-
clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. We also report in brackets Conley’s (1999) standard
errors that account for 2-dimensional spatial auto-correlation. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance with the most
conservative standard errors at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                       Table 4: Validity of the Regression Discontinuity (RD) Design

                                                               Rule of Law                        Control for Corruption

                                                                     (1)                                       (2)
Dependent Variables
Population Density in 1960                                         0.1552                                    0.0451
                                                                  (0.2087)                                  (0.2677)

Water Area                                                         0.0434                                    0.0572
                                                                  (0.0497)                                  (0.0682)

Elevation                                                          0.0156                                    0.0357
                                                                  (0.0253)                                  (0.0321)

Suitability for Agriculture                                        0.0115                                    0.0043
                                                                  (0.0200)                                  (0.0264)

Malaria Stability Index                                           -0.0187                                   -0.0419
                                                                  (0.0283)                                  (0.0328)

Distance to the Capital City                                     -0.2472**                                  -0.2293
                                                                  (0.1199)                                  (0.1573)

Distance to the Sea Coast                                          0.0000                                    0.0053
                                                                  (0.0150)                                  (0.0195)

Distance to the Border                                            -0.0037                                   -0.0046
                                                                  (0.0077)                                  (0.0098)

Diamond Mine Indicator                                            -0.0133                                   -0.0256
                                                                  (0.0457)                                  (0.0667)

Oil/Petroleum Deposit Indicator                                    0.0297                                    0.0515
                                                                  (0.0230)                                  (0.0385)

Observations                                                         526                                      526

Table 4 reports within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating the set of conditioning variables in our subsequent empirical
specifications with contemporary national institutions across partitioned ethnicities. Specifically we regress log (0.01 +
population density in 1960 (around independence)), log (1 + area under water), mean elevation, land’s suitability for
agriculture, a malaria stability index, distance of the centroid of each partitioned ethnic area to the capital city, distance to
the sea coast, distance to the national border, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil indicator on the rule of law index (in
column (1)) and on the control of corruption index (in column (2)). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions
and data sources. All specifications include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). Below the estimates
we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and
* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
            Table 5 - RD Design: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development
                               across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups

                            Panel A: Global Polynomial Control Function Method

                             (1)            (2)      (3)           (4)      (5)            (6)    (7)           (8)


Rule of Law               0.8153*** 0.0644        0.6432** 0.0349
                          (0.2645) (0.2795)       (0.2591) (0.3294)

Control of Corruption                                                    0.9522*** -0.1235  0.6920** -0.1762
                                                                          (0.2990) (0.3214) (0.2869) (0.3700)

Adjusted R-squared          0.301       0.843       0.403      0.846       0.298       0.841     0.398      0.846

Ethnicity Fixed Effects     No              Yes     No             Yes     No              Yes   No             Yes
Population Density          Yes             Yes     Yes            Yes     Yes             Yes   Yes            Yes
RD Polynomial               Yes             Yes     Yes            Yes     Yes             Yes   Yes            Yes
Location Controls           No              No      Yes            Yes     No              No    Yes            Yes
Geographic Controls         No              No      Yes            Yes     No              No    Yes            Yes
Observations                454             454     454            454     454             454   454            454


                                     Panel B: Local Linear Regression Method


Bandwidth                          100 km                  50 km                  100 km                50 km
                             (1)            (2)      (3)           (4)      (5)            (6)    (7)           (8)



Rule of Law               0.6544*** 0.1464        0.6306*** 0.1958
                          (0.2096) (0.1819)       (0.1992) (0.2014)

Control of Corruption                                                    0.8017*** 0.1028   0.7609*** 0.1774
                                                                          (0.2571) (0.2411) (0.2441) (0.2627)

Adjusted R-squared          0.214       0.775       0.184      0.774       0.219       0.774     0.187      0.772

Ethnicity Fixed Effects     No              Yes     No             Yes     No              Yes   No             Yes
Population Density          Yes             Yes     Yes            Yes     Yes             Yes   Yes            Yes
Observations                526             526     526            526     526             526   526            526
Table 5 - Notes
Table 5 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity estimates associating regional development with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control for corruption index
(in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities with two alternative regression discontinuity (RD) approaches, a global
polynomial control function method (Panel A) and a local linear regression method (Panel B).
In Panel A we include a third-order RD polynomial in distance of the centroid of each partitioned ethnic area to the national border;
distance takes positive values for partitioned areas that belong to the relatively high institutional quality country and negative values for
partitioned areas that fall in the relatively low institutional quality country. All specifications include interactions between the
polynomial terms and the proxy measure of national institutions. Estimation is performed across the two major partitions of each ethnic
group.
In Panel B we report local linear regression estimates restricting estimation in the areas close to the national border. In columns (1),
(2), (5), and (6) we focus of ethnic areas within 50 kilometers of each side of the national border (total 100 kilometers). In columns (3),
(4), (7), and (8) we focus on ethnic areas within 25 kilometers of each side of the national border (total 50 kilometers). In both Panel A
and Panel B odd-numbered specifications report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity
estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (0.01 +
population density). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we control for location and geography. The set of control variables includes the
distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the
distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture,
elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level respectively.
                                            Table 6: Accounting for Migration

                         Panel A: National Institutions and Regional Population Density

                                            (1)             (2)             (3)                  (4)            (5)           (6)


Rule of Law                              -0.2453          0.1464          -0.1527
                                        (0.4076)         (0.2399)        (0.2950)



Control of Corruption                                                                          -0.3769       0.0865         -0.2043
                                                                                              (0.4757)      (0.2923)       (0.3746)

Adjusted R-squared                        0.006           0.815            0.851               0.009          0.815          0.851

Ethnicity Fixed Effects                    No              Yes              Yes                 No             Yes            Yes
Location Controls                          No              No               Yes                 No             No             Yes
Geographic Controls                        No              No               Yes                 No             No             Yes
Observations                               526             526              526                 526            526            526

Table 6 Panel A reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional population density with
contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(3)) and
control for corruption index (in columns (4)-(6)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is log (0.01 +
population density at the ethnicity-country level). Columns (1) and (4) report cross-sectional estimates. Columns (2), (3), (5),
and (6) report within-country estimates that include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (3)
and (6) we control for location and geography. The set of control variables includes the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-
country area from the capital city of each country, the distance from the closest sea coast, the distance from the national border,
log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a
diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources.
Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                  Table 6: Accounting for Migration, Local Trade and Lights' Bleeding/Stealing

                                 Panel B: Excluding Pixels Close to the National Border

Excluding Area within                  50 km                       100 km                      50 km                       100 km
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)


Rule of Law                   0.6100**      0.1997       0.7826*** 0.1057
                               (0.2761)    (0.2194)       (0.1970) (0.3196)

Control of Corruption                                                                0.7721**       0.3289      0.8795***       0.1452
                                                                                      (0.3459)     (0.3514)      (0.2448)      (0.4861)

Adjusted R-squared              0.210       0.729          0.247        0.749          0.220        0.730          0.244         0.749

Ethnicity Fixed Effects          No            Yes          No              Yes         No             Yes          No              Yes
Population Density               Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
Observations                     365           365          218             218         365            365          218             218

Table 6 Panel B reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary
national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control for corruption
index (in columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from
satellite at the ethnicity-country level). In columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) we exclude from the estimation ethnic areas 25 kilometers from
each side of the national border (total 50 kilometers). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we exclude from the estimation ethnic areas 50
kilometers from each side of the national border (total 100 kilometers). Odd-numbered specifications report cross-sectional
specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants
not reported). In all specifications we control for log (0.01 + population density).
 The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level respectively.
             Table 7 - Differential Effect of National Institutions Far and Close to the Capital Cities

                                                       Global Control Polynomial                               Local Regression
                                                               Function                                       100 km Bandwidth
                                                           (1)                  (2)                     (3)                      (4)

                                                  Panel A: Ethnic Partitions Both Close or Far from the Capital Cities

Rule of Law                                            1.5424***              0.7247                1.4308***                 0.4465
                                                        (0.3599)             (0.6479)                (0.3807)                (0.5079)

Far Dummy Variable                                      -0.8029*              0.3771                  -0.5251                -0.5473
                                                         (0.4318)            (1.6135)                 (0.4805)               (1.3905)

Rule of Law * Far Dummy Variable                       -0.7935**             -0.3435                 -0.7143*                -0.2120
                                                        (0.3467)             (0.5948)                 (0.3996)               (0.5706)

Adjusted R-squared                                        0.382               0.835                    0.305                  0.832
Observations                                               196                 196                      196                    196

                                                                                Panel B: All Observations
                                                         Two Major Partitions                                   All Partitions

Rule of Law                                            1.1672***              0.4542                 1.0080**                 0.5269
                                                        (0.4104)             (0.6647)                 (0.4450)               (0.3596)

Distance to the Capital City                            -1.0067*             -0.5759                  -0.8276                -0.7635
                                                         (0.5811)            (0.6744)                 (0.6328)               (0.5314)

Rule of Law * Distance to the Capital City              -0.6852*             -0.5361                  -0.6490                -0.6388
                                                         (0.4014)            (0.5667)                 (0.4932)               (0.4409)

Adjusted R-squared                                        0.31                0.845                    0.222                  0.779
Observations                                              454                  454                      526                    526

Ethnicity Fixed-Effects                                    No                  Yes                      No                     Yes
Population Density                                         Yes                 Yes                      Yes                    Yes

Table 7 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with contemporary national
institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1)-(4)) and control for corruption index (in
columns (5)-(8)) in areas of partitioned ethnicities. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the
ethnicity-country level. Odd-numbered specifications report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-
ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log
(0.01 + population density). In Panel A we limit attention to two-way partitioned ethnic groups where either both partitions are close to
the respective capital city or both are far from the respective capital city (using the median value of the distance to the capital city). Far
is an indicator (dummy) variable that equals one for partitioned ethnic areas that are far from the capital. In Panel B we focus on all
partitioned ethnic groups and explore the interaction of national institutions with distance to the capital city.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level respectively.
      Table 8: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within African Countries

                                        Jurisdictional Hierarchy                                 Political Centralization
                                (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)


                                                                 Panel A: All Observations

Ethnic Institutions        0.3260*** 0.2900*** 0.2105*** 0.1878***                  0.5264*** 0.5330*** 0.3413*** 0.3385***
                           (0.0852) (0.0816) (0.0554) (0.0538)                      (0.1492) (0.1516) (0.0898) (0.1071)

Adjusted R-squared             0.409        0.534        0.597         0.654           0.400        0.531         0.593        0.652
Observations                    682          682          682           682             682          682           682          682

                                                           Panel B: Intensive Margin (Lit Areas)

Ethnic Institutions        0.3279*** 0.3057*** 0.1651** 0.1382*                     0.4819** 0.5775*** 0.2649** 0.2663*
                           (0.1240) (0.1130) (0.0705) (0.0715)                      (0.2369) (0.2142) (0.1234) (0.1399)

Adjusted R-squared             0.424        0.547        0.638         0.670           0.416        0.545         0.636        0.670
Observations                    517          517          517           517             517          517           517          517

Country Fixed Effects           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Location Controls               No           Yes          No            Yes             No           Yes           No           Yes
Geographic Controls             No           Yes          No            Yes             No           Yes           No           Yes
Population Density              No           No           Yes           Yes             No           No            Yes          Yes

Table 8 reports within-country OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions. In Panel A the
dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In Panel B the dependent
variable is the log (light density at night from satellite at the ethnicity-country level). In these specifications we thus ignore unlit
areas focusing on the “intensive” margin of luminosity. In columns (1)-(4) we measure pre-colonial ethnic institutions using
Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. In columns (5)-(8) we use the binary Gennaioli and
Rainer (2006, 2007) political centralization index that is based on Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
community variable. This index takes on the value of zero for stateless societies and ethnic groups that are part of petty chiefdoms.
All specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) we control for log
(0.01 + population density). In even-numbered columns we control for location and geography. The set of control variables includes
the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the
distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture,
elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable
definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the
ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                      Table 9: The Long-Run Effects of Pre-colonial Political Complexity
                             Conditioning on Other Pre-colonial Ethnic Features


                                 Specification A                               Specification B
                                                                              Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                         Additional Variable Observations Additional Variable     beyond the Local     Observations
                                                                                    Community
                                 (1)             (2)              (3)                    (4)                (5)


Gathering                     -0.0941              742           -0.0783             0.2099***             676
                              (0.1721)                           (0.1850)             (0.0561)

Hunting                       -0.0311              742           -0.0133             0.2116***             676
                              (0.1229)                           (0.1245)             (0.0573)

Fishing                       0.2442*              742           0.2447*             0.2111***             676
                              (0.1312)                           (0.1254)             (0.0564)

Animal Husbandry               0.0545              742            0.0346             0.2026***             676
                              (0.0410)                           (0.0428)             (0.0628)

Milking                        0.1782              695            0.0864             0.2032***             674
                              (0.1389)                           (0.1433)             (0.0589)


Agriculture Dependence       -0.1066**             742          -0.1052**            0.2113***             676
                              (0.0438)                           (0.0459)             (0.0572)

Agriculture Dependence         0.0237              695           -0.0116             0.2107***             674
Alternative                   (0.1066)                           (0.1039)             (0.0563)

Polygyny                       0.0382              742            0.0178             0.2110***             676
                              (0.1111)                           (0.1190)             (0.0582)

Polygyny Alt                  -0.2337              722           -0.2614             0.2211***             665
                              (0.2851)                           (0.3121)             (0.0543)

Clan Communities              -0.0779              742            0.0357             0.2158***             676
                              (0.1381)                           (0.1285)             (0.0555)

Settlement Pattern            -0.0171              694            -0.0073            0.2121***             673
                              (0.0353)                           (0.0377)             (0.0578)

Complex Settlements            0.2341              694            0.2138             0.2006***             673
                              (0.1618)                           (0.1619)             (0.0562)
Hierarchy of Local                     0.0154                679                -0.0030                  0.2102***                  674
Community                             (0.0789)                                  (0.0832)                  (0.0577)

Patrilineal Descent                   -0.1879                726                -0.2010                  0.1947***                  665
                                      (0.1332)                                  (0.1307)                  (0.0511)

Class Stratification                 0.1257**                603                 0.0652                   0.1576**                  566
                                      (0.0513)                                  (0.0584)                   (0.0745)

Class Stratification                 0.3970**                603                 0.2758                   0.1440**                  566
Indicator                             (0.1831)                                  (0.1896)                   (0.0615)

Elections                              0.3372                533                 0.2709                  0.2199***                  498
                                      (0.2518)                                  (0.2617)                  (0.0601)

Slavery                               -0.0202                654                -0.1170                  0.2030***                  604
                                      (0.1600)                                  (0.1595)                  (0.0620)

Property Rights                       -0.1967                562                -0.1788                  0.2198***                  523
                                      (0.2201)                                  (0.2295)                  (0.0690)

Table 9 reports within-country OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic features as reflected in Murdock’s
(1967) Ethnographic Atlas. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. All
specifications include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In all specifications we control for log (0.01 + population
density at the ethnicity-country level). In specification A (in columns (1)-(2)) we regress log (0.01 + light density) on various ethnic traits
from Murdock (1967). In specification B (columns (3)-(5)) we regress log (0.01 + light density) on each of Murdock’s additional variables
and the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family
dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
   Table 10: Differences in Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Differences in Regional Development across Contiguous Ethnicities

                                                                                  Centralized versus Non-                 Difference in                   Difference in
                                                     Centralized versus            Centralized within the           Jurisdictional Hierarchy              Jurisdictional
                                                      Non-Centralized                 Same Country                        Index > | 1 |               Hierarchy Index > | 2 |
                                                       (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)                (5)             (6)              (7)           (8)

                                                                       Panel A: Without Conditioning on Differences in Population Density

Differences in Jurisdictional Hierarchy            0.2476*** 0.2653***             0.2252*** 0.2500***               0.2146***      0.2349***         0.3332*** 0.3353***
                                                    (0.0625)  (0.0563)              (0.0667)  (0.0571)                (0.0698)       (0.0634)          (0.0961) (0.0938)

Adjusted R-squared                                    0.084         0.184             0.100         0.270               0.065          0.170             0.451        0.786

                                                                             Panel B: Conditional on Differences in Population Density

Differences in Jurisdictional Hierarchy            0.1236**      0.1449***          0.1129**      0.1258**            0.1291**      0.1434***         0.1998*** 0.2798**
                                                    (0.0495)      (0.0498)           (0.0510)      (0.0534)            (0.0543)      (0.0547)          (0.0768) (0.1095)

Adjusted R-squared                                    0.366         0.381             0.506         0.533               0.336          0.356             0.724        0.801

Location Controls                                      No            Yes               No            Yes                 No             Yes               No           Yes
Geographic Controls                                    No            Yes               No            Yes                 No             Yes               No           Yes
Observations                                           258           258               125           125                 186            186               21           21
Table 10 reports OLS estimates associating differences in regional development (as reflected in differences in log (0.01 + satellite light density) between two adjacent
ethnic homelands (of ethnicities i and j) with differences in pre-colonial ethnic institutions as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
community index (that ranges from 0 to 4). In columns (1)-(2) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups. In columns (3)-(4) we compare
centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups that are in the same country. In columns (5)-(6) we focus on pairs of adjacent ethnic homelands with at least 2-point
difference in the four-scale index of the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index. In columns (7)-(8) we focus on pairs of adjacent ethnic homelands
with at least 3-point difference in the four scale index of the jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community index.
In even numbered columns we control for differences in the location and differences in geography between the two adjacent ethnic homelands. The set of control
variables includes the differences of the two adjacent ethnic homelands with respect to: distance of the centroid of each ethnicity from the capital city of each country, the
distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1+ area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a
malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. In Panel A we do not control for differences in log (0.01 + population density). In Panel B we
control for differences in log (0.01 + population density) between the two adjacent ethnic homelands. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the ethnicity i and the ethnicity j dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                      Supplementary Appendix Table Figure 1a
                                           Kernel density estimate




           6
           4
 Density
           2
           0




                 0                 5                10        15            20       25
                                    Mean satellite light density in 2007-2008.
                 kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0215




                      Supplementary Appendix Table Figure 1b
                                           Kernel density estimate
           .4
           .3
 Density
           .2
           .1
           0




                 -6                -4               -2         0             2        4
                            log (mean satellite light density in 2007-2008 + 0.01)
                 kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.3717



                      Supplementary Appendix Table Figure 1c

                                           Kernel density estimate
           .2
           .15
Density
           .1
           .05
           0




                      -10                         -5                 0                5
                                Log (mean satellite light density in 2007-2008)
                 kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4808
      Supplementary Appendix Table 1: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional
                 Development across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
                                               Excluding North Africa

                                         Simple                Global Polynomial Control           Local Linear (100km)
                                   (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)


                                                                Panel A: Rule of Law

Rule of Law                    0.5675**            0.1647        0.5958**         0.0724           0.5699**        0.1989
                                (0.2475)          (0.1733)        (0.2616)       (0.1728)           (0.2437)      (0.1851)

adjusted R-squared               0.268             0.771           0.299           0.825             0.269         0.771

                                                           Panel B: Control for Corruption

Control for Corruption         0.6631**            0.1765        0.7533**         0.0211           0.6894**        0.1750
                                (0.3057)          (0.2144)        (0.3320)       (0.2328)           (0.2985)      (0.2423)

adjusted R-squared               0.268             0.770           0.306           0.825             0.272         0.770

Ethnicity Fixed Effects           No               Yes              No              Yes               No            Yes
Population Density                Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes           Yes
RD Polynomial                     No               No               Yes             Yes               No            No
Observations                      487              487              420             420               487           487
Appendix Table 1 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity OLS estimates associating regional development with
contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in Panel A) and
control for corruption index (in Panel B) in areas of partitioned ethnicities located in Sub-Saharan African countries
(excluding ethnic areas in North Africa). The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at
the ethnicity-country level. In columns (3)-(4) we include a third-order RD polynomial in distance of the centroid of each
partitioned ethnic area to the national border; distance takes positive values for partitioned areas that fall into the
relatively high institutional quality country and negative values for partitioned areas that fall into the relatively low
institutional quality country. These specifications also include interactions between the polynomial terms and the proxy
measure of national institutions.
Estimation is performed across the two-major partitions of each ethnic group. In columns (5)-(6) we report local linear
regression estimates focusing on ethnic areas 50 kilometers within each side of the national border (total 100 kilometers).
In both Panel A and Panel B odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report
within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all
specifications we control for log (0.01 + population density). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and
data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-
linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
      Supplementary Appendix Table 2: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional
                 Development across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
                            Large Differences in National Institutional Quality

                                         Simple               Global Polynomial Control          Local Linear (100km)
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)           (6)


                                                               Panel A: Rule of Law

Rule of Law                   0.7858***         0.1193          0.7159***          0.0174       0.7725***        0.1620
                               (0.2091)        (0.1880)          (0.2601)         (0.3813)       (0.1976)       (0.2071)

Adjusted R-squared               0.299            0.854            0.429           0.864           0.282         0.862

                                                          Panel B: Control for Corruption

Control for Corruption        0.9369***         0.0162          0.6389**          -0.3907       0.9146***        0.0417
                               (0.3009)        (0.2492)          (0.3006)         (0.4066)       (0.2942)       (0.2750)

Adjusted R-squared               0.226            0.855            0.359           0.865           0.218         0.859

Ethnicity Fixed Effects           No              Yes               No              Yes             No            Yes
Population Density                Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
RD Polynomial                     No              No                Yes             Yes             No            No
Observations                      230             230               230             230             230           230
Appendix Table 2 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity estimates associating regional development with
contemporary national institutions, as reflected in World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in Panel A) and
control for corruption index (in Panel B) in areas of partitioned ethnicities across the national border where there are
large differences in national institutional quality. The dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from
satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. In columns (3)-(4) we include a third-order RD polynomial in distance of the
centroid of each partition to the national border; distance takes positive values for partitioned areas that fall into the
relatively high institutional quality country and negative values for partitioned areas that fall into the relatively low
institutional quality country. These specifications also include interactions between the polynomial terms and the proxy
measure of national institutions.
Estimation is performed across the two-major partitions of each group. In columns (5)-(6) we report local linear
regression estimates focusing on ethnic areas within 50 kilometers of each side of the national border (total 100
kilometers). In both Panel A and Panel B odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered
columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In
all specifications we control for log (0.01 + population density). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions
and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country and the
ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
respectively.
                     Supplementary Appendix Table 3: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development
                                               across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
                     RD Specifications (Global Polynomial Control Function Approach) with the Ethnologue Database

                                                Two-Way Partitioned Ethnic Groups                                     Two Major Partitions of All Split Groups
                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)                (4)                  (5)             (6)                (7)             (8)


Rule of Law                        0.7051***          0.1360                                                   0.7855***          0.1668
                                    (0.2303)         (0.2474)                                                   (0.2574)         (0.2312)

Control for Corruption                                                  0.7305**             0.1563                                                0.8447**          0.1694
                                                                         (0.3310)           (0.3097)                                                (0.3521)        (0.2633)

Adjusted R-squared                    0.254            0.822              0.247              0.821                0.275           0.830               0.269           0.829

Ethnicity Fixed Effects                No               Yes                No                 Yes                  No              Yes                 No              Yes
Population Density                     Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes
RD Polynomial                          Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes
Observations                           444              444                444                444                  526             526                 526             526

Appendix Table 3 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in
World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1), (2), (5) and (6)) and control for corruption index (in columns (3), (4), (7) and (8)) in areas of
partitioned ethnicities using the spatial distribution of ethnicities across Africa according to the Ethnologue database. Odd-numbered columns report cross-sectional
specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants not reported). In all
specifications we control for log (0.01 + population density). All specifications include a third-order RD polynomial in distance of the centroid of each partition to the
national border; distance takes positive values for partitioned areas that fall into the relatively high institutional quality country and negative values for partitioned areas
that fall into the relatively low institutional quality country. These specifications also include interactions between the polynomial terms and the proxy measure of
national institutions. In columns (1), (2), (3), and (4) we focus on two-way partitioned ethnic groups.
In columns (5), (6), (7), and (8) we focus on the two major partitions of all split ethnic groups.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country
and the language group dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                   Supplementary Appendix Table 4: Contemporary National Institutions and Regional Development
                                             across and within Partitioned Ethnic Groups
                 Simple Cross-Sectional and Within-Ethnicity Specifications with Afrobarometer's Individual-level Data

                                            Household Access to Piped Water                                               Some Formal Schooling

                                    (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)                  (5)            (6)                 (7)               (8)


Rule of Law                     0.2836**        -0.1421                                                  0.0364         -0.0675
                                 (0.1373)       (0.1559)                                                (0.0473)        (0.1140)

Control for Corruption                                          0.3483***          -0.1226                                                  0.0429           -0.1170
                                                                 (0.0816)          (0.1725)                                                (0.0428)          (0.1175)

adjusted R-squared                0.049          0.189             0.098             0.188                0.002          0.076               0.003            0.078

Ethnicity Fixed-Effects            No             Yes               No               Yes                   No            Yes                  No              Yes
Population Density                Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes                  Yes            Yes                 Yes              Yes
Observations                      4336            4336             4336              4336                 4496           4496                4496             4496
Appendix Table 4 reports cross-sectional and within-ethnicity estimates associating regional development with contemporary national institutions, as reflected in
World Bank’s Governance Matters rule of law index (in columns (1), (2), (5), and (6)) and control for corruption index (in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8)) in areas of
partitioned ethnicities using individual data from the Afrobarometer. In columns (1)-(4) the dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if an
individual located in a partitioned ethnic area reports having access to piped water and zero otherwise. In columns (5)-(8) the dependent variable is an indicator
variable that takes on the value one if an individual located in a partitioned ethnic area reports having some formal education and zero otherwise. Odd-numbered
columns report cross-sectional specifications. Even-numbered columns report within-ethnicity estimates, where we include a vector of ethnicity fixed effects (constants
not reported). In all specifications we control for log (0.01 + population density).
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at the country
and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
       Supplementary Appendix Table 5: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within African Countries
                                                    Excluding North Africa

                                                                                                                         Contiguous-Ethnic-Homeland Analysis
                                                             Baseline Estimates
                                                                                                                                              Within the Same Country

                                        (1)            (2)                 (3)                (4)                  (5)           (6)               (7)             (8)


Jurisdictional Hierarchy            0.1841**       0.1517**            0.2136***         0.1864***             0.1181**      0.1417***          0.1184**       0.1393**
                                     (0.0895)       (0.0712)            (0.0553)          (0.0528)              (0.0522)      (0.0534)           (0.0562)       (0.0580)

adjusted R-squared                    0.282          0.416               0.530              0.609                 0.31          0.329             0.291           0.316

Country Fixed Effects                  No             No                  Yes                Yes                  No            No                 No              No
Population Density                     Yes            Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes           Yes                Yes             Yes
Location Controls                      No             Yes                 No                 Yes                  No            Yes                No              Yes
Geographic Controls                    No             Yes                 No                 Yes                  No            Yes                No              Yes
Observations                           640            640                 640                640                  243           243                178             178
Appendix Table 5 reports OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional
hierarchy beyond the local community index in ethnic homelands located in Sub-Saharan African countries (excluding ethnic areas in North Africa). In columns (1)-(4)
the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. The specifications in columns (3) and (4) include a set of
country fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (1)-(4) we control for log (0.01 + population density) at the ethnicity-country level. In columns (2) and (4)
we also control for: the distance of the centroid of each ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from
the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine
indicator, and an oil field indicator. In columns (5)-(8) we examine how differences in pre-colonial ethnic institutions as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional
hierarchy beyond the local community level (that ranges from 0 to 4) affect regional development (as reflected in differences
in log (0.01 + satellite light density) between two adjacent ethnic homelands (of ethnicities i and j). In columns (5)-(6) we compare centralized to non-centralized
adjacent ethnic groups. In columns (7)-(8) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups that are in the same country. In columns (6) and (8) we
control for differences in the location and differences in geography between the two adjacent ethnic homelands. The set of control variables includes the differences of
the two adjacent ethnic homelands in distance of the centroid of each ethnicity from the capital city of each country, the distance from the closest sea coast, the distance
from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond
mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-
clustered standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimension. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
respectively.
      Supplementary Appendix Table 6: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Development within African Countries
                                   Excluding Ethnic Homelands where Capital Cities Fall

                                                                                                                       Contiguous-Ethnic-Homeland Analysis
                                                              Baseline Estimates
                                                                                                                                               Within the Same Country

                                            (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)            (6)              (7)             (8)


Jurisdictional Hierarchy                0.3145**        0.1960**         0.1975***          0.1811***            0.1015*       0.1218**          0.1272**       0.1309**
                                         (0.1356)        (0.0774)         (0.0622)           (0.0568)            (0.0536)       (0.0529)          (0.0539)       (0.0581)

adjusted R-squared                        0.212           0.442             0.589              0.657               0.248         0.273             0.240           0.274

Country Fixed-Effects                      No              No                Yes                Yes                 No            No                No              No
Population Density                         Yes             Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes               Yes             Yes
Location Controls                          No              Yes               No                 Yes                 No            Yes               No              Yes
Geographic Controls                        No              Yes               No                 Yes                 No            Yes               No              Yes
Observations                               645             645               645                645                 216           216               160             160

Appendix Table 6 reports OLS estimates associating regional development with pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional
hierarchy beyond the local community level excluding ethnic areas where capital cities fall. In columns (1)-(4) the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + light density at
night from satellite) at the ethnicity-country level. The specifications in columns (3) and (4) include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns
(1)-(4) we control for log (0.01 + population density) at the ethnicity-country level. In columns (2) and (4) we also control the distance of the centroid of each
ethnicity-country area from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under water (lakes,
rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. In columns (5)-(8)
we examine how differences in pre-colonial ethnic institutions as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community level (that ranges
from 0 to 4) affect regional development (as reflected in differences in log (0.01 + satellite light density) between two adjacent ethnic homelands (of ethnicities i and j)
In columns (5)-(6) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups.
In columns (7)-(8) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups that are in the same country. In columns (6) and (8) we control for differences in
the location and differences in geography between the two adjacent ethnic homelands. The set of control variables includes the differences of the two adjacent ethnic
homelands in: distance of the centroid of each ethnicity from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log
(1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field
indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered standard errors at
the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                  Supplementary Appendix Table 7: Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Regional Population Density


                                                                                                                     Contiguous-Ethnic-Homeland Analysis
                                                           Baseline Estimates
                                                                                                                                             Within the Same Country

                                         (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)                 (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)


Jurisdictional Hierarchy              0.2153*       0.3088***          0.2550**           0.2469**            0.2356*** 0.2465***              0.1693**       0.1975***
                                      (0.1105)       (0.0831)           (0.1189)           (0.1129)            (0.0723)  (0.0579)               (0.0824)       (0.0714)

Adjusted R-squared                      0.012          0.386              0.391              0.548               0.070         0.245             0.039           0.211

Country Fixed-Effects                    No             No                 Yes                Yes                 No            No                No              No
Location Controls                        No             Yes                No                 Yes                 No            Yes               Yes             Yes
Geographic Controls                      No             Yes                No                 Yes                 No            Yes               Yes             Yes
Observations                             676            676                676                676                 258           258               186             186
Appendix Table 7 reports OLS estimates associating regional development proxied by population density with pre-colonial ethnic institutions, as reflected in
Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community level. In columns (1)-(4) the dependent variable is the log (0.01 + population density). The
specifications in columns (3) and (4) include a set of country fixed effects (constants not reported). In columns (2) and (4) we also control for the distance of the
centroid of each ethnicity-country from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national border, log (1 + area under
water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator, and an oil field indicator. In
columns (5)-(8) we examine how differences in pre-colonial ethnic institutions as reflected in Murdock’s (1967) jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
community level (that ranges from 0 to 4) affect regional development (as reflected in differences in log (0.01 + population density) between two adjacent ethnic
homelands (of ethnicities i and j). In columns (5)-(6) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups.
In columns (7)-(8) we compare centralized to non-centralized adjacent ethnic groups that are in the same country. In columns (6) and (8) we control for differences
in the location and differences in geography between the two adjacent ethnic homelands. The set of control variables includes the differences of the two adjacent
ethnic homelands in: distance of the centroid of each ethnicity from the capital city of each country, the distance from the sea coast, the distance from the national
border, log (1 + area under water (lakes, rivers, and other streams)), land suitability for agriculture, elevation, a malaria stability index, a diamond mine indicator,
and an oil field indicator. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. Below the estimates we report in parentheses double-clustered
standard errors at the country and the ethno-linguistic family dimensions. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level respectively.
                                        Appendix Table 8: Partitioned Ethnicities


                 % of Initial             # of                                 % of Initial             # of
Ethnicity Name   Homeland       Country Partitions     Ethnicity Name          Homeland       Country Partitions

ABABDA              0.72         EGY         2         LAKA (ADAMAWA)               0.69       TCD         3
ABABDA              0.28         SDN         2         LAKA (ADAMAWA)               0.20       CMR         3
ADELE               0.48         GHA         2         LAKA (ADAMAWA)               0.11       CAF         3
ADELE               0.52         TGO         2         LAMBA                        0.39       ZAR         2
AFAR                0.17          DJI        3         LAMBA                        0.61       ZMB         2
AFAR                0.22          ERI        3         LAMBYA                       0.17       MWI         3
AFAR                0.61         ETH         3         LAMBYA                       0.33       TZA         3
ALUR                0.16         ZAR         2         LAMBYA                       0.50       ZMB         3
ALUR                0.84         UGA         2         LIGBI, DEGHA (SE)            0.72       GHA         2
AMBA                0.87         ZAR         2         LIGBI, DEGHA (SE)            0.28       CIV         2
AMBA                0.13         UGA         2         LOBI                         0.42       CIV         2
AMBO                0.41         AGO         2         LOBI                         0.58       BFA         2
AMBO                0.59         NAM         2         LUGBARA                      0.45       ZAR         3
AMER                0.56          ERI        2         LUGBARA                      0.04       SDN         3
AMER                0.44         SDN         2         LUGBARA                      0.51       UGA         3
ANA                 0.33         BEN         2         LUNGU                        0.31       TZA         2
ANA                 0.67         TGO         2         LUNGU                        0.69       ZMB         2
ANUAK               0.75         ETH         2         LUVALE                       0.81       AGO         3
ANUAK               0.25         SDN         2         LUVALE                       0.01       ZAR         3
ANYI                0.42         GHA         2         LUVALE                       0.17       ZMB         3
ANYI                0.58         CIV         2         MADI                         0.42       SDN         2
ASBEN               0.89         NER         2         MADI                         0.58       UGA         2
ASBEN               0.11         DZA         2         MAKONDE                      0.56       MOZ         2
ASSINI              0.51         GHA         2         MAKONDE                      0.44       TZA         2
ASSINI              0.49         CIV         2         MALINKE                      0.03       GMB         6
ATTA                0.51         MAR         2         MALINKE                      0.13       CIV         6
ATTA                0.49         DZA         2         MALINKE                      0.27       MLI         6
ATYUTI              0.13         GHA         2         MALINKE                      0.04       GNB         6
ATYUTI              0.87         TGO         2         MALINKE                      0.25       GIN         6
AULLIMINDEN         0.55         MLI         3         MALINKE                      0.29       SEN         6
AULLIMINDEN         0.40         NER         3         MAMBILA                      0.57       CMR         2
AULLIMINDEN         0.05         DZA         3         MAMBILA                      0.43       NGA         2
AUSHI               0.27         ZAR         2         MANDARA                      0.35       CMR         2
AUSHI               0.73         ZMB         2         MANDARA                      0.65       NGA         2
AVATIME             0.51         GHA         2         MANGA                        0.60       NER         2
AVATIME             0.49         TGO         2         MANGA                        0.40       NGA         2
AZANDE              0.62         ZAR         3         MANYIKA                      0.39       MOZ         2
AZANDE              0.15         CAF         3         MANYIKA                      0.61       ZWE         2
AZANDE              0.23         SDN         3         MASAI                        0.38       KEN         2
AZJER               0.24         LBY         3         MASAI                        0.62       TZA         2
AZJER               0.00         NER         3         MASALIT                      0.13       TCD         2
AZJER               0.75         DZA         3         MASALIT                      0.87       SDN         2
BABUKUR     0.82   ZAR   2   MASHI      0.12   AGO   2
BABUKUR     0.18   SDN   2   MASHI      0.88   ZMB   2
BAJUN       0.37   KEN   2   MASINA     0.82   MLI   3
BAJUN       0.63   SOM   2   MASINA     0.09   BFA   3
BALANTE     0.73   GNB   2   MASINA     0.09   MRT   3
BALANTE     0.27   SEN   2   MATAKAM    0.70   CMR   2
BANYUN      0.48   GNB   2   MATAKAM    0.30   NGA   2
BANYUN      0.52   SEN   2   MBERE      0.02   TCD   3
BANZIRI     0.14   ZAR   2   MBERE      0.24   CMR   3
BANZIRI     0.86   CAF   2   MBERE      0.74   CAF   3
BARABRA     0.31   EGY   2   MBUKUSHU   0.74   AGO   3
BARABRA     0.69   SDN   2   MBUKUSHU   0.15   BWA   3
BARARETTA   0.18   ETH   3   MBUKUSHU   0.12   NAM   3
BARARETTA   0.44   KEN   3   MBUNDA     0.89   AGO   2
BARARETTA   0.38   SOM   3   MBUNDA     0.11   ZMB   2
BARGU       0.77   BEN   4   MENDE      0.18   LBR   3
BARGU       0.03   NER   4   MENDE      0.82   SLE   3
BARGU       0.19   NGA   4   MINIANKA   0.01   CIV   3
BARGU       0.02   BFA   4   MINIANKA   0.72   MLI   3
BASHI       0.09   BDI   3   MINIANKA   0.27   BFA   3
BASHI       0.83   ZAR   3   MOMBERA    0.72   MWI   2
BASHI       0.08   RWA   3   MOMBERA    0.28   ZMB   2
BATA        0.29   CMR   2   MPEZENI    0.11   MWI   2
BATA        0.71   NGA   2   MPEZENI    0.89   ZMB   2
BAYA        0.20   CMR   2   MUNDANG    0.80   TCD   2
BAYA        0.80   CAF   2   MUNDANG    0.20   CMR   2
BERABISH    0.80   MLI   2   MUNDU      0.30   ZAR   2
BERABISH    0.20   MRT   2   MUNDU      0.70   SDN   2
BERTA       0.75   ETH   2   MUSGU      0.76   TCD   2
BERTA       0.25   SDN   2   MUSGU      0.24   CMR   2
BIDEYAT     0.21   LBY   4   NAFANA     0.74   GHA   2
BIDEYAT     0.40   TCD   4   NAFANA     0.26   CIV   2
BIDEYAT     0.03   EGY   4   NALU       0.41   GNB   2
BIDEYAT     0.36   SDN   4   NALU       0.59   GIN   2
BIRIFON     0.52   GHA   3   NAMA       0.18   ZAF   2
BIRIFON     0.47   BFA   3   NAMA       0.82   NAM   2
BOBO        0.20   MLI   2   NAUDEBA    0.87   BEN   2
BOBO        0.80   BFA   2   NAUDEBA    0.13   TGO   2
BOKI        0.22   CMR   2   NDAU       0.86   MOZ   2
BOKI        0.78   NGA   2   NDAU       0.14   ZWE   2
BONDJO      0.14   ZAR   2   NDEMBU     0.26   AGO   3
BONDJO      0.86   COG   2   NDEMBU     0.39   ZAR   3
BONI        0.67   KEN   2   NDEMBU     0.35   ZMB   3
BONI        0.33   SOM   2   NDOGO      0.01   ZAR   3
BORAN       0.46   ETH   2   NDOGO      0.18   CAF   3
BORAN       0.54   KEN   2   NDOGO      0.81   SDN   3
BRONG       0.84   GHA   2   NDUKA      0.23   TCD   2
BRONG       0.16   CIV   2   NDUKA      0.77   CAF   2
BUEM        0.40   GHA   2   NGAMA      0.30   TCD   2
BUEM        0.60   TGO   2   NGAMA       0.70   CAF   2
BULOM       0.85   SLE   2   NGERE       0.65   CIV   3
BULOM       0.15   GIN   2   NGERE       0.29   LBR   3
BUSA        0.14   BEN   2   NGERE       0.06   GIN   3
BUSA        0.86   NGA   2   NGUMBA      0.65   CMR   2
BWAKA       0.81   ZAR   3   NGUMBA      0.35   GNQ   2
BWAKA       0.15   CAF   3   NGWAKETSE   0.86   BWA   2
BWAKA       0.04   COG   3   NGWAKETSE   0.14   ZAF   2
CHAGA       0.24   KEN   2   NSENGA      0.15   MOZ   3
CHAGA       0.76   TZA   2   NSENGA      0.78   ZMB   3
CHAKOSSI    0.27   GHA   2   NSENGA      0.06   ZWE   3
CHAKOSSI    0.73   TGO   2   NSUNGLI     0.78   CMR   2
CHEWA       0.34   MWI   3   NSUNGLI     0.22   NGA   2
CHEWA       0.50   MOZ   3   NUKWE       0.44   AGO   4
CHEWA       0.16   ZMB   3   NUKWE       0.24   BWA   4
CHIGA       0.12   RWA   3   NUKWE       0.05   ZMB   4
CHIGA       0.87   UGA   3   NUKWE       0.26   NAM   4
CHOKWE      0.81   AGO   2   NUSAN       0.30   BWA   3
CHOKWE      0.19   ZAR   2   NUSAN       0.37   ZAF   3
COMORIANS   0.82   COM   2   NUSAN       0.33   NAM   3
COMORIANS   0.18   MYT   2   NYAKYUSA    0.12   MWI   2
DAGARI      0.67   GHA   2   NYAKYUSA    0.88   TZA   2
DAGARI      0.33   BFA   2   NYANGIYA    0.17   SDN   2
DARI        0.78   TCD   2   NYANGIYA    0.83   UGA   2
DARI        0.22   CMR   2   NYANJA      0.64   MWI   2
DAZA        0.27   TCD   2   NYANJA      0.36   MOZ   2
DAZA        0.73   NER   2   NYASA       0.05   MWI   3
DELIM       0.55   ESH   2   NYASA       0.68   MOZ   3
DELIM       0.45   MRT   2   NYASA       0.27   TZA   3
DENDI       0.60   BEN   3   NZANKARA    0.14   ZAR   2
DENDI       0.39   NER   3   NZANKARA    0.86   CAF   2
DIALONKE    0.36   MLI   3   PANDE       0.38   CAF   2
DIALONKE    0.58   GIN   3   PANDE       0.62   COG   2
DIALONKE    0.06   SEN   3   POPO        0.72   BEN   2
DIDINGA     0.04   KEN   3   POPO        0.28   TGO   2
DIDINGA     0.89   SDN   3   PUKU        0.31   CMR   3
DIDINGA     0.07   UGA   3   PUKU        0.49   GNQ   3
DIGO        0.62   KEN   2   PUKU        0.19   GAB   3
DIGO        0.38   TZA   2   REGEIBAT    0.34   ESH   2
DIOLA       0.14   GMB   3   REGEIBAT    0.66   MRT   2
DIOLA       0.07   GNB   3   RESHIAT     0.83   ETH   3
DIOLA       0.78   SEN   3   RESHIAT     0.06   KEN   3
DUMA        0.63   GAB   2   RESHIAT     0.11   SDN   3
DUMA        0.37   COG   2   RONGA       0.60   MOZ   3
DZEM        0.74   CMR   3   RONGA       0.35   ZAF   3
DZEM        0.03   GAB   3   RONGA       0.05   SWZ   3
DZEM        0.24   COG   3   RUANDA      0.02   BDI   5
EGBA        0.41   BEN   3   RUANDA      0.06   ZAR   5
EGBA        0.52   NGA   3   RUANDA      0.89   RWA   5
EGBA          0.07   TGO    3   RUANDA     0.02   TZA    5
EKOI          0.38   CMR    2   RUANDA     0.02   UGA    5
EKOI          0.62   NGA    2   RUNDI      0.76   BDI    4
ESA           0.03    DJI   3   RUNDI      0.04   RWA    4
ESA           0.52   ETH    3   RUNDI      0.20   TZA    4
ESA           0.44   SOM    3   RUNGA      0.74   TCD    3
EWE           0.44   GHA    2   RUNGA      0.26   CAF    3
EWE           0.56   TGO    2   SABEI      0.56   KEN    2
FANG          0.37   CMR    4   SABEI      0.44   UGA    2
FANG          0.07   GNQ    4   SAHO       0.43    ERI   2
FANG          0.54   GAB    4   SAHO       0.57   ETH    2
FANG          0.02   COG    4   SAMO       0.12   MLI    2
FON           0.86   BEN    3   SAMO       0.88   BFA    2
FON           0.14   TGO    3   SANGA      0.26   CMR    3
FOUTADJALON   0.01   MLI    4   SANGA      0.19   CAF    3
FOUTADJALON   0.11   GNB    4   SANGA      0.55   COG    3
FOUTADJALON   0.88   GIN    4   SEKE       0.34   GNQ    2
FOUTADJALON   0.01   SEN    4   SEKE       0.66   GAB    2
FUNGON        0.81   CMR    2   SHAMBALA   0.10   KEN    2
FUNGON        0.19   NGA    2   SHAMBALA   0.90   TZA    2
GADAMES       0.25   LBY    3   SHEBELLE   0.58   ETH    2
GADAMES       0.27   TUN    3   SHEBELLE   0.42   SOM    2
GADAMES       0.48   DZA    3   SHUWA      0.62   TCD    3
GIL           0.80   MAR    2   SHUWA      0.17   CMR    3
GIL           0.20   DZA    2   SHUWA      0.21   NGA    3
GOMANI        0.86   MWI    2   SONGHAI    0.57   MLI    3
GOMANI        0.14   MOZ    2   SONGHAI    0.36   NER    3
GREBO         0.33   CIV    2   SONGHAI    0.07   BFA    3
GREBO         0.67   LBR    2   SONINKE    0.68   MLI    3
GRUNSHI       0.68   GHA    2   SONINKE    0.03   SEN    3
GRUNSHI       0.32   BFA    2   SONINKE    0.29   MRT    3
GUDE          0.83   CMR    2   SOTHO      0.24   LSO    2
GUDE          0.17   NGA    2   SOTHO      0.76   ZAF    2
GULA          0.61   TCD    2   SUBIA      0.11   BWA    4
GULA          0.39   CAF    2   SUBIA      0.53   ZMB    4
GUN           0.48   BEN    2   SUBIA      0.06   ZWE    4
GUN           0.52   NGA    2   SUBIA      0.30   NAM    4
GURENSI       0.74   GHA    3   SUNDI      0.37   ZAR    2
GURENSI       0.13   TGO    3   SUNDI      0.63   COG    2
GURENSI       0.13   BFA    3   SURI       0.71   ETH    2
GURMA         0.15   BEN    4   SURI       0.29   SDN    2
GURMA         0.12   NER    4   SWAZI      0.45   ZAF    2
GURMA         0.01   TGO    4   SWAZI      0.55   SWZ    2
GURMA         0.72   BFA    4   TABWA      0.57   ZAR    2
GUSII         0.53   KEN    2   TABWA      0.43   ZMB    2
GUSII         0.47   TZA    2   TAJAKANT   0.15   MAR    4
HAMAMA        0.80   TUN    2   TAJAKANT   0.14   ESH    4
HAMAMA        0.20   DZA    2   TAJAKANT   0.66   DZA    4
HAUSA         0.14   NER    2   TAJAKANT   0.05   MRT    4
HAUSA        0.86   NGA   2   TAMA             0.30   TCD    2
HIECHWARE    0.81   BWA   2   TAMA             0.70   SDN    2
HIECHWARE    0.19   ZWE   2   TAWARA           0.57   MOZ    2
HLENGWE      0.82   MOZ   3   TAWARA           0.43   ZWE    2
HLENGWE      0.00   ZAF   3   TEDA             0.34   LBY    3
HLENGWE      0.18   ZWE   3   TEDA             0.35   TCD    3
HOLO         0.84   AGO   2   TEDA             0.31   NER    3
HOLO         0.16   ZAR   2   TEKE             0.31   ZAR    3
IBIBIO       0.11   CMR   2   TEKE             0.03   GAB    3
IBIBIO       0.89   NGA   2   TEKE             0.66   COG    3
IFORA        0.30   MLI   2   TEKNA            0.53   MAR    2
IFORA        0.70   DZA   2   TEKNA            0.47   ESH    2
IMRAGEN      0.10   MAR   3   TEM              0.17   BEN    2
IMRAGEN      0.74   ESH   3   TEM              0.83   TGO    2
IMRAGEN      0.16   MRT   3   TENDA            0.57   GIN    2
ISHAAK       0.20   ETH   2   TENDA            0.43   SEN    2
ISHAAK       0.80   SOM   2   THONGA           0.58   MOZ    3
IWA          0.33   TZA   2   THONGA           0.42   ZAF    3
IWA          0.67   ZMB   2   TIENGA           0.22   NER    3
JERID        0.90   TUN   2   TIENGA           0.78   NGA    3
JERID        0.10   DZA   2   TIGON            0.32   CMR    2
JIE          0.24   KEN   2   TIGON            0.68   NGA    2
JIE          0.76   UGA   2   TIGRINYA         0.51    ERI   3
KABRE        0.39   BEN   2   TIGRINYA         0.44   ETH    3
KABRE        0.61   TGO   2   TIGRINYA         0.05   SDN    3
KANEMBU      0.73   TCD   3   TLOKWA           0.14   BWA    3
KANEMBU      0.25   NER   3   TLOKWA           0.77   ZAF    3
KANEMBU      0.02   NGA   3   TLOKWA           0.09   ZWE    3
KAONDE       0.21   ZAR   2   TOMA             0.29   LBR    2
KAONDE       0.79   ZMB   2   TOMA             0.71   GIN    2
KAPSIKI      0.65   CMR   2   TONGA            0.84   ZMB    2
KAPSIKI      0.35   NGA   2   TONGA            0.16   ZWE    2
KARA         0.85   CAF   2   TRIBU            0.25   GHA    2
KARA         0.15   SDN   2   TRIBU            0.75   TGO    2
KARAMOJONG   0.27   KEN   2   TRIPOLITANIANS   0.74   LBY    2
KARAMOJONG   0.73   UGA   2   TRIPOLITANIANS   0.26   TUN    2
KARE         0.75   ZAR   2   TUBURI           0.25   TCD    2
KARE         0.25   CAF   2   TUBURI           0.75   CMR    2
KGATLA       0.13   BWA   2   TUKULOR          0.39   SEN    2
KGATLA       0.87   ZAF   2   TUKULOR          0.61   MRT    2
KISSI        0.12   LBR   3   TUMBUKA          0.74   MWI    2
KISSI        0.02   SLE   3   TUMBUKA          0.26   ZMB    2
KISSI        0.86   GIN   3   TUNISIANS        0.87   TUN    2
KOBA         0.89   BWA   2   TUNISIANS        0.13   DZA    2
KOBA         0.11   NAM   2   UDALAN           0.82   MLI    3
KOMA         0.57   ETH   2   UDALAN           0.05   NER    3
KOMA         0.43   SDN   2   UDALAN           0.13   BFA    3
KOMONO       0.49   CIV   2   VAI              0.76   LBR    2
KOMONO       0.51   BFA   2   VAI              0.24   SLE    2
KONGO                      0.77         AGO           3           VENDA                            0.70         ZAF            2
KONGO                      0.23         ZAR           3           VENDA                            0.30         ZWE            2
KONJO                      0.81         ZAR           2           VILI                             0.20         AGO            4
KONJO                      0.19         UGA           2           VILI                             0.22         ZAR            4
KONKOMBA                   0.24         GHA           2           VILI                             0.11         GAB            4
KONKOMBA                   0.76         TGO           2           VILI                             0.47         COG            4
KONO                       0.74         SLE           2           WAKURA                           0.28         CMR            2
KONO                       0.26         GIN           2           WAKURA                           0.72         NGA            2
KONYANKE                   0.30         CIV           2           WANGA                            0.79         KEN            2
KONYANKE                   0.70         GIN           2           WANGA                            0.21         UGA            2
KORANKO                    0.39         SLE           2           WUM                              0.88         CMR            2
KORANKO                    0.61         GIN           2           WUM                              0.12         NGA            2
KOTA                       0.41         GAB           2           YAKA                             0.16         AGO            2
KOTA                       0.59         COG           2           YAKA                             0.84         ZAR            2
KOTOKO                     0.67         TCD           2           YAKOMA                           0.40         ZAR            2
KOTOKO                     0.33         CMR           2           YAKOMA                           0.60         CAF            2
KPELLE                     0.48         LBR           3           YALUNKA                          0.25         SLE            2
KPELLE                     0.52         GIN           3           YALUNKA                          0.75         GIN            2
KRAN                       0.16         CIV           2           YAO                              0.13         MWI            3
KRAN                       0.84         LBR           2           YAO                              0.65         MOZ            3
KREISH                     0.10         CAF           2           YAO                              0.22         TZA            3
KREISH                     0.90         SDN           2           YOMBE                            0.13         AGO            3
KUNDA                      0.84         MOZ           3           YOMBE                            0.48         ZAR            3
KUNDA                      0.15         ZMB           3           YOMBE                            0.39         COG            3
KUNG                       0.10         BWA           2           ZAGHAWA                          0.14         TCD            2
KUNG                       0.90         NAM           2           ZAGHAWA                          0.86         SDN            2
KUNTA                      0.85         MLI           2           ZEKARA                           0.83         MAR            2
KUNTA                      0.15         DZA           2           ZEKARA                           0.17         DZA            2
KWANGARE                   0.84         AGO           2           ZIMBA                            0.16         MWI            2
KWANGARE                   0.16         NAM           2           ZIMBA                            0.84         MOZ            2

Appendix Table 8 reports the name of partitioned ethnic groups (as coded by Murdock (1959)) and the percentage of the historical
homeland of the split ethnic groups that fall into more than one country. Section 2 gives details on our approach in identifying
partitioned ethnicities.
