                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      REGIME CHANGES AND FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                           Andrew Ang
                                        Allan Timmermann

                                       Working Paper 17182
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17182


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Andrew Ang and Allan Timmermann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Regime Changes and Financial Markets
Andrew Ang and Allan Timmermann
NBER Working Paper No. 17182
June 2011
JEL No. G11,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

Regime switching models can match the tendency of financial markets to often change their behavior
abruptly and the phenomenon that the new behavior of financial variables often persists for several
periods after such a change. While the regimes captured by regime switching models are identified
by an econometric procedure, they often correspond to different periods in regulation, policy, and
other secular changes. In empirical estimates, the regime switching means, volatilities, autocorrelations,
and cross-covariances of asset returns often differ across regimes, which allow regime switching models
to capture the stylized behavior of many financial series including fat tails, heteroskedasticity, skewness,
and time-varying correlations. In equilibrium models, regimes in fundamental processes, like consumption
or dividend growth, strongly affect the dynamic properties of equilibrium asset prices and can induce
non-linear risk-return trade-offs. Regime switches also lead to potentially large consequences for investors'
optimal portfolio choice.


Andrew Ang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway 413 Uris
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu

Allan Timmermann
Department of Economics
University of California
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
atimmerm@ucsd.edu
1    Introduction

Financial markets often change their behavior abruptly. While some changes may be transitory (“jumps”),
often the changed behavior of asset prices persists for many periods. For example, the mean, volatility,
and correlation patterns in stock returns changed dramatically at the start of, and persisted through, the
global financial crisis of 2008-2009. Similar regime changes, some of which can be recurring (recessions
versus expansions) and some of which can be unique (breaks), are prevalent in fixed income, equities,
and foreign exchange markets, and in the behavior of many macro variables. Regime switching models
can capture these sudden changes of behavior, and the phenomenon that the new dynamics of prices and
fundamentals persist for several periods after a change.
    There are several reasons why regime switching models have become popular in financial modeling.
First, the idea of regime changes is natural and intuitive. Indeed, the original application of regime
switching in Hamilton’s (1989) seminal work was to business cycle recessions and expansions and the
regimes naturally captured cycles of economic activity around a long-term trend. Hamilton’s regimes
were closely tied to the notion of recession indicators as identified ex post by the NBER business cycle
dating committee.
    When applied to financial series, regimes identified by econometric methods often correspond to
different periods in regulation, policy, and other secular changes. For example, interest rate behavior
markedly changed from 1979 through 1982, during which the Federal Reserve changed its operating
procedure to targeting monetary aggregates. Other regimes identified in interest rates correspond to
the tenure of different Federal Reserve Chairs (see, for example, Sims and Zha, 2006). In equities,
different regimes correspond to periods of high and low volatility, and long bull and bear market periods
(Pagan and Sossounov, 2003). Thus, regime switching models can match narrative stories of changing
fundamentals that sometimes can only be interpreted ex post, but in a way that can be used for ex-ante
real-time forecasting, optimal portfolio choice, and other economic applications.
    Second, regime switching models parsimoniously capture stylized behavior of many financial return
series including fat tails, persistently occurring periods of turbulence followed by periods of low volatility
(ARCH effects), skewness, and time-varying correlations. By appropriately mixing conditional normal
(or other types of) distributions, large amounts of non-linear effects can be generated. Even when the true
model is unknown, regime switching models can provide a good approximation for more complicated
processes driving security returns. Regime switching models also nest as a special case jump models,
since a jump is a regime which is immediately exited next period and, when the number of regimes is



                                                      1
large, the dynamics of a regime switching model approximates the behavior of time-varying parameter
models where the continuous state space of the parameter is appropriately discretized.
   Finally, another attractive feature of regime switching models is that they are able to capture non-
linear stylized dynamics of asset returns in a framework based on linear specifications, or conditionally
normal or log-normal distributions, within a regime. This makes asset pricing under regime switching
analytically tractable. In particular, regimes introduced into linear asset pricing models can often be
solved in closed form because conditional on the underlying regime, normality (or log-normality) is
recovered. This makes incorporating regime dynamics in affine models straight forward.
   The notion of regimes is closely linked to the familiar concept of good and bad states or states with
low versus high risk, but surprising and somewhat counterintuitive results can be obtained from equilib-
rium asset pricing models with regime changes. Conventional linear asset pricing models imply a positive
and monotonic risk-return relation (e.g., Merton, 1973). In contrast, changes between discrete regimes
with different consumption growth rates can lead to increasing, decreasing, flat or non-monotonic risk-
return relations as shown by, e.g., Backus and Gregory (1993), Whitelaw (2000), Ang and Liu (2007),
and Rossi and Timmermann (2011). Intuitively, non-monotonic patterns arise because “good” and “bad”
regimes, characterized by high and low growth in fundamentals and asset price levels, respectively, may
also be associated with higher uncertainty about future prospects than more stable, “normal” regimes
which are likely to last longer. The possibility of switching across regimes, even if it occurs relatively
rarely, induces an important additional source of uncertainty that investors want to hedge against. Inverse
risk-return trade-offs can result in some regimes because the market portfolio hedges against adverse fu-
ture consumption shocks even though the level of uncertainty (return volatility) is high in these regimes.
Further non-linearities can be generated as a result of investors’ learning about unobserved regimes.
   We begin our review in Section 2 by describing the structure of basic regime switching models.
We discuss how these models can match stylized properties of asset returns in data and show how the
presence of regimes economically affects equilibrium risk-return trade-offs. In Section 3 we show how
these insights have been used by the now extensive regime switching literature to model interest rates,
equity returns, and exchange rates, and for asset allocation. We conclude in Section 4 by describing some
unresolved future research areas for regime switching model applications.




                                                    2
2        Canonical Regime Switching Models

2.1        Modeling Regimes

Consider a variable yt , which depends on its own past history, yt−1 , random shocks, εt , and some regime
process, st . Regimes are generally modeled through a discrete variable, st ∈ {0, 1, ..., k}, tracking the
particular regime inhabited by the process at a given point in time. Although regimes could affect the
entire distribution, they are often limited to affect the intercept, µst , autocorrelation, φst , and volatility,
σst , of the process:1
                                       yt = µst + φst yt−1 + σst εt ,         εt ∼ iid(0, 1).                                    (1)

        To complete the model, the process governing the dynamics of the underlying regime, st , needs to
be specified. It is common to assume that st follows a homogenous first-order Markov chain, Π[i,j] =
Pr(st = j|st−1 = i) = pij . For example, in the common case with two regimes,

                           Pr(st = 0|st−1 = 0) = p00             and     Pr(st = 1|st−1 = 1) = p11 .                             (2)

More generally, regime transitions could be time-varying and depend on the duration of time spent in
the regime (Durland and McCurdy, 1994) or on other state variables (Diebold, Lee and Weinbach, 1994;
Filardo, 1994) in which case pij (t) = Φ(zt ), where zt is conditioning information such as an interest
rate spread or a leading economic indicator, and Φ could be a logit or probit model.


2.1.1       Does History Repeat?

A key issue in regime switching models is whether the same regimes repeat over time, as in the case of
repeated recession and expansion periods, or if new regimes always differ from previous ones. If “history
repeats” and the underlying regimes do not change, all regimes will recur at some time: plus ça change,
plus c’est la même chose. With only two regimes this will happen if pii < 1, i = 0, 1. Models with
recurring regimes have been used to characterize bull and bear markets, calm versus turbulent markets,
and recession and expansion periods.
        An alternative to the assumption of recurring regimes is the change point process considered by
Chib (1998) and studied in the context of dynamics in stock returns by Pastor and Stambaugh (2001) and
Pettenuzzo and Timmermann (2010). In this model, the set of regimes expands over time, each regime
    1
        More broadly, if other conditioning information, zt−1 , affect the mean or volatility, the regime switching process takes the
form yt = µst (yt−1 , zt−1 ) + σst (yt−1 , zt−1 )εt , εt ∼ iid(0, 1).




                                                                   3
is unique, and previous regimes are not visited again:
                                                                          
                                         p00   1 − p00       0        0
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                  0             p11       1 − p11   ···   
                               Π=
                                  ..             ..          ..      ..
                                                                           .
                                                                                                         (3)
                                  .               .           .       .   
                                                                          
                                   0             ···         0       pkk

This type of model is likely to be a good representation of regime shifts related to technological change
and certain types of legislative, or political changes that are irreversible or unlikely to repeat. Of course,
a combination of recurrent regimes and new regimes is possible.


2.2     Estimation Techniques

Different econometric methods can be used to estimate regime switching models. Maximum likelihood
and EM algorithms are outlined by Hamilton (1988, 1989) and Gray (1996). The maximum likelihood
algorithm involves a Bayesian updating procedure which infers the probability of being in a regime
given all available information up until that time, Pr(st |It ), where It is the information set at time t.
An alternative to maximum likelihood estimation is Gibbs sampling, which was developed for regime
switching models by Albert and Chib (1993) and Kim and Nelson (1999).
      An important issue in estimating regime switching models is specifying the number of regimes. This
is often difficult to determine from data and as far as possible the choice should be based on economic
arguments. Such decisions can be difficult since the regimes themselves are often thought of as ap-
proximations to underlying states that are unobserved. It is not uncommon to simply fix the number of
regimes at some value, typically two, rather than basing the decision on econometric tests. The reason is
that tests for the number of regimes are typically difficult to implement because they do not follow stan-
dard distributions. To see this, consider the simple two-regime model in equation (1). Under the null of a
single regime, the parameters of the other regime are not identified and so there are unidentified nuisance
parameters. This means that conventional likelihood ratio tests are not asymptotically χ2 −distributed.
Davies (1977), Hansen (1992), and Cho and White (2007) further discuss this issue. An alternative is to
use residual tests such as Hamilton (1996).
      Having presented a canonical regime switching model, we now discuss how this model matches
many properties of asset returns, in particular skewness and fat tails, downside risk properties, and time-
varying correlations.




                                                       4
2.3     Statistical Properties

2.3.1    Skewness and Fat Tails

An attractive feature of regime switching models is that they capture central statistical features of asset
returns. To illustrate this, consider a simple two-regime switching model:

                                   yt = µst + σst εt ,       εt ∼ iid N (0, 1),                           (4)

where the (unconditional) probability that st = 0 is π0 and st = 1 with probability 1 − π0 . This is a
special case of a regime switching model (1) with no autoregressive terms.
      Figure 1 plots the probability density functions (pdfs) corresponding to this mixture of two normals
for (µ0 = 1, σ0 = 1), (µ1 = −2, σ1 = 2), and π0 = 0.8. The mixture of the two normals produces
pronounced negative skewness. Timmermann (2000) derives the moments of a general regime-switching
process with constant transition probabilities. As a special case, it can be shown that the first four central
moments of the process in equation (4) are given by:

          E[yt ] = π0 µ0 + (1 − π0 )µ1 ,

       V ar(yt ) = π0 (1 − π0 )(µ0 − µ1 )2 + π0 σ02 + (1 − π0 )σ12 ,
                                         £                                    ¤
      skew(yt ) = π0 (1 − π0 )(µ0 − µ1 ) (1 − 2π0 )(µ0 − µ1 )2 + 3(σ02 − σ12 ) ,
                                           £                                                        ¤
       kurt(yt ) = π0 (1 − π0 )(µ0 − µ1 )2 ((1 − π0 )3 + π03 )(µ0 − µ1 )2 + 6π0 σ12 + 6(1 − π0 )σ02

                         +3π0 σ04 + 3(1 − π0 )σ14 .                                                       (5)

      Differences in means across regimes, µ0 − µ1 , enter the higher moments such as variance, skew, and
kurtosis. In particular, the variance is not simply the average of the variances across the two regimes:
the difference in means also imparts an effect because the switch to a new regime contributes to volatil-
ity. Intuitively, the possibility of changing to a new regime with a different mean introduces an extra
source of risk. Skew only arises in this model if the means differ across the two regimes (µ0 6= µ1 ).
Richer expressions, with similar intuition, apply with regime-dependent autoregressive terms and a full
transition probability matrix. For the case shown in Figure 1, the mean is -0.50, the standard deviation
is 2.18 (bigger than the largest individual standard deviation), the coefficient of skew is -0.65, while the
coefficient of kurtosis in this case at 2.85 falls below that of the normal distribution.
      Importantly, differences in means in addition to differences in variances can generate persistence in
levels as well as squared values−akin to volatility persistence observed in many return series. For the



                                                         5
simple model in equation (4), we have

                 cov(yt , yt−1 ) = π0 (1 − π0 )(µ0 − µ1 )2 [p00 + p11 − 1]

                 cov(yt2 , yt−1
                            2
                                ) = π0 (1 − π0 )(µ20 − µ21 + σ02 − σ12 )2 [p00 + p11 − 1] .              (6)

Again differences in means play an important role in generating autocorrelation in first moments−without
such differences, the autocorrelation will be zero. In contrast, volatility persistence can be induced either
by differences in means or by differences in variances across regimes. In both cases, the persistence
tends to be greater, the stronger the combined persistence of the regimes, as measured by (p00 + p11 − 1).
For the case shown in Figure 1, the first-order autocorrelation of the series in levels is 0.28, while the
first-order autocorrelation for the squared series is 0.13.


2.3.2   Time-Varying Correlations

A stylized fact of asset returns is that correlations increase during market downturns as shown by Longin
and Solnik (2001), Ang and Chen (2002), and others. Regime switching models are able to match
these patterns well through persistence in the probabilities of staying in a regime with low means, high
volatilities, and high correlations. To illustrate this, Figure 2 reproduces Longin and Solnik (2001)
exceedance correlations on US and UK equity returns computed by Ang and Bekaert (2002a).
    An exceedance correlation is defined as follows. Consider observations {(y1 , y2 )} drawn from a
bivariate variable Y = (y1 , y2 ). Suppose the exceedance level θ is positive (negative). Consider ob-
servations where values of y1 and y2 are greater (or less) than θ percent of their empirical means, i.e.,
the subset of observations {(y1 y2 )|y1 ≥ (1 + θ)ȳ1 and y2 ≥ (1 + θ)ȳ2 } for θ ≥ 0 and {(y1 y2 )|y1 ≤
(1 + θ)ȳ1 and y2 ≤ (1 + θ)ȳ2 } for θ ≤ 0, where ȳj is the mean of yj . The correlation of this subset of
points is termed the exceedance correlation.
    Figure 2 shows that the exceedance correlations of US-UK returns in the data exhibit a pronounced
asymmetric pattern, with negative exceedance correlations higher than positive exceedance correlations.
A bivariate regime switching model of US-UK returns matches this pattern closely. Note that a GARCH
model with asymmetry cannot match this pattern. In the regime switching model, one regime is charac-
terized by low means but high correlations and volatility. This bad regime is persistent so a draw from
this regime makes a draw next period from the same regime more likely. Ang and Chen (2002) show
that a model which combines normally distributed returns with transitory negative jumps also fails to
reproduce the Longin-Solnik figure.



                                                      6
2.4     Asset Pricing with Regimes

The regime switching model is not simply an empirical model that can closely match stylized statistical
properties of financial returns. When regimes are embedded in an equilibrium specification, they generate
realistic and interesting dynamics in risk-return relations. Indeed, the ability to capture various elements
of higher moment dynamics, particularly non-linear time-series patterns, is highlighted when regimes
are considered in equilibrium.
      To illustrate this, we start with the conventional asset pricing model based on a representative agent
with utility U over consumption, Ct , and subjective discount factor, β. Let Pt be period-t price of equity
which pays out a dividend, Dt . Following Lucas (1978):

                                  Pt U 0 (Ct ) = βEt [U 0 (Ct+1 )(Pt+1 + Dt+1 )],                         (7)

where Et is the conditional expectation. We assume power utility, U (C) = C 1+γ /(1 + γ), where
γ 6= −1. We further assume that consumption is equal to dividends each period, Ct = Dt . Thus, the
Euler equation (7) becomes
                                      Pt Dtγ = βEt [Dt+1
                                                     γ
                                                         (Pt+1 + Dt+1 )].                                 (8)

The quantity Mt+1 = βU 0 (Ct+1 )/U 0 (Ct ) is called the stochastic discount factor.
      We consider a generalization of Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990) where the dividend process is
subject to switches in both the mean and volatility:

                 Dt+1 = Dt exp (α0 + α1 st+1 + (σ0 + σ1 st+1 )εt+1 ) ,        εt ∼ iid N (0, 1),          (9)

where st = {0, 1} follows the two-regime process in equation (2) and is independent of all current,
future, and past values of εt . This type of model with regime switching in either consumption or div-
idend growth appears to be strongly supported by empirical evidence, see, e.g., Cecchetti, Lam and
Mark (1990), Whitelaw (2000), Bekaert and Liu (2004), and Lettau, Ludvigsson and Wachter (2008)).
      Investors are assumed to know st at time t (but not st+1 ) and so set prices conditional on the pre-
vailing regime. Let πt0 = 1 if st = 0, otherwise st = 1, so that πt0 is an indicator tracking the current
regime. Using the transition probabilities in equation (2), the conditionally expected dividend becomes
the current dividend times the weighted average of dividend growth in the two regimes:
                           X
        Et [Dt+1 |st ] =          E[Dt+1 |st+1 ] Pr(st+1 |st )
                           st+1

                       = Dt exp(α0 + σ02 /2) [πt0 p00 + (1 − πt0 )(1 − p11 )]                            (10)

                              +Dt exp((α0 + α1 ) + (σ0 + σ1 )2 /2) [πt0 (1 − p00 ) + (1 − πt0 )p11 ] .

                                                         7
Even though future dividend growth is not log-normally distributed, by conditioning on the future regime
and weighting appropriately by the regime transition probabilities, a closed-form expression for the ex-
pected future dividend is obtained.
    Following Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990), we conjecture that the solution for the asset price takes
the form
                                          Pt = ρ(st )Dt ,   st = {0, 1}                                (11)

The price-dividend ratio is constant within each regime–although it depends in a highly nonlinear way
on the parameters of the consumption/dividend process and investor preferences−and takes only a finite
number of values equivalent to the number of different regimes:
                                                                                      
                ρ(0)             1 − β̃ α̃ p   β̃ α̃ (1 −  p    )    p   + α̃   (1 − p    )
                     = β̃0          0 1 11    0 1         00
                                                                    00      1        00
                                                                                                      (12)
                ρ(1)       ∆     β̃ (1 − p )      1 − β̃ p           (1 − p ) + α̃ p
                                      0        11            0 00              11      1 11

where

                     β̃0 = β exp((1 + γ)α0 + (1 + γ)2 σ02 /2)

                     α̃1 = exp((1 + γ)α1 + (1 + γ)2 [σ0 σ1 + σ12 /2])

                     ∆ = (1 − β̃0 p00 )(1 − β̃0 α̃1 p11 ) − β̃02 α̃1 (1 − p11 )(1 − p00 ).

    To gain intuition for this result, consider the case with persistent high-growth and low-growth regimes.
Starting from the high-growth regime, investors expect high future endowment growth. This lowers the
relative price of future endowments, raises current savings and demand for the risky asset, and thereby
increases the current stock price. Conversely, investors’ desire to intertemporally smooth their con-
sumption leads them to consume more today, sell off their risky asset holdings, and thus reduces the
current stock price. Which effect dominates depends on the degree of concavity of the utility function.
If γ = −1 (log utility), the two effects cancel out and the price-dividend ratio is independent of the
underlying regime. If γ > −1, the intertemporal relative price effect dominates and the price-dividend
ratio is highest in the high-growth regime, while if γ < −1, the intertemporal consumption smoothing
effect dominates and so the price-dividend ratio is highest in the low-growth regime.
    With the solution to the asset price in place, (gross) returns are easily computed:

                    Pt+1 + Dt+1   (ρ(st+1 ) + 1)
           Rt+1 ≡               =                × exp(α0 + α1 st+1 + (σ0 + σ1 st+1 )εt+1 ).           (13)
                         Pt           ρ(st )

This expression is consistent with the empirical evidence reviewed in the next section, of strong regime
dependence in asset returns. In this model, return variations arise from two sources. First, there is the

                                                        8
usual variation due to uncertainty about future dividend growth, which in this case becomes compounded
by the dependence of such growth on the unknown future regime. Second, there is variation over time
in the price-dividend ratio. This second source is induced by the presence of regimes and arises because
realized returns depend on both current and next-period regimes. If the parameters of the dividend
process are sufficiently different across the two regimes and preferences are different from log-utility
(γ 6= −1), price-dividend ratios can be highly regime-dependent and regime switches will have large
effects on returns.
    The presence of persistent regimes in consumption growth means that the conditional expected return
depends on the current regime and hence becomes time-varying:

                                   ρ(0) + 1
           Et [Rt+1 |st = 0] = p00          × exp(α0 + σ02 /2)
                                     ρ(0)
                                             ρ(1) + 1
                                 +(1 − p00 )          × exp(α0 + α1 + (σ0 + σ1 )2 /2),
                                               ρ(0)
                                   ρ(1) + 1
           Et [Rt+1 |st = 1] = p11          × exp(α0 + α1 + (σ0 + σ1 )2 /2)
                                     ρ(1)
                                             ρ(0) + 1
                                 +(1 − p11 )          × exp(α0 + σ02 /2).                               (14)
                                               ρ(1)

    To better understand these expressions, consider again the model with persistent high-growth and
low-growth regimes. Assuming that the price-dividend ratio is not too regime dependent, i.e., γ is “close”
to minus one, expected returns will be higher when starting from the regime associated with the highest
expected growth in dividends. This result can be overturned, however, when the dividend growth rate in
one regime has a high mean but a low variance and γ > −1, so the price-dividend ratio is highest in the
high-growth regime.
    Similar expressions can be derived for the variance of returns conditional on the current regime. In
fact, the conventional finding of a monotonic and linear relation between the equity premium and the
conditional variance of returns need not hold in this model. For example, when γ is close to minus one,
so the price-dividend ratio does not vary much across the two regimes, the mean return can be highest in
the high-growth regime, while simultaneously the variance of returns may be highest in the low-growth
regime, e.g., as a result of higher dividend growth volatility in this regime (i.e., µ1 < 0, σ1 > 0).
    This analysis shows that regimes in the consumption/dividend process endogenously generates dif-
ferences across regimes in expected returns and return volatility. Combined with our earlier results in
equations (5) and (6), this simple model is further capable of generating skews, kurtosis, serial correlation
and volatility clustering in equilibrium returns.
    The findings for this simple model–that introducing regimes in consumption growth can result in

                                                     9
time-varying expected returns, skewness, regime-dependent volatility, and an inverted equilibrium risk-
return relation–extends to more complex settings. Garcia, Meddahi and Tedongap (2008) and Bonomo
et al. (2011) generalize the analysis to a setting where investors have either Epstein-Zin recursive prefer-
ences or generalized disappointment aversion and where the dividend and consumption processes need
not be identical. Calvet and Fisher (2007) use an equilibrium regime switching model to introduce shocks
that last from less than a day to several decades. They find that their model can generate a large volatility
feedback and produces a trade-off between skewness and kurtosis in asset returns. In all these models,
as well as in the solution in equation (12), the price-dividend ratio can only take one of k + 1 different
values, corresponding to the number of regimes. By introducing lagged consumption as in Whitelaw
(2000) or other state-variable dependence of consumption, price-dividend ratios and expected returns
can depend not only on regimes, but also vary continuously as a function of other variables.


2.4.1   Rare Events and Disasters

A number of studies have argued that rare disasters can have a major impact on equilibrium asset prices.
These disasters are usually modeled as a transitory jump where consumption levels drop substantially.
These types of jumps are special cases of a more general regime switching process where one regime
has very high exit probabilities, or always exits next period, depending on the frequency at which data
are modeled. In the two-regime transition probabilities of equation (2), st = 1 would correspond to a
disaster regime if p10 is close to one and the mean of consumption conditional on st = 1 is set to a very
low number. Thus, a rare disaster event is a particularly bad and transitory regime.
    In Rietz (1988), consumption follows a first-order Markov process with three regimes, two of which
correspond to “normal” regimes and the third corresponds to a “crash” regime. The model has zero
probability of staying in the crash regime and equal probabilities of moving to the normal regimes. In
Barro (2006), there is a regular consumption process and a disaster process, which has a small probability
of occurring every period. This is a special case of a simple switching model similar to equation (4). Both
studies find that the possibility of rare disasters can significantly raise the equity premium.
    Even if rare disasters are not directly observed in data, they may affect price dynamics if agents take
into account the probability of a rarely occurring regime which has yet to be realized. Thus, regime
switching models are well suited to capturing “Peso” problems, where prices reflect possible discrete
changes in the future distribution of shocks. Evans (1996) provides a summary of regime switching
applications to various Peso problems.




                                                     10
2.5     Learning about Unobserved Regimes

The simple equilibrium regime switching process of the previous subsection assumed that agents know
which regime applies at each time. This is a valid assumption in many cases, such as a credible policy
change, e.g. a switch in currency or monetary policy regime. In other cases, regimes cannot be identified
in real time. Then, the underlying regime is treated as a latent variable that is unobserved by economic
researchers and possibly also by agents in the economy. This introduces a filtering problem as agents
learn about regimes. The filtering algorithm uses Bayes’ rule to update beliefs according to how likely
new observations are drawn from different regimes, which are weighted by prior beliefs concerning the
previous regimes. The higher the persistence of the regimes, the greater the weight on past data.
      To briefly illustrate the effect of learning, assume that the regime process follows the two-regime
model of equation (2). Assume that the two distributions are N (1, 12 ) and N (−2, 22 ) for st = 0 and
st = 1, respectively, which are the same distributions as those in Figure 1. We assume that p00 = 0.95
and p11 = 0.80. Figure 3 shows a particular path drawn from this model. The true regime path is
shown in the solid blue line and the inferred (filtered) regime probability is graphed in the dashed green
line. The updated regime probabilities track the underlying regime quite accurately, but at times miss an
important regime change (as in the case of the third regime change) and at other times issue false alarms.
This emphasizes the difficulty associated with real-time tracking of the underlying regime.
      Learning of the type illustrated in Figure 3 can have a significant effect on equilibrium asset prices as
shown by Veronesi (2000), Timmermann (2001), Calvet and Fisher (2007), David and Veronesi (2009),
and Cenesizoglu (2011). Because the underlying regime is rarely known with certainty and can undergo
abrupt shifts, agents’ beliefs and the dynamics of learning will affect equilibrium asset prices even if
the underlying model parameters are known. Veronesi (1999) considers a model where the drift of
the dividend process changes between two regimes. Agents update their beliefs about the underlying
regime by observing past and current dividends and the equilibrium stock price is a convex function of
their posterior estimate of the regime probability. Veronesi shows that agents’ attempt to hedge against
their own uncertainty about the underlying regime can lead to patterns of over- and underreaction in
how news are incorporated into asset prices. This model leads to higher asset price volatility during
times with high uncertainty about the underlying regime which typically occurs around recessions, thus
matching the stylized finding that stock return volatility is countercyclical. Calvet and Fisher (2007)
and Cenesizoglu (2011) further show how regimes can account for time-varying, state-dependent and
asymmetric reaction of equilibrium stock prices to news.
      Learning can also induce non-linearities in risk-return trade-offs and volatility clustering. David and


                                                       11
Veronesi (2009) consider a three-regime model with transitory “good” and “bad” regimes and a more
persistent “normal” regime in fundamentals. Asset prices are dominated by directional information and
so are lowest in the bad regime and highest in the good regime. Conversely, uncertainty is highest in
the good and bad regimes, due to the low probability of remaining in these regimes, and lowest in the
normal regime. This creates a V-shaped relation between return volatility and valuation measures which
in turn can give rise to an inverse V-shaped relation between volatility and expected returns. Timmer-
mann (2001) shows how regime switching in the dividend growth process and agents’ learning about
the underlying regime can give rise to volatility clustering in asset returns, volatility being particularly
high after a break in the dividend growth process at which point uncertainty about fundamentals is at its
highest.



3      Applications in Finance

In this section we survey regime switching applications in finance. We begin by characterizing the salient
features of regime switching estimations that are shared by almost all applications in the literature. To do
this we present estimates of regime switching models applied to equity returns, interest rates, and foreign
exchange returns. We then discuss how the literature has added to these benchmark specifications. In
each case, we highlight how the empirical estimates bring out both the statistical and economic properties
summarized by the previous section.


3.1     Typical Estimations

We estimate the regime switching model (1) on equity excess returns, which are total returns (dividend
plus capital gain) on the S&P500 in excess of T-bills; interest rates, which are three-month T-bill yields;
and foreign exchange excess returns (FX returns), which are returns from converting one USD into
Deutschmarks or Euros, earning the German T-bill return, and then converting back to USD, in excess
of the US T-bill return. That is, the foreign exchange return is the uncovered interest rate parity return.
Table 1 reports the parameter estimates and reveals some common properties of regime switching esti-
mations. We assume two regimes which are ordered so that st = 0 represents the high volatility regime.
The data frequency is monthly in all cases.
      First, regimes are mostly identified by volatility. In all cases, conditional on there being two regimes,
we cannot reject that the regime-dependent means are equal to each other, µ0 = µ1 , but overwhelmingly
reject that σ0 = σ1 . Estimating means of returns is difficult even in a setting without regimes, as the


                                                       12
unconditional mean can only be pinned down by long time series (see Merton, 1980). Thus, it is not
surprising that the means conditional on each regime are harder to identify as the number of observations
of each regime must necessarily be less than the total number of observations in the sample.2
       Despite means being hard to pin down, there are some natural economic properties of the mean
estimators. For excess equity returns, there is a high volatility regime that has, on average, low returns.
This regime naturally corresponds to bear markets. This pattern has been found since the earliest studies
of regime switches on equity returns like Hamilton and Susmel (1994). It may at first seem puzzling
that the high-volatility regime has the lowest expected return. However, as we have seen in Section 2.3,
equilibrium asset pricing models are consistent with a negative risk-return trade-off in some regimes.
Further, it should be noted that these are not ex-ante expected returns and ex-ante volatility estimates,
since they do not account for the probability of switching across regimes or learning in real time about
the regime.
       Ignoring the mild evidence of serial correlation in equity returns, the model-implied coefficient of
skewness and kurtosis from equation (5) is -0.09 and 3.62, respectively. If the means are not different
across regimes, the model-implied skewness and kurtosis would be zero and 3.63. Interestingly, the
model-implied first-order autocorrelation in the squared return series induced by regime switching is
very high at 0.77, demonstrating the ability of the model to generate persistence in squares without
inducing serial correlation in levels (the first-order serial correlation induced by regimes in returns is
essentially zero).
       Second, for persistent processes like interest rates, mean reversion coefficients often differ across
regimes. In fact, even for returns which are close to i.i.d., like equity returns and foreign exchange
returns, we reject that φ0 = φ1 . In Table 1, the three-month T-bill yield behaves like a random walk
when volatility is low. Ang and Bekaert (2002c) interpret this as arising from the smoothing efforts
of activist monetary policy during normal times. When the Federal Reserve intervenes aggressively,
volatility of short rates increases but since these periods of assertive interventions tend to be temporary,
mean reversion in the high volatility regime is lower. An attractive feature of regime switching models is
that although the interest rate is non-stationary in one regime, as long as a recurrent regime is sufficiently
mean-reverting, the overall process remains stationary as shown by Holst et al. (1994) and Ang and
   2
       For the regime switching model applied to three-month T-bill yields, µ0 = −0.0170, which is statistically insignificantly
different from zero and also statistically insignificantly different from µ1 , even though T-bill yields have never been negative
in the sample. The regime switching model is estimated by maximum likelihood and matches unconditional moments closely.
Intuitively in regime st = 0, the regime switching model picks up large, volatile changes in interest rates (see Figure 4), which
are slightly negative, on average.



                                                               13
Bekaert (1998).
       Finally, the regimes are persistent with p00 and p11 both being close to one. This persistence of
regimes plays an important role in generating volatility clustering, so periods of high volatility are
followed by high volatility and periods of low volatility are followed by low volatility as shown in
equation (6). In Figure 4, we plot the smoothed regime probabilities of the high volatility regime,
Pr(st = 0|IT ), conditioning on the whole sample of the regime switching models estimated on each
asset return. For equity returns, Panel A shows that the regimes are largely identified by volatility. For
example, the period between 1997-2003 is classified as a high volatility regime and encompasses both
the bull market of the late 1990s and the subsequent crash of internet stocks and the market decline in
the early 2000s. For interest rates in Panel B, the high volatility regime includes both the volatile interest
rates in the early 1970s due to the OPEC oil shocks, the high and very volatile interest rates during the
monetary targeting experiment over 1979-1982, and more recently the pronounced decrease in interest
rates during the early 2000s and during the financial crisis post-2007. The high volatility regime is least
persistent for foreign exchange returns in Panel C. There, the high volatility regime closely corresponds
to sudden depreciations of the USD (Table 1 shows that µ0 = 0.46% per month compared to µ1 = 0.01%
per month).
       With the properties of a typical regime switching estimation in mind, we now discuss significant,
specific contributions of the literature, beginning with equity returns.


3.2       Equity Returns

The basic regime switching specification (1) applied to equity returns presented in Table 1 and Figure 4
models only the equity return as a function of its own lagged value. A large number of studies find that
aggregate stock market returns are predictable. The strength of this predictability, however, has varied
considerably over time. The predictable power of many instruments used in the literature to predict
excess aggregate equity returns, like dividend yields, term spreads, and default spreads, declined or even
disappeared over the 1990s as documented by Welch and Goyal (2008) and Ang and Bekaert (2007),
among others, and formally tested by Pesaran and Timmermann (2002).
       One response is that the strength of predictability−or even the unconditional return distribution (Ma-
heu and McCurdy, 2009)−changes over time and is subject to breaks and parameter instability (see, e.g.,
Schaller and van Norden, 1997; Paye and Timmermann, 2006; Rapach and Wohar, 2006; Johannes, Ko-
rteweg and Polson, 2011).3 This is the approach of Henkel, Martin and Nardari (2011) who capture the
   3
       Another response to the lack of predictability is that predictability was never there, see e.g. Bossaerts and Hillion (1999)



                                                                 14
time-varying nature of return predictability in a regime switching context. They use a regime switch-
ing VAR with several predictors, including dividend yields, and interest rate variables along with stock
returns. They find that predictability is very weak during business cycle expansions but is very strong
during recessions. Thus, most predictability occurs during market downturns and the regime switch-
ing model captures this counter-cyclical predictability by exhibiting significant predictability only in the
contraction regime.
    Predictability, and its regime-dependent nature, is a form of time-varying first moment of returns.
Regime switching models have also been extensively applied to time-varying second moments. In fact,
regime switching models themselves generate heteroskedasticity (see equation (6)). Under the traditional
ARCH and GARCH models of Engle (1982) and Bollerslev (1986), changes in volatility are sometimes
found to be too gradual and unable to capture, despite the additions of asymmetries and other tweaks
to the original GARCH formulations, sudden changes in volatilities. Hamilton and Susmel (1994) and
Hamilton and Lin (1996) developed regime-switching versions of ARCH dynamics applied to equity
returns that allowed volatilities to rapidly change to new regimes. A version of regime switching GARCH
was proposed by Gray (1996). There have been applications of regime switching to option volatilities
and option valuation as well, such as Dueker (1997) and Bollen, Gray and Whaley (2000), among others.
    There have been many versions of regime switching models applied to vectors of asset returns. Ang
and Bekaert (2002a) and Ang and Chen (2002) show that regime switching models provide the best fit out
of many alternative models to capture the tendency of many assets to exhibit higher correlations during
down markets than in up markets. Ang and Chen (2002) interestingly find that there is little additional
benefit to allowing regime switching GARCH effects compared to the heteroskedasticity already present
in a standard regime switching model of normals.
    It is reasonable to expect that if the market portfolio exhibits regime switches, then portfolios of
stocks would also switch regimes and the regimes and behavior within each regime of the portfolios
should be related across portfolios. This is indeed the case. Perez-Quiros and Timmermann (2000),
Gu (2005), and Guidolin and Timmermann (2008b), among others, fit regime switching models to a
small cross section of stock portfolios. On the one hand, these studies show that the magnitude of size
and value premiums, among other things, varies across regimes in the same direction. On the other hand,
the dynamics of certain stock portfolios react differently across regimes, such as small firms displaying
the greatest differences in sensitivities to credit risk across recessions and expansions compared to large
firms. Factor loadings of value and growth firms also differ significantly across regimes.
and Welch and Goyal (2008).



                                                    15
3.3     Interest Rates

Regimes in interest rates identified in empirical work by, e.g., Hamilton (1988), Sola and Driffill (1994),
Gray, (1996), Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (2001), Ang and Bekaert (2002b,c), and others, are often
linked to underlying monetary policy regimes. Using conventional decompositions of the nominal in-
terest rate, such regimes could reflect dynamics in real rates, inflation expectations, or the inflation risk
premium. The literature has found evidence of regimes in all these components, some of which are not
directly observable. Ang, Bekaert and Wei (2008) build a model which allows for switches in real rate
factors, inflation, and risk premiums. Previously, regimes in real rates (Garcia and Perron, 1996) and
regimes in inflation (Evans and Wachtel, 1993; Evans and Lewis, 1995) were only separately consid-
ered. By considering two regimes in real rate factors and two regimes in inflation, Ang, Bekaert and Wei
expand out the regimes to a total of four regimes.
      Ang, Bekaert and Wei find that most of the time real short rates and inflation are drawn from a regime
where short rates are relatively low and stable and inflation is relatively high and not volatile. The stable
probability of this regime is over 70%. Their inflation regimes are characterized as “normal inflation”
and regimes of disinflation. During the regimes with decreasing inflation, the real rate curve is downward
sloping. These regimes only occur after 1982 and are consistent with activist monetary policy raising real
rates through actions at the short-end of the yield curve and achieving disinflation. That these regimes
only appear after 1982 is consistent with Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000), Boivin (2006), and others who
document a structural break before and after Federal Reserve Chairman Volcker.
      Ang, Bekaert and Wei’s regime switching term structure model is able to identify latent factors and
regime switches in real rate and inflation components through the cross section of bond yields (the term
structure). Their model builds on the popular affine models (see Duffie and Kan, 1996) and maintains
tractability by maintaining exponential affine forms of bond prices conditional on the prevailing regime.
That is, in a standard affine bond pricing model, the time t price of a zero-coupon bond maturing in T
periods, P (t, T ) can be written as

                                       P (t, T ) = exp(A(T ) + B(T )0 Xt ),                             (15)

for some factors Xt . The coefficients A(T ) and B(T ) are a function of the dynamics of Xt and the
specification of bond risk premiums. In the regime switching models developed by Ang, Bekaert and
Wei (2008), the factors Xt and risk premiums can switch regimes so that conditional on the regime st ,
the bond price can be written as

                                  P (t, T |st ) = exp(A(T, st ) + B(T )0 Xt ).                          (16)

                                                       16
Ang, Bekaert and Wei can accommodate switches only in the conditional mean and volatilities of Xt .
Dai, Singleton and Yang (2007) present a similar regime switching model that incorporates regime-
dependent mean reversion and regime-dependent probabilities under the real measure, but these param-
eters still cannot switch regimes under the risk-neutral pricing measure. Bansal and Zhou (2002) and
Bansal, Tauchen and Zhou (2004) develop approximate solutions of the form

                                P (t, T |st ) ≈ exp(A(T, st ) + B(T, st )0 Xt ).                     (17)

when all parameters switch under both the real and risk-neutral measures.
      A related literature has tried to endogenize the monetary policy regimes in equilibrium models. Bik-
bov and Chernov (2008) develop a no-arbitrage term structure model where output shocks, inflation
shocks, and monetary policy all change regimes in a macro model. In their model, the response of
the monetary authority to output and inflation changes across regimes. Davig and Leeper (2007) and
Farmer, Waggoner and Zha (2009) also embed re-occurring policy shifts into macro DSGE models. All
of these authors allow agents to recognize that policy shifts can and do occur and this recognition of the
probability that regimes can change affect equilibrium output and inflation outcomes.


3.4     Exchange Rates

Exchange rates are characterized by highly persistent trends, punctuated by abrupt changes, which
regime switching models capture well (see, for example, Panel C of Figure 4). These regimes have some
link with underlying currency policy for some currencies, as discussed by Froot and Obstfeld (1991),
Engel and Hakkio (1996), Dahlquist and Gray (2000), such as a switch from a free float regime to a
target zone, target bands, or an exchange rate peg. The “carry trade,” which is investing in high interest
rate currencies by borrowing in currencies with low interest rates, is well known to exhibit long periods
of steady gains with sudden periods of high volatility with reversals of the previous regime’s gains. More
recent papers, like Ichiue and Koyama (2007) continue to confirm this behavior, which has been docu-
mented pervasively in the literature since Engel and Hamilton (1990) and Bekaert and Hodrick (1993).
This regime switching behavior of “going up by the stairs and coming down by the elevator” can result
from the action of monetary policy as shown by Plantin and Shin (2009) and Backus et al. (2010). In
Plantin and Shin (2009), a risky asset price can deviate from its fundamental value with a fixed probabil-
ity, but snaps back to its fundamentals price from time to time. This is an example of a two-regime model
where one regime represents the long-run fundamentals price, while the other regime allows prices to
deviate from their fundamentals.


                                                      17
3.5      Asset Allocation

A natural question given the overwhelming existence of regimes is which portfolios should be optimally
held in each regime, and whether there is an optimal portfolio to hedge against the risk of regime changes.
The first paper to examine asset allocation with regime changes was Ang and Bekaert (2002a), who
examine portfolio choice for a small number of countries. They exploit the ability of the regime switching
model to capture higher correlations during market downturns and examine the question of whether such
higher correlations during bear markets negate the benefits of international diversification. They find
there are still large benefits of international diversification. The costs of ignoring the regimes is very
large when a risk-free asset can be held; investors need to be compensated approximately 2 to 3 cents
per dollar of initial wealth to not take into account regime changes.
       Figure 5, which is a reproduction from Ang and Bekaert (2004), conveys the intuition for the effects
of regime shifts on asset allocation. There are two regimes in an international CAPM: the high volatility
regime has the lowest Sharpe ratio and its mean-standard deviation frontier is the closest from the bot-
tom. The low volatility regime has the highest Sharpe ratio. The unconditional mean-standard deviation
frontier averages across the two mean-standard deviation frontiers and is drawn in the solid blue line.
An investor who ignores regimes sits on this unconditional frontier. Clearly, an investor can do better by
holding a higher Sharpe ratio portfolio when the low volatility-high Sharpe ratio regime prevails. Con-
versely, when the bad regime occurs, the investor who ignores regimes holds too high an equity weight
and would have been better off shifting into the risk-free asset.
       While Figure 5 considers mean-variance utility, investors usually care about more than the first two
moments. Guidolin and Timmermann (2008a) consider asset allocation over international assets with a
regime switching model by an investor who takes into account skew and kurtosis preferences. Regime
switching models generate skewness and kurtosis (see equation (5)) and so the regime switching data
generating process is natural to use with utility functions that capture the effect of higher moments.4
They find that the presence of regimes leads to a substantial home-biased portfolio for a US investor, and
the introduction of skew and kurtosis preferences leads to further home biases. The strong persistence
of the regimes (see Table 1) generates interesting “term structures of risk” linking the variance and
higher order moments to the investment horizon (see Guidolin and Timmermann, 2006). Guidolin and
Timmermann (2007) show that these can have significant effects on long-term hedging demands.
       In Figure 5, the risk-return trade-offs are known in each regime. Given the parameters, the investor
can infer which regime prevails at each time. This updating of the probability of the current regime,
   4
       Higher moment risk does enter Ang and Bekaert’s (2002a) CRRA utility, but CRRA utility is locally mean-variance.


                                                              18
given all information up to time t, can be computed using methods similar to the learning problem in
Section 2.5. A further consideration is that the parameters themselves have estimation error. Guidolin and
Timmermann (2008a) and Tu (2010) tackle the problem of parameter uncertainty in a regime switching
model applied to asset allocation problems. Tu (2010) finds that even after taking into account param-
eter uncertainty, the cost of ignoring the regimes is considerable. This is consistent with the finding in
Pettenuzzo and Timmermann (2010) that uncertainty about future regimes can have a large effect on in-
vestors’ optimal long-run asset allocation decisions which can even change from being upward-sloping
in the investment horizon in the absence of multiple regimes to being downward-sloping once uncertainty
associated with future regime changes is accounted for.



4    Conclusion

We have discussed how regime changes are modeled, their impact on equilibrium asset prices, and the
empirical evidence consistent with regimes in a variety of asset return series in fixed income, equities,
and currency markets. An important remaining issue is, “What gives rise to regimes?” In some instances,
the discrete shift from one regime to another may result from a change in economic policy, e.g. a shift
in monetary or exchange rate regime. In other cases, a major event, such as the bankruptcy of Lehman
in September 2008, or the 1973 oil crisis, may be the trigger. More broadly, however, regimes can
approximate swings in the state of the economy which may not be of a binary nature and build up over
time.
    Another possibility is that regimes are driven by investor expectations. Branch and Evans (2010)
propose a framework with boundedly rational investors who use underparameterized models to form
expectations. They show that in equilibrium, agents’ beliefs and asset prices are jointly determined in
a way that can give rise to multiple misspecified equilibria each with distinct means and variances of
returns. Learning dynamics and bounded rationality could thus be some reasons behind why there are
regimes.
    In addition to the underlying source of regimes, there are many other areas open for future research.
Most work in asset pricing incorporating regime switching has considered either a single or a small set
of risky assets. Cross-sectional effects of regimes on asset returns has been far less studied. Individual
stocks and industry portfolios may differ in terms of their sensitivity and exposure to regime changes.
Interesting questions are then whether regime change is a risk factor that is priced in equilibrium and
whether differences in exposure to such a risk factor can help explain cross-sectional variations in ex-



                                                   19
pected equity returns.
   A second question is whether the regimes inferred from asset return series can be used to shed light
on the underlying fundamentals of the economy. Our simple analysis of an equilibrium asset pricing
model showed that regimes in consumption or dividend growth translate into regimes in asset returns.
Can this relation be reverse engineered? Consumption and dividend data tend to be very smooth, so
the question is whether regimes deduced from asset returns (which are less smooth) can help us better
infer properties of the underlying fundamentals. In a broader context, can regimes identified from asset
prices which are observed at high frequencies, be used to forecast regimes in macro variables, which are
sampled only at low frequencies?




                                                  20
References
 [1] Albert, J.H., and S. Chib, 1993, Bayes Inference via Gibbs Sampling of Autoregressive Time Series Subject to Markov
     Mean and Variance Shifts. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 11, 1-15.

 [2] Ang A., and G., Bekaert, 1998, Regime Switches in Interest Rates. NBER Working Paper 6508.

 [3] Ang A., and G., Bekaert, 2002a, International Asset Allocation with Regime Shifts. Review of Financial Studies, 15,
     1137-1187.

 [4] Ang, A., and G., Bekaert, 2002b, Regime Switches in Interest Rates. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 20,
     163-182.

 [5] Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, 2002c, Short Rate Nonlinearities and Regime Switches. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
     Control, 26, 1243-1274.

 [6] Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, 2004, How do Regimes Affect Asset Allocation? Financial Analysts Journal, 60, 86-99.

 [7] Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, 2007, Stock Return Predictability: Is It There? Review of Financial Studies, 20, 651-707.

 [8] Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei, 2008, The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected Inflation. Journal of Finance, 63,
     797-849.

 [9] Ang, A., and J. Chen, 2002, Asymmetric Correlations of Equity Portfolios. Journal of Financial Economics, 63, 443-494.

[10] Ang, A. and J. Liu, 2007, Risk, Returns, and Dividends. Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 1-38.

[11] Barro, R.J., 2006, Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121,
     823-866.

[12] Backus, D.K., and A.W. Gregory, 1993, Theoretical Relations between Risk Premiums and Conditional Variances. Journal
     of Business and Economic Statistics, 11, 177-85.

[13] Backus, D.K., F. Gavazzoni, C. Telmer, and S.E. Zin, 2010, Monetary Policy and the Uncovered Interest Parity Puzzle.
     NBER Working Paper 16218.

[14] Bansal, R., and H. Zhou, 2002, Term Structure of Interest Rates with Regime Shifts. Journal of Finance, 57, 1997-2043.

[15] Bansal, R., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou, 2004, Regime Shifts, Risk Premiums in the Term Structure, and the Business Cycle.
     Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 22, 396-409.

[16] Bekaert, G., and R.J. Hodrick, 1993, On Biases in the Measurement of Foreign Exchange Risk Premiums. Journal of
     International Money and Finance, 12, 115-138.

[17] Bekaert, G., R.J. Hodrick, and D.A. Marshall, 2001, Peso Problem Explanations for Term Structure Anomalies. Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 48, 241-270.

[18] Bekaert, G. and J. Liu, 2004, Conditional Information and Variance Bounds on Pricing Kernels. Review of Financial
     Studies, 17, 339-378.

[19] Bikbov, R., and M. Chernov, 2008, Monetary Policy Regimes and the Term Structure of Interest Rates. Working paper,
     LSE.

[20] Boivin, J., 2006, Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coefficients and Real-Time Data. Journal
     of Money, Credit and Banking, 38, 1149-1174.


                                                            21
[21] Bollen, N., S.F. Gray, and R.E. Whaley, 2000, Regime Switching in Foreign Exchange Rates: Evidence from Currency
     Option Prices. Journal of Econometrics, 94, 239-276.

[22] Bollerslev, T., 1986, Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity. Journal of Econometrics, 31, 307-327.

[23] Bonomo, M., R. Garcia, N. Meddahi and R. Tedongap, 2011, Generalized Disappointment Aversion, Long-Run Volatility
     Risk, and Asset Prices. Review of Financial Studies, 24, 82-122.

[24] Bossaerts, P., and P. Hillion, 1999, Implementing Statistical Criteria to Select Return Forecasting Models: What do we
     Learn? Review of Financial Studies, 12, 405-428.

[25] Branch, W.A., and G.W. Evans, 2010, Asset Return Dynamics and Learning. Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1651-1680.

[26] Calvet, L.E., and A.J. Fisher, 2007, Multifrequency news and stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 86, 178-212.

[27] Cecchetti, S.G., P-S. Lam, and N.C. Mark, 1990, Mean Reversion in Equilibrium Asset Prices. American Economic
     Review, 80, 398-418.

[28] Cenesizoglu, T., 2011, The Reaction of Atock Returns to News about Fundamentals. Working paper, Universite de Mon-
     treal.

[29] Chib, S., 1998, Estimation and Comparison of Multiple Change Point Models. Journal of Econometrics 86, 221-241.

[30] Cho, J.-S., and H. White, 2007, Testing for Regime Switching. Econometrica 75, 1671-1720.

[31] Clarida, R., J. Cali, and M. Gertler, 2000, Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some
     Theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147-180.

[32] Clarida, R., J. Cali, and M. Gertler, 2000, Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some
     Theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147-180.

[33] Dahlquist, M., and S. F. Gray, 2000, Regime-Switching and Interest Rates in the European Monetary System. Journal of
     International Economics, 50, 399-419.

[34] Dai, Q., K.J. Singleton, and W. Yang, 2007, Regime Shifts in a Dynamic Term Structure Model of U.S. Treasury Bond
     Yields. Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1669-1706.

[35] David, A., and P. Veronesi, 2009, What Ties Return Volatilities to Price Valuations and Fundamentals? Working paper,
     University of Chicago.

[36] Davies, R., 1977, Hypothesis Testing When a Nuisance Parameter Is Present Only Under the Alternative. Biometrika, 64,
     247-254.

[37] Davig, T., and E.M. Leeper, 2007, Generalizing the Taylor Principle. American Economic Review, 97, 607-635.

[38] Diebold, F.X., J.H. Lee, and G.C. Weinbach, 1994, Regime Switching with Time-Varying Transition Probabilities, in
     Hargreaves, C., ed., Time Series Analysis and Cointegration, Oxford University Press.

[39] Dueker, M.J., 1997, Markov Switching in GARCH Processes and Mean-Reverting Stock-Market Volatility. Journal of
     Business and Economic Statistics, 15, 26-34.

[40] Duffie, D., and R. Kan, 1996, A Yield-Factor Model of Interest Rates. Mathematical Finance, 6, 379-406.

[41] Durland, J.M., and T.H. McCurdy, 1994, Duration-Dependent Transitions in a Markov Model of U.S. GNP Growth.
     Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12, 279-288.


                                                             22
[42] Engle, R.F., Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation.
     Econometrica, 50, 987-1008.

[43] Engel, C., and J., Hamilton, 1990, Long Swings in the Dollar: Are They in the Data and Do Markets Know It? American
     Economic Review, 80, 689-713.

[44] Engel, C., and C.S. Hakkio, 1996, The Distribution of Exchange Rates in the EMS. International Journal of Finance and
     Economics, 1, 55-67.

[45] Evans, M.D.D., 1996, Peso Problems: Their Theoretical and Empirical Implications, in Maddala, G.S. and C.R. Rao,
     eds., Handbook of Statistics, Vol. 14, Elsevier.

[46] Evans, M.D.D. and K. Lewis, 1995, Do Expected Shifts in Inflation Affect Estimates of the Long-Run Fisher Relation?
     Journal of Finance, 50, 255-253.

[47] Evans, M.D.D. and P. Wachtel, 1993, Inflation Regimes and the Sources of Inflation Uncertainty. Journal of Money, Credit
     and Banking, 25, 475-511.

[48] Farmer, R.E.A., D.F. Waggoner, and T. Zha, 2009, Understanding Markov-Switching Rational Expectations Models.
     Journal of Economic Theory, 144, 1849-1867.

[49] Filardo, A.J., 1994, Business-Cycle Phases and Their Transitional Dynamics. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
     12, 299-308.

[50] Fong, W.-M., and K.H., See, 2001, Modelling the Conditional Volatility of Commodity Index Futures as a Regime
     Switching Process. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16, 133-163.

[51] Froot, K.A., and M. Obstfeld, 1991, Exchange-Rate Dynamics under Stochastic Regime Shifts. Journal of International
     Economics, 31, 203-229.

[52] Garcia, R., 1998, Asymptotic Null Distribution of the Likelihood Ratio Test in Markov Switching Models, International
     Economic Review, 39, 763-788

[53] Garcia, R., and P. Perron, 1996, An Analysis of the Real Inteerest Rates under Regime Shifts. Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 78, 111-125.

[54] Garcia, R., N. Meddahi, R. Tedongap, 2008, An Analytical Framework for Assessing Asset Pricing Models and Pre-
     dictability. Working paper, Universite de Montreal.

[55] Gray, S., 1996, Modeling the Conditional Distribution of Interest Rates as Regime-Switching Process. Journal of Financial
     Economics, 42, 27-62.

[56] Guidolin, M. and A. Timmermann, 2006, Term Structure of Risk under Alternative Econometric Specifications. Journal
     of Econometrics, 131, 285-308.

[57] Guidolin, M. and A. Timmermann, 2007, Asset Allocation under Multivariate Regime Switching. Journal of Economic
     Dynamics and Control, 31, 3503-3544.

[58] Guidolin, M., and A. Timmermann, 2008a, International Asset Allocation under Regime Switching, Skew and Kurtosis
     Preferences. Review of Financial Studies, 21, 889-935.

[59] Guidolin, M., and A. Timmermann, 2008b, Size and Value Anomalies under Regime Shifts. Journal of Financial Econo-
     metrics, 6, 1-48.


                                                              23
[60] Gu, L., 2005, Asymmetric Risk Loadings in the Cross Section of Stock Returns, SSRN working paper.

[61] Hamilton, J.D., 1988, Rational Expectations Econometric Analysis of Changes in Regime: An Investigation of the Term
     Structure of Interest Rates. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 12, 385-423.

[62] Hamilton, J.D., 1989, A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle.
     Econometrica, 57, 357-384.

[63] Hamilton, J.D., 1996, Specification Testing in Markov-Switching Time-Series Models. Journal of Econometrics, 70, 127-
     157.

[64] Hamilton, J.D., and G., Lin, 1996, Stock Market Volatility and the Business Cycle. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11,
     573-593.

[65] Hamilton, J.D., and R. Susmel, 1994, Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity and Changes in Regime. Journal of
     Econometrics, 64, 307-333.

[66] Hansen, B., 1992, The Likelihood Ratio Test Under Non-Standard Conditions: Testing the Markov Switching Model of
     GNP. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 7, S61-S82.

[67] Henkel, S.J., J.S. Martin and F. Nardari, 2011, Time-varying Short-Horizon Predictability. Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics, 99, 560-580.

[68] Holst, U., G., Lindgren, J. Holst, and M. Thuvesholmen, 1994, Recursive Estimation in Switching Autoregressions with
     a Markov Regime. Journal of Time Series Analysis, 15, 489-506.

[69] Ichiue, H., and K. Koyama, 2007, Regime Switches in Exchange Rate Volatility and Uncovered Interest Rate Parity. Bank
     of Japan Working Paper 07-E-22.

[70] Johannes, M., A. Korteweg, and N. Polson, 2011, Sequential Learning, Predictive Regressions, and Optimal Portfolio
     Returns. Working paper, Columbia University.

[71] Kim, C-J., and C. Nelson, 1999, State Space Models with Regime Switching. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[72] Lettau, M., S. Ludvigson, and J. Wachter, 2008, The Declining Equity Premium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk
     Play? Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1653-1687.

[73] Lettau, M. and S. van Nieuwerburgh, 2008, Reconciling the Return Predictability Evidence. Review of Financial Studies,
     21, 1607-1652.

[74] Longin, F., and B. Solnik, 2001, Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets. Journal of Finance, 56, 649-676.

[75] Lucas, R.E., 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy. Econometrica, 46, 1429-1445.

[76] Maheu, J.M., and T. H. McCurdy, 2009, How Useful are Historical Data for Forecasting the Long-Run Equity Return
     Distribution? Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 27, 95-112.

[77] Merton, R.C., 1973, An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model. Econometrica, 41, 867-887.

[78] Merton, R.C., 1980, On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market. Journal of Financial Economics, 98, 605-625.

[79] Pagan, A.R., and K.R. Sossounov, 2003, A Simple Framework for Analyzing Bull and Bear Markets. Journal of Applied
     Econometrics 18, 23-46.

[80] Pastor, L. and R. Stambaugh, 2001, The Equity Premium and Structural Breaks. Journal of Finance, 56, 1207-1245.


                                                            24
[81] Paye, B. and A. Timmermann, Instability of Return Prediction Models. Journal of Empirical Finance, 13, 274-315.

[82] Perez-Quiros, G. and A. Timmermann, 2000, Firm Size and Cyclical Variations in Stock Returns. Journal of Finance, 55,
     1229-1262.

[83] Perez-Quiros, G. and Timmermann, A., 2001, Business Cycle Asymmetries in Stock Returns: Evidence from Higher
     Order Moments and Conditional Densities. Journal of Econometrics, 103, 259-306..

[84] Pesaran, M.H. and A. Timmermann, 2002, Market Timing and Return Prediction under Model Instability. Journal of
     Empirical Finance, 9, 495-510.

[85] Pettenuzzo, D. and A. Timmermann, 2010, Predictability of Stock Returns and Asset Allocation under Structural Breaks.
     Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

[86] Plantin, G., and H.S. Shin, 2006, Carry Trades and Speculative Dynamics. Working paper, Princeton University.

[87] Rapach, D.E., and M.E. Wohar, 2006, Structural Breaks and Predictive Regression Models of Aggregate U.S. Stock
     Returns. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4, 238-274.

[88] Rietz, T.A., 1988, The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22, 117-131.

[89] Rossi, A., and A. Timmermann, 2011, What is the Shape of the Risk-Return Relation? Working paper, UCSD.

[90] Schaller, H., and S., van Norden, 1997, Regime Switching in Stock Market Returns, Applied Financial Economics, 7,
     177-191.

[91] Sims, C. and T. Zha, 2006, Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy? American Economic Review, 96,
     54-81.

[92] Sola, M., and J. Driffill, 2002, Testing the Term Structure of Interest Rates using a Stationary Vector Autoregression with
     Regime Switching. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 18, 601-628.

[93] Timmermann, A., 2000, Moments of Markov Switching Models. Journal of Econometrics, 96, 75-111.

[94] Timmermann, A., 2001, Structural Breaks, Incomplete Information, and Stock Prices. Journal of Business and Economic
     Statistics, 19, 299-315.

[95] Tu, J., 2010, Is Regime Switching in Stock Returns Important in Portfolio Decisions? Management Science, 56, 1198-
     1215.

[96] Turner, C., R. Startz, and C. Nelson, 1989, A Markov Model of Heteroskedasticity, Risk, and Learning in the Stock
     Market. Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 3-22.

[97] Veronesi, P., 1999, Stock Market Overreaction to Bad News in Good Times: A Rational Expectations Equilibrium Model.
     Review of Financial Studies, 12, 975-1007.

[98] Veronesi, P., 2000, How Does Information Affect Stock Returns? Journal of Finance, 55, 807-837.

[99] Welch, I., and A. Goyal, 2008, A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity Premium Prediction.
     Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1455-1508.

[100] Whitelaw, R., 2000, Stock Market Risk and Return: An Equilibrium Approach. Review of Financial Studies, 13, 521-
     548.




                                                              25
                                            Table 1: Parameter Estimates
                                  Equity Returns                 Interest Rates               FX Returns

                               Estimate    Std Error        Estimate     Std Error       Estimate    Std Error

             µ0                  0.3326       0.2354         -0.0170       0.1273          0.4592       0.8921
             µ1                  0.8994       0.2614          0.0355       0.0094          0.0143       0.0766
             φ0                  0.0633       0.0460          0.9888       0.0018         -0.0392       0.1718
             φ1                 -0.0426       0.0928          1.0000       0.0000          0.3033       0.0447
             σ0                  4.8867       0.3448          0.8127       0.0512          4.3035       0.6314
             σ1                  2.4462       0.4637          0.1760       0.0104          2.4842       0.1293
             P                   0.9770       0.0196          0.8789       0.0370          0.8692       0.1011
             Q                   0.9512       0.0206          0.9499       0.0147          0.9805       0.0179

                                p-value                      p-value                      p-value

             Test µ0 = µ1        0.1057                       0.7483                       0.6203
             Test φ0 = φ1        0.0406                       0.0000                       0.0001
             Test σ0 = σ1        0.0160                       0.0000                       0.0026


We report parameter estimates of the regime switching model (1) applied to equity excess returns, which are total returns
(dividend plus capital gain) on the S&P500 in excess of the T-bills; interest rates, which are three-month T-bill yields; and
foreign exchange excess returns (FX returns), which are returns from converting one USD into Deutschmarks or Euros,
earning the German T-bill return, and then converting back to USD, in excess of the US T-bill return. All returns are
at the monthly frequency. Estimations are done by maximum likelihood. The sample period is 1953:01 to 2010:12 for
equities and interest rates and 1975:01 to 2010:12 for foreign exchange returns.




                                                            26
                                           Figure 1: Mixture of Normals


      0.4            N(1,1)
                     N(−2,2)
                     Mixture of Normals
    0.35



      0.3



    0.25



      0.2



    0.15



      0.1



    0.05



        0
        −8           −6            −4            −2             0            2             4             6             8

The figure plots the probability density functions (pdfs) of a N (1, 12 ) distribution in the blue solid line, a N (−2, 22 )
distribution in the red dotted line, and a simple mixture of the two distributions that draws from N (1, 12 ) with probability
P = 0.8 and N (−2, 22 ) with probability 1 − P in the black, heavy solid line.




                                                             27
                                        Figure 2: Exceedance Correlations

                                              US−UK Exceedance Correlations
                   0.65

                                                                                      Data
                                                                                      RS Distn
                    0.6
                                                                                      Normal Distn
                                                                                      Asymmetric GARCH
                   0.55


                    0.5
     Correlation




                   0.45


                    0.4


                   0.35


                    0.3


                   0.25


                    0.2
                      −4   −3      −2           −1          0             1           2            3           4
                                                        Exceedance


This is a reproduction of Figure 1 from Ang and Bekaert (2002). The figure shows exceedance correlations of US-
UK returns, which are correlations conditional on exceedances θ. Exceedances are given in percentages away from the
empirical mean, so for an exceedance θ = +2, we calculate the correlation conditional on observations greater than 3
times the US mean, and 3 times the mean of the UK. For θ = −2, we calculate the correlation conditional on observations
less than -1 times the US mean, and -1 times the mean of the UK. The implied exceedance correlations from a regime
switching model is shown in dashed lines, and the correlations from the data represented by squares. The exceedance
correlation for a normal distribution and an asymmetric GARCH model calibrated to the data are drawn in dotted-dashed
and dotted lines, respectively.




                                                          28
                                                   Figure 3: Mixture of Normals

                               1.2




                                1




                               0.8
     Probability of state 1




                               0.6




                               0.4




                               0.2




                                0




                              −0.2
                                     0   10   20   30     40       50      60        70        80         90          100
                                                                 period


The figure plots a simulation from a regime switching process with two states st = 0 and st = 1 with distributions
N (1, 12 ) and N (−2, 22 ), respectively. The transition probabilities are p00 = 0.95 and p11 = 0.80. The true regime path
is shown in the solid blue line and the inferred (filtered) regime probability is graphed in the dashed green line.




                                                               29
                   Figure 4: Smoothed Probabilities

                             Panel A: Equity Returns
                                Cumulated Equity Returns
 4


 3


 2


 1


 0
          1960        1970            1980              1990            2000     2010


                      Smoothed Probability of High Volatility Regime
 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
          1960        1970            1980              1990            2000     2010


                             Panel B: Interest Rates
                                Three−Month T−Bill Yields
15



10



 5



 0
          1960        1970            1980              1990            2000     2010


                      Smoothed Probability of High Volatility Regime
 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
          1960        1970            1980              1990            2000     2010


                    Panel C: Foreign Exchange Returns
                       Cumulated Foreign Exchange Excess Returns
 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

      0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6
            1980     1985          1990         1995           2000       2005   2010


                       Smoothed Probability of High Volatility Regime
      1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

      0
            1980     1985          1990         1995           2000       2005   2010




                                          30
Note to Figure 4
In the bottom of each panel, we plot smoothed probabilities of being in regime st = 0, p(st = 0|IT ), conditional over
the full sample computed following Hamilton (1990) and Kim (1994) from the regime switching model (??) applied to
equity excess returns, which are total returns (dividend plus capital gain) on the S&P500 in excess of the T-bills in Panel
A; interest rates, which are three-month T-bill yields in Panel B; and foreign exchange excess returns (FX returns), which
are returns from converting one USD into Deutschmarks or Euros, earning the German T-bill return, and then converting
back to USD, in excess of the US T-bill return in Panel C. The top of each panel shows cumulated sums of equity and
foreign exchange excess returns in Panels A and C and the three-month T-bill yield in Panel B. All returns are at the
monthly frequency. The sample period is 1953:01 to 2010:12 for equities and interest rates and 1975:01 to 2010:12 for
foreign exchange returns.




                                                           31
                                     Figure 5: Regime Switching Frontiers

     0.18


     0.16


     0.14


     0.12


       0.1


     0.08


     0.06


     0.04         World Market
                  Regime 1 Frontier
                  Regime 2 Frontier
                  Unconditional Frontier
     0.02         MVE Regime 1 SR = 0.871
                  MVE Regime 2 SR = 0.268
                  MVE Unconditional SR = 0.505
         0
             0     0.05       0.1       0.15       0.2       0.25       0.3       0.35       0.4       0.45       0.5


This is a reproduction of Figure 3 from Ang and Bekaert (2004). The mean-standard deviation frontier of the high
volatility regime is shown in the red dotted-dashed line and has the lowest Sharpe ratio. The mean-standard deviation
frontier of the low volatility regime is shown in the green dashed line and has the highest Sharpe ratio. The unconditional
mean-standard deviation frontier is drawn in the solid blue line.




                                                            32
