                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EMPIRICAL CONTENT OF MODELS WITH MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA IN
                  ECONOMIES WITH SOCIAL INTERACTIONS

                                           Alberto Bisin
                                           Andrea Moro
                                           Giorgio Topa

                                       Working Paper 17196
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17196


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Alberto Bisin, Andrea Moro, and Giorgio Topa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Empirical Content of Models with Multiple Equilibria in Economies with Social Interactions
Alberto Bisin, Andrea Moro, and Giorgio Topa
NBER Working Paper No. 17196
July 2011
JEL No. C51,C52,I1

                                               ABSTRACT

We study a general class of models with social interactions that might display multiple equilibria.
We propose an estimation procedure for these models and evaluate its efficiency and computational
feasibility relative to different approaches taken to the curse of dimensionality implied by the multiplicity.
Using data on smoking among teenagers, we implement the proposed estimation procedure to understand
how group interactions affect health-related choices. We find that interaction effects are strong both
at the school level and at the smaller friends-network level. Multiplicity of equilibria is pervasive at
the estimated parameter values, and equilibrium selection accounts for about 15 percent of the observed
smoking behavior. Counterfactuals show that student interactions, surprisingly, reduce smoking by
approximately 70 percent with respect to the equilibrium smoking that would occur without interactions.


Alberto Bisin                                         Giorgio Topa
Department of Economics                               Federal Reserve Bank of New York
New York University                                   Domestic Research Function
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor                         33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10012                                    New York, NY 10045
and NBER                                              giorgio.topa@ny.frb.org
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Andrea Moro
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
Nashville, TN 37235
andrea.moro@vanderbilt.edu
1    Introduction

In this paper, we study models with multiple equilibria in economies with social interactions.
Social interactions refer to socioeconomic environments in which markets do not necessarily
mediate all of the agents’ choices. In such environments, each agent’s ability to interact
with others might depend on a network of relationships, e.g., a family, a peer group, or
more generally a socioeconomic group. Social interactions represent an important aspect of
several socioeconomic phenomena, such as crime, school performance, risky sexual behavior,
alcohol and drug consumption, smoking, and obesity, and more generally are related to
neighborhood effects, which are important determinants of economic outcomes such as
employment, the patterns of bilateral trade and economic specialization, migration, urban
agglomeration, and segregation.
    Social interactions typically give rise to multiple equilibria as they induce externalities.
Consider, for example, a society of agents whose preferences for smoking are stronger the
higher the proportion of smokers in the population - in other words, agents have preferences
for conformity at the global population level. In this society, we may find equilibria where
few people smoke and equilibria where many people smoke if the dependence of agents’
preferences on the proportion of smokers in the population is strong enough. But multiple
equilibria may also arise if conformity in agents’ preferences is at the level of local reference
groups, smaller than the whole population, as in the case e.g., of peer effects. It is because of
externalities of this kind that the canonical models of social interaction, Brock and Durlauf
(2001b) and Glaeser and Scheinkman (2003), also display multiple equilibria, with either
local and/or global interactions.
    We refer to economies with social interactions as “societies.” We consider a general soci-
ety with (possibly) multiple equilibria and assume the econometrician observes data realized
from one or more of the equilibria. We derive conditions for identification (in the popula-
tion) of the parameters of the society. We show that identification is no more an issue when
the model has multiple equilibria than when it has a unique equilibrium. We define the like-
lihood of the data conditionally on the equilibrium selection and introduce two estimators
of the model’s structural parameters. The first estimator is based on maximizing the likeli-
hood of the data over both the set of equilibria and the set of structural parameters. Insofar
as this estimator requires the ability to compute all of the equilibria that are consistent with


                                               1
a given set of parameters, it might represent a daunting computational task. Therefore, we
also propose a computationally simpler two-step estimation procedure that does not require
computing all feasible equilibria, nor postulating an arbitrary equilibrium selection rule. We
describe the estimators’ properties and evaluate the efficiency and computational feasibility
of the two approaches using Monte Carlo simulations. We show, in the context of Brock
and Durlauf (2001b)’s canonical model that the two-step procedure, while less efficient, is
faster by several orders of magnitude. We also show that estimation procedures based on
the adoption of an arbitrary equilibrium selection rule can be less efficient (and are again
much slower) than our two-step procedure, which is agnostic about equilibrium selection.
We conclude that the two-step estimation procedure is particularly appropriate when the
investigator does not have information about the equilibrium selection.
   Furthermore, we implement the proposed two-step estimation using data from the Na-
tional Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (“Add Health”), a longitudinal study of
a nationally representative sample of adolescents in grades seven to twelve in the United
States during the 1994-95 school year. In this data sample, an individual’s smoking level is
positively associated with the number of smokers within the individual’s friendship network.
The positive association holds even after controlling for individual characteristics such as
grade, race, and gender. Further, the data exhibit large variation in aggregate smoking lev-
els across schools. These facts are consistent with social interactions of significant strength
and suggest that there may be scope for different schools to be in different equilibria with
regard to smoking prevalence.
   We indeed estimate the parameters of various extensions of Brock and Durlauf (2001b)’s
model. Results show widespread social interactions among students, both at the level of the
school and at the level of the individuals’ friendship networks. Our parameter estimates are
consistent with the presence of multiple equilibria in our empirical application. Simulations
of the model indicate that changes in the strength of friendship or school-wide social inter-
actions (e.g., changes in the number of friends in personal networks, or in policies aimed
at discouraging tobacco use in schools) can have highly nonlinear and sometimes counter-
intuitive effects, with the possibility of large shifts in smoking prevalence because of the
presence of multiple equilibria.
   We find significant heterogeneity across schools in the magnitude of the interaction



                                              2
effects. Simulating all equilibria in each school, we find that multiple equilibria are present
in forty out of the forty-one schools used for this exercise. Simulating students’ behavior
if all schools selected the equilibrium with the lowest smoking level, we find that selection
into a higher level of smoking equilibrium accounts for about 15 percent higher smoking,
on average. Finally, to quantify the effect of social interactions, we simulate the level of
smoking that would occur if there were no preferences for peers’ behavior. Compared to
the simulated outcome without interactions, actual smoking is 70 percent lower, on average.
Somewhat contrary to standard presumptions, this result suggests that social interactions
may have an important role in reducing, rather than increasing, smoking in adolescents.
       With social interactions, comovements between an individual’s and her peers’ outcomes
may be due to peer effects but also to sorting of individuals into groups according to observed
and unobserved attributes. More generally, one needs to distinguish social interaction effects
from other correlated unobservable factors that may induce the observed comovements in
outcomes. This issue is sidestepped in this paper, to focus instead on how to explicitly treat
the multiplicity of equilibria that typically arise in these economies.1


1.1       Related Literature

The identification and estimation of models with social interactions is an active area of
research. In this context, the issue of identification has been analyzed by Manski (1993) with
regards to the linear-in-means model. Though identification generally requires stringent
conditions for this class of reduced-form linear models,2 multiplicity of equilibria is typically
not an issue. Estimates of social interactions and peer effects, in this context, have been
obtained e.g., by Calvo Armengol, Patacchini, and Zenou (2009), De Giorgi, Pellizzari, and
Redaelli (2010), Patacchini and Zenou (2011a and 2011b), and Tincani (2011).
       More generally, however, when agents’ policy functions are nonlinear, multiplicities arise,
especially when social interactions take the form of strategic complementarities, as in the
   1
     See, e.g., Ioannides and Zabel (2008) and Ioannides and Zanella (2008) for empirical studies of selection
in related contexts. A companion paper, by Bisin, Moro, and Topa (in progress), addresses the possibility
of correlated unobservables by explicitly modeling the selection of individuals into networks. Preliminary
results indicate that sorting, while statistically significant, does not reduce by much the magnitude of the
estimated social interaction effects.
   2
     Sufficient conditions for identification in this context have been proposed by Graham and Hahn (2005),
Bramoulle’, Djebbari, and Fortin (2009), Davezies, D’Haultfoeuille, and Fougere (2006), and Lee (2007),
among others.



                                                      3
case of preferences for conformity with a reference group. In the canonical nonlinear model
of social interactions - Brock and Durlauf (2001b)’s binary choice model - multiple equilibria
are hard to dispel, even if interactions are only global. In this class of societies, however,
social interactions are identified under functional form assumptions on the stochastic struc-
ture of preference shocks, as well as nonparametrically (Brock and Durlauf (2007)).3 Brock
and Durlauf (2001a), Krauth (2006), and Soetevent and Kooreman (2007) extend these
results to binary choice economies of local interactions.4
       Indeed, in this class of nonlinear models identification is obtained under much weaker
conditions than in the class of linear economies, typically even in the case in which only one
realization of equilibrium is observed in the data, e.g., when social interactions are global and
only the actions of agents belonging to a single population are observed. In empirical work,
however, i) either sufficient conditions which guarantee a unique equilibrium are typically
assumed, as e.g., in Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman (1996) and Head and Mayer (2008);
ii) or else a selection mechanism is specified, as e.g., in Krauth (2006) and in Soetevent and
Kooreman (2007), who exploit the structure of Nash equilibria of supermodular games
to reduce the set of equilibria under strong assumptions on the support of the selection
mechanism, and in Nakajima (2007) who instead adopts a selection mechanism which is
implicitly determined by an adaptive learning mechanism.
       Important and related work on the econometrics of multiple equilibria has also been
done in macroeconomics. Dagsvik and Jovanovic (1994) study economic fluctuations in a
model with two equilibria (high and low economic activity) in each period; they postulate a
stochastic (Markovian) equilibrium selection process over time and estimate the parameters
of this process with time-series data on economic activity. The adopted functional-form
specification allows them to derive closed-form solutions of the mapping from the set of
parameters to the set of equilibria, which helps in constructing the sample likelihood for
estimation. Imrohoroglu (1993) and Farmer and Guo (1995) estimate dynamic macroeco-
nomic models of inflation and business cycles, respectively, with a continuum of equilibria
by parametrizing equilibria with a sunspot process and recovering from data the time series
   3
     Blume, Brock, Durlauf and Ioannides (2011) provide an excellent review of the existing literature on
the identification of models with social interactions. They discuss several examples in which the presence of
multiple equilibria helps achieve identification.
   4
     Krauth (2006) allows for correlated effects - that is, for correlation in the preference shocks across peers,
under specific parametric assumptions.



                                                        4
of the sunspot realizations under assumptions on the properties of the process; see also
Aiyagari (1995). More recent developments of these methods are surveyed in Benhabib and
Farmer (1998). In this paper, we show that assuming a specific equilibrium selection (or
sunspot) process is not always necessary and may lead to inefficient estimates if the assumed
process is not the “true” data-generating process.
       A related literature studies the issue of identification and estimation in multiple equilib-
rium models of industrial organization. It concentrates on simultaneous-move finite games
of complete information where the investigator observes only the actions played by the
agents, whereas the parameters to be estimated also affect the payoffs.5 Classic examples
include the entry game studied by Bresnahan and Reiss (1991), which has extensive appli-
cations (e.g., also in labor economics). In this class of games, the model is typically not
identified: a continuum of parameter values is consistent with the same equilibrium realiza-
tion of the strategy profile. Partial identification is possible, however, as shown by Tamer
(2003) for large classes of incomplete econometric structures.6 Others, such as Bjorn and
Vuong (1985), Bresnahan and Reiss (1991), and Bajari, Hong, and Ryan (2010), have opted
for imposing assumptions that guarantee identification. Bajari, Hong, and Ryan (2010), in
particular, have interesting results about estimation as well. The estimation procedure they
adopt requires the computation of all equilibria of the game for any element of the param-
eter set and the joint estimation of the parameters of an equilibrium selection mechanism
(in an ex ante pre-specified class), which determines the probability of a given equilibrium,
as in Dagsvik and Jovanovic (1994).
       Instead, Bajari, Hong, Krainer, and Nekipelov (2006) and Aguirregabiria-Mira (2007)
study, respectively, static and dynamic versions of a discrete entry game of incomplete
information. In this context, they study the properties of a two-step estimator similar
in spirit to ours.7 A version of this estimator had been introduced by Moro (2003) in the
context of a model of statistical discrimination in the labor market.8 In that application, the
   5
     See Berry and Tamer (2007) for a survey of this literature.
   6
     See also Manski and Tamer (2002), Andrews, Berry, and Jia (2004), Ciliberto and Tamer (2009),
Beresteanu, Molchanov, and Molinari (2008), and Galichon and Henry (2008). Echenique and Komunjer
(2005) have results regarding the identification of monotone comparative statics in incomplete econometric
structures.
   7
     See also Pakes, Ostrovsky, and Berry (2004), Pesendorfer and Schmidt-Dengler (2004), and Bajari,
Benkard, and Levin (2007); see Aguirregabiria (2004) for some foundational theoretical econometric work.
   8
     See also Fang 2006.



                                                    5
equilibrium map linking wages to the individual workers’ characteristics is different across
different equilibria, hence the model can be identified and estimated off cross-sectional data.
         Finally, our application to teenagers’ smoking behavior is also specifically related to a
large empirical literature. These studies generally document strong social interactions, or
peer effects, in smoking decisions. However part of the literature relies on linear-in-means
models which, as shown by Manski (1993), are not identified. As a result, it tends to
attribute to social interactions any effects that are possibly due instead to selection and/or
common shocks. This is the case, e.g., of Wang, Fitzhugh, Westerfield, and Eddy (1995)
and Wang, Eddy, and Fitzhugh (2000); see also the review in Tyas and Pederson (1998).
Instrumental variable estimates, as in Norton, Lindrooth, and Ennett (1998), Gaviria and
Raphael (2001), and Powell, Tauras, and Ross (2003), attempt to address these problems.9
The evidence for strong social interactions in smoking is maintained when non-linear models
are estimated which are better identified, e.g., by Krauth (2006), Soetevent and Kooreman
(2007), and Nakajima (2007).


2         A general society

Consider a society populated by a set of agents indexed by i ∈ I. The population is par-
titioned into sub-populations indexed by n = 1, ..., N and represented by disjoint sets In
           N
           S
such that     In = I. Let |In | denote the dimensionality of set In and |I| the dimensionality
               n=1
of I. We shall be interested in the limit where each sub-population n is composed of count-
ably infinite agents. Different sub-populations can be interpreted as neighborhoods, ethnic
groups, schools, etc.
Network. The network structure of the society is characterized by a map g from the set
of agents I to its power set P, so that g(i) ⊂ I denotes the group of agents in the society
that interact with agent i. We assume each agent i ∈ In interacts locally with a finite
group g(i) ⊂ In , composed of members of her own sub-population.10 Let | g(i) |< ∞ be the
dimensionality of g(i).
Exogenous characteristics. Each agent i ∈ I is characterized by a vector of exogenous
     9
    See also Bauman and Fisher (1986), Krosnick and Judd (1982), and Jones (1994).
    10
    This is not a restriction on but rather a definition of the concept of sub-population. Also, we construct
the network so that g(i) does not contain i.



                                                     6
characteristics xi ∈ X. Each sub-population n is in turn characterized by a vector of
exogenous characteristics zn ∈ Z. Let z = (zn )n∈N , xn = (xi )i∈In , and x = (xi )i∈I . We
assume X and Z are compact sets.
Actions. Each agent i ∈ I chooses an element yi in a compact set Y (possibly a discrete
set). Agents’ choices are simultaneous. Let yg(i) , yn , denote the vectors of choices in groups
g(i) and In , respectively, and let y denote the vector of choices of all agents.
Uncertainty. Let εi denote a vector of idiosyncratic shocks hitting agent i ∈ I; let un
denote the vector of aggregate shocks hitting all agents i ∈ In , and let u = (un )n∈N . All
shocks are defined on a compact support.11 For any i ∈ In let p(εi | zn , un ) denote the
conditional probability of the shocks εi . We allow the distribution p(εi | zn , un ) to depend
on the choice vector yn . We assume εi and εj are conditionally independent across i, j ∈ In ,
for any n ∈ N . Let p(u) denote the probability of u. Typically, these shocks are preference
shocks, but they could also represent technology shocks.
Global interactions. Let π n denote an A-dimensional vector of equilibrium aggregates
defined at the level of sub-population n. Typically, π n contains an externality, a global
social interaction effect. If the society has a competitive market component, then π n would
typically also contain the vector of competitive equilibrium prices. Let A denote an (A-
dimensional) vector valued continuous map A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) such that equilibrium con-
ditions in sub-population n are written

                                          1 X
                                lim           A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) = 0
                              |In |→∞   |In |
                                            i∈In

    The map A could have a component Aj representing, e.g., the excess demand for
commodity j of agent i with characteristics xi in a sub-population n characterized by
(π n , zn , un ). The condition lim|In |→∞ |I1n | i∈In Aj (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) = 0 would in this case
                                                 P

represent market clearing for commodity j in sub-population n. Also, the map A could have
a component Aj 0 such that lim|In |→∞ |I1n | i∈In Aj 0 (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) = lim|In |→∞ |I1n | i∈In yi −
                                            P                                                        P

π n , so that π n represents the average action in sub-population n (if Y = {0, 1} then π n
represents the fraction of agents in sub-population n choosing an element of y = 1).12
  11
     To simplify notation, we avoid specifying formally the probability spaces on which random variables are
defined. We also refer generally to probability functions, which are to be interpreted as density functions
when the underlying space is continuous.
  12
      We implicitly require that both externalities and markets do not extend across the sub-population, as


                                                     7
Choice. Any agent i ∈ I, before choosing yi observes the private shocks, the realization
un , the whole vector xn , and zn .13 We shall also assume that the maximization problem of
each agent is sufficiently regular for equilibrium conditions to be well-behaved mathemat-
ical objects amenable to standard calculus techniques. Detailed assumptions and formal
arguments are relegated to Appendix A.14
   The set of first-order conditions that determine the choice of an arbitrary agent i ∈ In
induces a conditional probability distribution on (y, x), Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un .15
                                                                                         


2.1     Equilibrium

At equilibrium in sub-population n, the first-order conditions are satisfied jointly for any
agent i ∈ In and the equilibrium aggregates π n satisfy a set of consistency and market-
clearing conditions. Formally:

Definition 1 An equilibrium in society, given (zn , un ) for any n ∈ N , is represented
by a probability distribution on the configuration of actions and characteristics (yn , xn ),
P (yn , xn | zn , un ), and an A−dimensional vector π n such that:

   1. P (yn , xn | zn , un ) is ergodic and satisfies

                                                                                   
                P yi = y, xi = x | yg(i) , zn , un = Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un , P − a.s.,               (1)


       for any i ∈ In and any (x, y) ∈ X × Y ;

   2. π n satisfies
                                EP [A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un )] = 0, for any i ∈ In .                        (2)

       where the expectation is taken with respect to P (yn , xn | zn , un ).
no π n0 , n0 6= n, enters in the equilibrium condition for sub-population n. In fact, our analysis is unchanged if
we allow for relations across sub-populations, at the level of the general society, by introducing an aggregate
equilibrium variable - say, Π - and equilibrium conditions of the form of a continuus map B(π, Π) = 0.
  13
     The analysis is easily extended to the case of incomplete information, e.g., where agents’ information is
restricted to their neighbors or their sub-populations.
  14
     Also, note that our formulation assumes that the system of first-order conditions and the equilibrium
conditions are block recursive, in the sense that (xi , εi ) enter the first order conditions only through the
choice vector yn .
  15                                                                       0
     Typically, the first-order        conditions will result from agent i s choice of yi to maximize preferences:
V yi , xi , yg(i) , π n , zn , εi , un . See Appendix A for details.



                                                        8
The infinite size of each sub-population In justifies a population interpretation of the equi-
librium condition, (2), through an appropriate Law of Large Numbers.16 In particular, the
ergodicity requirement on the probability distribution on the configuration of actions and
characteristics P (yn , xn | zn , un ) at equilibrium implies that



                   1 X
         lim           A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) = EP [A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un )] , for any i ∈ In .
       |In |→∞   |In |
                      i∈In


    To understand the nature of multiple equilibria in our general society, it is convenient
to think of an equilibrium as satisfying two interrelated fixed-point conditions. First, at
equilibrium in sub-population n, the first-order conditions are satisfied jointly for any agent
i ∈ In , given equilibrium aggregates π n . This is equivalent to requiring that yn satisfy
a Nash equilibrium of the simultaneous move anonymous game. Second, at equilibrium,
for any sub-population n, the equilibrium aggregates π n satisfy a set of consistency and
market-clearing conditions.
    More precisely, at equilibrium in sub-population n, given π n , there exists a probability
distribution on the configuration of actions and characteristics (yn , xn ), P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un )
such that

                                                                                   
          P yi = y, xi = x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un = Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un , P − a.s.,             (3)


Generally, in a society with both global and local interactions, given a system of conditional
                                             
probabilities Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un obtained from first order conditions given π n , there
might exist multiple probability distributions P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) that satisfy (3).17 Let
the set of such distributions, given (π n , zn , un ), be denoted P(π n , zn , un ). Consider instead
a society with only global interactions. In such a society the set of first-order conditions of
an arbitrary agent i ∈ In , given π n , induces a conditional probability distribution on (y, x)
of the form Pi (y, x | π n , zn , un ). In this case, there exists a unique probability distribution
  16
     See Follmer (1974) and Horst and Follmer (2001). Appendix A, contains a formal construction of the
equilibrium set, with conditions for existence and uniqueness. Finally, see Blume and Durlauf (1998, 2001)
for a discussion of equilibrium concepts in related contexts.
  17
     In the terminology of random fields, adopted in statistical mechanics, such probability distributions are
typically called phases and the the occurrence of multiple phases is called phase transition.




                                                        9
P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) satisfying the first order conditions (see Appendix A).
       Equilibrium also requires that π n satisfies EP [A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un )] = 0, where the ex-
pectation is taken with respect to some probability distribution P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) ∈
P(π n , zn , un ). Fixing one such probability distribution, multiplicities might arise depend-
ing on the functional form for A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) as a function of π n .
       To summarize the previous discussion, in the general setting with both global and lo-
cal interactions, multiplicities may arise both with regard to the probability distributions
P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) ∈ P(π n , zn , un ) and as a result of the form of the equilibrium map
A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) as a function of π n . Thus, when only local interactions are present,
one could still face multiplicity coming from the non-uniqueness of the probability distri-
bution P (yn , xn | zn , un ); when only global interactions are present, one could encounter
multiplicity arising from the shape of the equilibrium map A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ).


2.2       Example 1: Brock and Durlauf ’s binary choice model

Agent i ∈ In chooses an outcome yi ∈ {−1, 1}, to maximize his preferences which in turn
depend on his own choice and on an average of the choices in sub-population n, π n :18


                   max        V (yi , xi , π n , zn , εi , un ) = hn (xi , zn , un ) · yi + Jn yi π n + εi .   (4)
                 yi ∈{−1,1}


       We assume that hn (xi , zn , un ) is linear and we eliminate any dependence from zn for
notational simplicity:
                                             hn (xi , zn , un ) = cn xi + un .

The distribution of shocks εi is assumed to be independent of un and identical across sub-
populations n: p(εi | un ) = p(εi ). Furthermore, p(εi ) depends on agent i’s choice yi and it
is extreme-valued. That is,19

                                                                              1
                                   Pr (εi (−1) − εi (1) ≤ z) =                       .
                                                                        1 + exp (−z)
  18
     In this simple version of the model, therefore, there are no local interactions.
  19
     More generally, for an extreme value distribution, p (εi (−1) − εi (1) ≤ z) = 1/(1 + exp (−βz)) where the
parameter β is the variance of the distribution. But normalizing β = 1 is without loss of generality in our
setting, as it is equivalent to normalizing the units of the utility function.




                                                             10
         The utility of each choice yi is then:


                      V (yi , xi , π n , εi (yi ) , un ) = (cn xi + un ) · yi + Jn yi π n + εi (yi ) .


         At equilibrium π n = EP [yn ], where P is the probability of (yn , xn ).


2.3         Example 2: Glaeser and Scheinkman (2003)’s continuous choice
            model

Agent i ∈ In chooses an outcome yi ∈ [0, 1], as a solution of

                                                                                 
                                     max V yi , Γ yg(i) , xi , π n , zn , εi , un
                                    yi ∈[0,1]

              P                                P
where Γ yg(i) = j∈g(i) γ ij yj , with γ ij ≥ 0,   γ ij = 1. At an equilibrium, the first-order
                                                                j∈g(i)
conditions,                                                                               
                                            P
                                 ∂V yi ,        j∈g(i) γ ij yj , xi , π n , zn , εi , un
                                                                                               = 0,
                                                          ∂yi
are satisfied, for any i ∈ In ; jointly with the equilibrium condition π n = EP [yn ].


3         Identification

In this section, we study identification, which we intend as identification in the population,
for any n ∈ N (that is, for In infinitely large, for any n ∈ N ). We show that the conditions
for identification in economies with possibly multiple equilibria are not conceptually more
stringent than those that apply to economies with a unique equilibrium.
         Let θn ∈ Θ denote the vector of parameters to be estimated in sub-population n, with Θ
compact. We derive conditions for θ = {θn }n∈N to be identified from the econometrician’s
observation of (y, x, π, z) as well as of the composition of each sub-population and of the
whole neighborhood network – that is, the observation of the map g.
         The definition of identification we adopt in our context is semi-parametric identifica-
tion;20 that is, we assume some parametric specification for p(εi |zn , un ) - the parameter
    20
         For related definitions, see Lehmann and Casella (1998), Definition 1.5.2, and van der Vaart (1998), p.
62.



                                                               11
vector θn ∈ Θ may contain parameters of the distribution p(εi |zn , un ) - but not for p(u).
       Explicitly including the dependence of probability distributions at equilibrium on θn ∈ Θ
for clarity in the notation:

Definition 2 The parameters of a society are identified by observation of (y, x, π, z) and
g if, for all n ∈ N, and any θ n , θ 0n ∈ Θ,


              (θ n , un ) 6= (θ 0n , u0n ) ⇒ P (yn , xn | zn , un ; θ n ) 6= P yn , xn |, zn , u0n ; θ 0n .
                                                                                                         


       Recall from the previous section that the equilibrium conditions can be written as
EP (yn ,xn |πn ,zn ,un ;θn ) [A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ; θn )] = 0. Without loss in generality, let us assume
that the vector of parameters θn can be partitioned as θn = θfnoc , θeq
                                                                                        
                                                                                        n so that:

                                                                                            
                       P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θn ) = P yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θfnoc                  (5)


The equilibrium conditions can therefore be represented, for any n ∈ N , as a map from
(zn , un , θeq                       f oc                                f oc                                   f oc
                                                                                                                     
            n ) into π n for given θ n and a map from (π n , zn , un , θ n ) into P yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θ n      .
Let π n (zn , un , θeq                          f oc
                    n ) and P(π n , zn , un ; θ n ) be such maps, respectively, with some abuse of no-

tation. Equilibrium is then unique, in sub-population n, if π n (zn , un , θeq                          f oc
                                                                            n ) and P(π n , zn , un ; θ n )

are one-to-one. This is, however, neither necessary nor sufficient for identification.

Proposition 1 The parameters of a general society are identified by observation of (y, x, π, z)
and g if for any n ∈ N , given zn , π n (zn , un , θeq                                      eq
                                                            n ), as a map from (un , θ n ) to π n , and

P(π n , zn , un ; θfnoc ), as a map from (π n , un , θfnoc ) to P yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θfnoc , are both
                                                                                                 

onto.

       Note that the condition in Proposition 1 is not required for the uniqueness of equilibrium;
nor does uniqueness imply the condition.21 To illustrate this point, consider a society
characterized by a map P(π n , zn , un ; θfnoc ) which is one-to-one and onto. In this case,
identification rests on the properties of the map π n (zn , un , θeq
                                                                  n ), given zn . Panel (a) in

Figure 1 displays an equilibrium map that does not satisfy the condition for identification
in Proposition 1 even though the equilibrium is unique. Panel (b) displays a manifold
  21
    A related result appears in Jovanovic (1989), who shows that a unique reduced form is neither a necessary
nor sufficient condition for identification.


                                                          12
             πn 6                                         πn 6
                             (a)                                          (b)




                                                -                                           -
                                             (un , θeq
                                                    n )                                 (un , θeq
                                                                                               n )

Figure 1: (a) Unique equilibrium, no identification; (b) multiple equilibria with identification


π n (zn , un , θeq
                n ) that is not one-to-one (with multiple equilibria), but is onto, and hence it

satisfies the identification condition.
       Importantly, in Proposition 1, identification of θn is obtained independently of the dis-
tribution of shocks u, p(u), as the realization un is identified jointly with θn , for any n ∈ N .
Under an ergodicity assumption on the stochastic process for un , the distribution of u,
p(u), can then typically be identified non-parametrically in population (that is, for N in-
finitely large); see Appendix A.22 Of course less restrictive identification conditions can be
constructed under parametric restrictions on p(u), e.g., when we allow for some specific
(known to the econometrician) correlation form of un with observable variables like zn .
       In empirical implementations it might be convenient to impose parameter constraints
across sub-populations, e.g., that all parameters be identical, θn = θ, for any n ∈ N , as in
Section 5. The conditions for identification are weaker under these classes of constraints.


3.1      Example: Brock and Durlauf

Under the assumptions in the example, the first-order conditions take the following form:

                                                     1
                          Pr (yi = 1) =
                                               1 + exp (−2φi )
                                                                          1
                        Pr (yi = −1) = 1 − Pr (yi = 1) =
                                                                    1 + exp (2φi )
  22
    This is trivially the case when un is independently and identically distributed across n. But this is also
the case if the spatial correlations of the un across n ∈ N satisfy an appropriate boundedness conditions.
See also Conley and Topa (2007) for some identification results in a related context.



                                                     13
where
                                      φi ≡ cn xi + Jn π n + un .

    The equilibrium condition, π n = EP [yn ], is reduced to


                                π n = Exi tanh (cn xi + Jn π n + un )                              (6)


    It is straightforward to show that, typically, equation (6) has multiple solutions. As-
suming scalar individual characteristics and abstracting from sub-population shocks un , it is
shown by Brock and Durlauf (2001b) that the equilibrium condition π n = Exi tanh (cn xi + Jn π n )
has generically either one or three solutions.
    It is also immediate to show that the sufficient condition for identification in Proposition
1 is satisfied for this economy as long as either θn = θ, n ≥ 2 or as long as cn does not
contain a constant.


4    Estimation

The previous section argues that identification is no more an issue when the model has mul-
tiple equilibria than when it has a unique equilibrium. This is not the case for estimation,
when the identification conditions require that the econometrician be able to compute all
feasible equilibria for every set of parameters, often a daunting computational task.23 In
this section, we introduce two alternative estimation methods for societies with potentially
multiple equilibria. The direct estimation method has all the large and small sample prop-
erties of a standard maximum-likelihood method, though it requires the computation of all
the feasible equilibria for every set of parameters. The alternative estimator we propose,
a two-step estimation method, preserves the large sample properties of the direct method
while being computationally straightforward.
    Suppose that, for any sub-population n ∈ N , the econometrician observes (yi , xi ) for
a random sample of the individuals i ∈ In . The econometrician also observes, for any
individual i in the sample, his network g(i), and the vector yg(i) . Finally, the econometrician
observes zn and can obtain a point estimate of π n , π
                                                     bn , as well as of the distribution of actions
  23
     See however Judd and Su (2006) for a discussion of these issues and a claim that the computational
complexity of these tasks is exaggerated in the current econometric literature.


                                                  14
and characteristics P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ), Pb(yn , xn | π n , zn , un ). We assume that, for any
n ∈ N, the condition for identification in Proposition 1 is satisfied.
       The likelihood for the random variables (y, x), given z and θ, is defined as L(y, x | z; θ).
In our setup, because of the possible presence of multiple equilibria, L(y, x | z; θ) is a
correspondence. Let


                           P(zn , un ; θn ) = P(π n (zn , un ; θeq               f oc
                                                                n ), zn , un ; θ n ).


Then                                              Z
                          L(y, x | z; θ) =             [Πn∈N P(zn , un ; θn )] p (u) du                  (7)

              denotes the Aumann integral.24 Let L(z; θ) be the set of measurable likelihood
          R
where
functions induced by (7); so that any l(y, x | z; θ) ∈ L(z; θ) is a measurable selection of the
correspondence L(y, x | z; θ).25


4.1       The direct estimation method

We define a direct (maximum likelihood) estimator of θ as follows:


                               θ
                               b = arg max                  max           l(y, x | z; θ)                 (8)
                                              θ       l(y,x|z;θ)∈L(z;θ)


Because of the possible multiplicity of equilibria, L(z; θ) is generally difficult to characterize.
However, under standard regularity conditions, the following proposition holds:

Proposition 2 The direct maximum likelihood estimator θ
                                                      b is consistent.


       The estimator θ
                     b can be computed by using the following algorithm: 1. Consider sub-

population n ∈ N ; 2. For each (θn , un ), compute all the equilibria of the model; 3. Compute
  24
      See Appendix A for details and references. Loosely speaking, the Riemann integral is not defined since
π n (zn , un ; θeq
                n is a correspondence; the Aumann integral is defined for correspondences and is constructed
by taking the union of the Riemann integrals of all measurable selections of the correspondence; it coincides
with the Riemann integral when applied to a measurable function.
   25
      The standard sufficient condition for identification in the sample of the parameter vector θ at θ0 can
then be written as follows: For all θ ∈ ΘN , θ 6= θ0 ,

                                  arg        max                           / L(z; θ0 ).
                                                            l(y, x | z; θ) ∈
                                        l(y,x|z;θ)∈L(z;θ)




                                                             15
the likelihood of each equilibrium and choose the maximum among them; 4. Repeat for all
n ∈ N ; 5. Integrate over u and maximize over θ. This procedure is computationally difficult,
especially when the society is sufficiently complex that a closed-form characterization of
equilibrium is impossible.


4.2     The two-step estimation method

We now introduce a simpler two-step estimation procedure.
First step. Compute the point estimates πb n and Pb(yn , xn | π
                                                              bn , zn , un ) for, respectively,
π n and P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ).
Second step. Estimate

  ˆn , ˆθ̂eq ) as a solution of
 (û      n
                                                            ˆn , ˆθ̂eq );
                                                bn ∈ π(zn , û
                                                π                   n


       and

 ˆf oc
 θ̂n as a solution of
                                        P (yn , xn | π          ˆn ; ˆθ̂f oc ) = Pb.
                                                     b n , zn , û      n


    Note that this estimation procedure does not require the computation of all the equilibria
as a function of θn , because the inversion operations in the second step are guaranteed by
the identification condition. Note also that the inversion operations in the second step are
substituted e.g., by standard maximum likelihood procedures when parametric assumptions
are imposed on p(u) and/or when parameter constraints across sub-populations are imposed,
as in Section 5.
    It is straightforward to conclude the following.

Proposition 3 If π   b n and Pb are consistent estimators of π n and P , the two-step estimator
ˆ
θ̂n is a consistent estimator of θn .

Furthermore, in specific empirical implementations, the small sample properties for the
two-step estimator can be improved by means of several expedients. First, the two-step
method can be iterated as, e.g., in Aguirregabiria and Mira (2007). Second, in constructing



                                                        16
the likelihood the econometrician could account for the distribution of the estimators π
                                                                                       bn
and Pb due, e.g., to sampling error.26


4.3       Monte Carlo analysis of estimators in Brock and Durlauf

We now study in detail the estimation methods in the previous section in the context of
the binary choice model of Brock and Durlauf (2001b), introduced in Section 2.2.
       Because the model abstracts from local interactions, multiplicity in P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ),
for any π n , is not an issue. Assume without loss of generality that agents do not condition
on any zn . In this model, independence of εi across agents i ∈ I implies that, for the vector
of choices y n :

                                         Y                                Y
         Pr (yn |xn , π n , un ) =            Pr (yi |xi , π n , un ) ∼          exp ((cn xi + un ) · yi + Jn yi π n )         (9)
                                          i                                 i


Equation (9) suggests the formulation of the likelihood as a function of θn = {cn , Jn }:

                                Y                                         1+yi                                      1−yi
 l(yn |xn , π n , un ; θn ) =            [Pr (yi = 1|xi , π n , un )]      2      · [Pr (yi = −1|xi , π n , un )]    2     ∼
                                     i
                                Y                                               1+yi                                       1−yi
                                         [exp (cn xi + un + Jn π n )]            2     · [exp (−cn xi − un − Jn π n )]      2

                                     i


       We run two sets of experiments: The first using the Brock-Durlauf model with one sub-
population, N = 1. We compare the performance of the two-step estimator to that of the
full maximum-likelihood estimator (what we call the “direct method”). The second set of
experiments is run in a multiple sub-population setting, N ≥ 2. Here, we compare the prop-
erties of the two-step method to both the direct method and another estimation method in
which the multiplicity issue is addressed by explicitly incorporating an equilibrium selection
mechanism into the likelihood function, as in Dagsvik and Jovanovic (1994).
       Note that the slope coefficients cn are identified in the single sub-population case by
the variation in average smoking across different values of the xi ’s. An intercept term
in cn is only identified in the multiple sub-population case with commmon parameters if
sub-populations select at least two different equilibria, because cn has the same effect on
  26
    Moro (2003) first employed this two-step method to estimate a model with multiple equilibria. In
his model, identifying restrictions require that shocks are independently and identically distributed across
sub-populations n ∈ N .


                                                             17
        Evaluation Criterion      Direct     Two-step    Direct, two-step initial est
        RMSE, parameter c        0.05056      0.05043               0.05043
         Bias, parameter c       -0.00315    -0.00251              -0.00251
        RMSE, parameter J        0.10768      0.10708               0.10706
         Bias, parameter J       -0.00184    -0.00542              -0.00390
             Min time           136.57404     0.23075             132.76532
             Max time           183.95280     0.36781             181.82902
            Mean time           157.22378     0.30190             158.34783
           Median time          156.88555     0.29983             158.34823


    Table 1: Monte Carlo single sub-population experiment - results (low-equilibrium)


behavior in all equilibria, but Jn ’s effect is proportional to the equilibrium behavior. We
do not include an intercept term in any of our specifications.


4.3.1   Results for a single sub-population (N = 1)

We use a version of the Brock-Durlauf model with a single covariate xi ∼ N (µx , 1) and
global interactions (no local interactions). Thus the model parameters are a pair θ ≡ (c, J) ;
note that we drop the index n for simplicity as N = 1. We draw an artificial sample of
20,000 students (characterized by their attribute xi ) and run a Monte-Carlo experiment,
drawing N =160 vectors of the true parameters of the model. Parameter c is drawn from
a uniform with support [−0.8, 0.8], and parameter J from a uniform with support [1, 3].
For each random draw θtrue
                         j   of the model parameters, j = 1, ..., N , we use the model to
                            true
                                 
generate simulated data ye θj      , choosing one single equilibrium for a given experiment
(i.e., all students are acting according to the same equilibrium). For each simulated dataset
ye θtrue
         
     j      we estimate the model parameters using both the two-step and the direct methods,
n 2s d o
       θj , j = 1, ..., N . We then compare the properties of the two estimators, focusing
  θj , b
  b

on several evaluation criteria: bias (the average difference between the estimator and the
true parameter), root mean squared error (RMSE) (the root of the average of the squared
differences between the estimator and the true parameter), and computational speed.
   Table 1 reports the results of the experiments in which the low-level equilibrium was
always chosen; results for the intermediate and high-level equilibrium are very similar and
are available from the authors upon request. The second column reports properties of the
direct method where the starting value θ0 used in the likelihood maximization routine was


                                             18
fixed at c = 0, J = 2. The third column reports statistics for the two-step method. The
                                                                                 2s
fourth column reports results for the direct method when the two-step estimates b
                                                                                θj were
used as initial values for the maximization algorithm.
       The two-step method always exhibits lower RMSE than the direct method with fixed
starting values.27 This is surprising since the direct method represents the full maximum-
likelihood estimation and should therefore achieve a weakly lower RMSE. The reason for
this result is that, even though we use a maximization algorithm – simulated annealing –
that is very robust to discontinuities in the objective function, in a small but nontrivial
number of cases the algorithm gets “stuck” in a region of the parameters that correspond
to the wrong equilibrium, which yields estimates very far from θtrue . To address this issue,
                                     2s
we also use the direct method with bθ as starting values (column four): in this case, the
                                            j

RMSE is the same or slightly lower than in the two-step case.
       The real advantage of the two-step method, however, is in computational speed. Even
with this very stripped-down model, an estimation run with the direct method took a
median time between 156 and 159 minutes (depending on the choice of equilibrium); instead,
the two-step method took roughly between twenty-seven and thirty seconds. This is a
vast computational advantage that enables researchers to estimate much richer models of
economic behavior than if they were to use brute force maximum-likelihood only.


4.3.2      Results for multiple sub-populations (N ≥ 2)

Our second set of experiments concerns a setting with multiple sub-populations n, where
all agents in a single sub-population n, i ∈ In , are assumed to be in the same equilibrium
but each sub-population may be in a different equilibrium.
       A possible approach is to postulate a selection mechanism across equilibria, which in-
volves a specific correlation structure (in equilibria) across the different sub-populations of
the society (see, e.g., Dagsvik and Jovanovic (1994) and Bajari, Hong, and Ryan (2010)).
This enables the econometrician to write the likelihood as the product of two terms: loosely
speaking, the probability of the data in a given sub-population n, conditional on parameters
and on the equilibrium chosen in n; and the probability that sub-population n is in that
particular equilibrium given the selection mechanism. Therefore, the likelihood is a mixture
  27
    The difference is slight in the case in which the low equilibrium is picked and larger in the other two
cases, especially when the intermediate equilibrium is selected.


                                                    19
of likelihoods conditional on equilibria, where the weights are equal to the probabilities of
equilibria given data. Thus the likelihood becomes a well-behaved function rather than a
complicated correspondence. The downside of this approach is that the econometrician has
to take a stand on the specific equilibrium selection mechanism being used.
       We perform two types of experimental comparisons. First, we again compare the two-
step estimator to the direct method. Second, we compare the two-step estimator with the
estimators obtained by postulating an equilibrium selection (we call this the D-J method, for
Dagsvik and Jovanovic). In the direct versus two-step method experiment, we use n = 20,
with 5,000 agents in each sub-population; in the D-J versus two-step method comparison,
we use n = 300, with 200 agents in each sub-population.28 To concentrate on equilibrium
selection, we assume the parameters are identical across sub-populations: (cn , Jn ) = (c, J),
for all n, and are randomly drawn as in the single sub-population experiments. Suppose
the equilibrium set contains at most K equilibria, indexed by k = 1, ..., K. Let


                 φn (π k ) = Pr (sub-population n is in eqm. π k | yn−1 , yn−2 , ...) .


       To simulate the experimental data, we used a second-order spatially auto-regressive pro-
cess (SAR(2)) as our equilibrium selection mechanism. The sub-population is ordered on
a one-dimensional integer lattice, where “closeness” in the lattice represents “closeness” in
terms of social distance and hence it justifies the correlation structure imposed on equilib-
rium selection.29 Let K = 3, as in the Brock and Durlauf model we simulate. The first two
sub-populations are assigned one of the three possible equilibria at random (independently),
with probabilities (p1 , p2 , 1 − p1 − p2 ). For n > 2, each sub-population n adopts the same
equilibrium as sub-population n − 1 with probability a1 , and it adopts the same equilibrium
as sub-population n − 2 with probability a2 ; with the residual probability (1 − a1 − a2 )
sub-population n is assigned an equilibrium independently of the preceding sub-population
(again with probabilities (p1 , p2 , 1 − p1 − p2 )). The conditional probabilities φn (π k ) are
computed recursively based on this particular selection mechanism.
  28
     We have a larger number of cities in the D-J experiment because we wanted to also study the method’s
ability to estimate the equilibrium selection mechanism; consequently, we were limited to having only 200
artificial students in each sub-population n for computational reasons.
  29
     In a time-series context, correlation across time-periods is perhaps more natural. In a cross-sectional
context, one can still determine “closeness” between sub-populations by using some notion of social distance:
see Conley and Topa (2002).


                                                     20
       Correlation in eq. selection        α1 =α2 =1/3              α1 =0.1,α2 =0.8
          Evaluation Criterion          Direct    Two-step        Direct     Two-step
                   (1)                   (2)          (4)           (5)         (6)
       RMSE, c                         0.04849      0.00343      0.02468      0.02330
       Bias, c                         0.00530     -0.00006      -0.00239    -0.00093
       RMSE, J                         0.18000      0.02769      0.04941      0.04216
       Bias, J                         0.03824      0.00705      0.00584     -0.00023
       Min time                       133.07780 1.23348         130.13754 1.30992
       Max time                       234.96883 6.49528         224.77100 7.60333
       Mean time                      159.35291 1.57270         154.92274 1.65008
       Median time                    157.15724 1.53797         152.82602 1.59336


Table 2: Monte Carlo multiple sub-populations experiments: comparison of direct and
two-step methods


   Table 2 collects results for the first set of experiments, comparing the two-step and direct
methods, where the evaluations are based on the results obtained from 160 runs where
the “true” parameters are randomly drawn using the same criteria used in the previous
subsection. The second and third columns concern an experiment in which the parameters
of the SAR(2) selection mechanism were set at a1 = 1/3, a2 = 1/3. In this particular case,
both RMSE and bias measures are much lower for the two-step than for the direct method.
We suspect that this is a consequence of the extreme computational difficulties involved
in maximizing the full likelihood in the multiple sub-populations case. As in the single
sub-population case, computational speed is again roughly two orders of magnitude higher
for the two-step method than for the direct method.
   The RMSE and bias properties are quite sensitive to the specific parameterization of
the selection mechanism. Columns 4 and 5 display results for the case in which the SAR(2)
parameters are set at a1 = 1/10, a2 = 4/5. Here, the two methods under comparison
exhibit roughly similar properties in terms of RMSE and bias, although computational
speed is again much higher for the two-step method.
   Finally, we turn to two experiments that perform a comparison between the two-step
and D-J methods. In each experiment, we wish to evaluate the performance of the D-J
method in the case in which the econometrician correctly specifies the equilibrium selection
process, as opposed to a situation in which the equilibrium selection is misspecified relative
to the truth. In the first experiment, the true selection mechanism is a SAR(2) process,


                                             21
        Econometrician Conjectures          Correct: α1 , α2 > 0       Misspecified: α2 = 0
           Evaluation Criterion                D-J     Two-step            D-J     Two-step
                   (1)                         (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)
                RMSE, C                     0.00580      0.00736        0.00567     0.00721
                 Bias, C                    -0.00015    -0.00027        -0.00032   -0.00036
                RMSE, J                     0.02455      0.04497        0.02390     0.04466
                 Bias, J                    0.00235      0.02343        0.00253     0.02302
                Min time                   330.61444 0.60659           277.07853 0.62736
              Median time                  352.19753 0.74459           297.17443 0.73311
                Max time                   417.93318 2.32693           382.53198 5.82907

Table 3: Monte Carlo experiments: misspecification of the equilibrium transition probabil-
ities


with a1 = 0.01, a2 = 0.95, whereas the econometrician assumes a SAR(1) specification in
the misspecified case. In the second experiment, the true equilibrium selection mechanism
imposes p1 = p2 = 1/3 and a1 = a2 = 1/3, but the econometrician assumes p2 = 0 (i.e., the
intermediate equilibrium is never chosen) in the misspecified case.30
    The results of these two experiments are reported in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. In each
table, columns 2 and 3 report results for a situation in which the econometrician adopting
the D-J method uses the correct specification, whereas columns 4 and 5 focus on the case
in which the “D-J econometrician” chooses a misspecified model. Notice that, when using
the two-step method, one does not need to take a stand on the selection mechanism.
    The comparison is interesting: in the first experiment, the D-J method performs some-
what better than the two-step in terms of RMSE, especially with regard to the social
interactions parameter J, in both the correct and the misspecified case. In the second ex-
periment, however, the two-step method performs much better than the D-J method, with
RMSE measures roughly one order of magnitude smaller for the former. In both cases,
computational speed remains much higher for the two-step method, even more so than in
the comparison with the direct method. These Monte Carlo experiments therefore highlight
another advantage of the two-step method (in addition to speed): since it does not involve
explicitly specifying an equilibrium selection, it is more robust to potential misspecification
of this sort than methods that rely on taking a stand on the selection mechanism.

   30
      The second experiment is inspired by models with myopic dynamics in which the intermediate equilib-
rium is typically unstable.


                                                   22
       Econometrician Conjectures       Correct: P1 , P2 > 0    Misspecified: P2 = 0
          Evaluation Criterion         Jovanovic Two step       Jovanovic Two step
                  (1)                     (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)
               RMSE, C                  0.00517      0.00912     0.07751     0.00911
                Bias, C                 0.00001     -0.00042     -0.01124   -0.00043
               RMSE, J                  0.02523      0.08002     0.74713     0.07953
                Bias, J                 0.00437      0.05484     0.65119     0.05394
               Min time                333.29544 0.59714        271.94123 0.62225
             Median time               356.65684 0.72343        287.05614 0.73007
               Max time                453.14298 3.49153        398.08752 0.84737


Table 4: Monte Carlo experiments: misspecification of the equilibrium selection probabili-
ties


5    Social interactions and smoking

In this section, we estimate several different specifications of the social interactions model
in Brock and Durlauf (2001b), presented in Section 2.2. To this end, we use data on smok-
ing obtained from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), a
longitudinal study of a nationally representative sample of adolescents in grades seven to
twelve in the United States during the 1994-95 school year. Add Health combines longitu-
dinal survey data on respondents’ social, economic, psychological, and physical well-being
with contextual data on the family, neighborhood, community, school, friendships, peer
groups, and romantic relationships. A sample of eighty U.S. high schools and fifty-two U.S.
middle schools was selected with unequal probability of selection. Incorporating systematic
sampling methods and implicit stratification into the Add Health study design ensured this
sample is representative of U.S. schools with respect to region of the country, urban or rural
setting, school size, school type, and ethnic composition.
    In the empirical application, therefore, we encode yi = 1 if agent i smokes and yi = −1 if
he or she does not. Each sub-population n is a school. We consider only high schools, which
we define as schools having students enrolled in all grades between nine and twelve. Among
these, we include only the forty-five schools that have at least 400 students, in order to have
a sufficient number of smokers and minorities in each school. Even with these restrictions,
there are cases in which the parameter estimates associated with specific racial or ethnic
groups are not estimated with any precision.


                                              23
5.1   Specification of social interactions

We explore different specifications of the structure of interaction inside schools. In most
cases, we consider the general case in which interactions have both a school-wide and a
local component, that is, at the level of each agent’s circle of friends, which are reported
in the Add Health individual friendship network data. We estimate the model parameters
separately for each school (without imposing any structure on the distribution of parameters
across schools), as well as jointly, imposing some additional structure. However, when we
estimate the model parameters separately for each school, the global interaction parameter is
not identified separately from the intercept term in agents’ random utility (see Section 5.3).
Therefore, in this case we estimate a specification with local interactions only. Finally, as we
discuss later, in order to study the effects of changes in the parameters on the equilibrium
mapping, we also need to estimate a specification with school-wide interactions only, so that
we have a closed-form solution for the equilibrium mapping.
   In the general case each agent i ∈ In has preferences represented by

                                                                             X
          V yi , xi , yg(i) , π n , zn , εi , un = cn xi · yi + JnG yi π n +   JnL yi π g(i) + εi
                                                

                                                                         j∈g(i)


                   1      P
where π g(i) =   |g(i)|   j∈g(i) yj .
   Only school-wide interactions are obtained with JnL = 0; only local interactions are
present with JnG = 0.


5.2   Specification of parameters

First, we estimate (cn , Jn ) separately for each school n, to study the distribution of param-
eter estimates across schools. Second, we estimate a set of model specifications in which
the model parameters (cn , Jn ) are either constrained to be the same across schools or to be
a function of observed school attributes zn : cn = c(zn ), Jn = J(zn ). Finally, we estimate
specifications with multiple schools where we allow (cn , Jn ) to contain random coefficients
as in (12)-(13) or in (14)-(15). In all cases, we allow for an intercept term in cn .
   More specifically, in the case in which the parameters are specified as a function of
observed school attributes, let the dimension of the vector zn be K, for any school n. We



                                                    24
adopt the following linear specification:

                                                          K
                                                          X
                               cn = c(zn ) = α0 +               αk znk ;                   (10)
                                                          k=1
                                                          XK
                               Jn = J(zn ) = γ 0 +              γ k znk .                  (11)
                                                          k=1


   In the case in which we let the parameters contain random coefficients, the specification
we adopt is:


                            cn = α0 + αn , with αn ∼ N (0, σ α )                           (12)

                            Jn = γ 0 + γ n , with γ n ∼ N (0, σ γ )                        (13)


More generally, we also include school attributes zn :

                                     K
                                     X
                      cn = α0 +            αk znk + αn , with αn ∼ N (0, σ α )             (14)
                                     k=1
                                     XK
                      Jn = γ 0 +           γ k znk + γ n , with γ n ∼ N (0, σ γ )          (15)
                                     k=1


   We assume that the random coefficients {αn , γ n } are independent of each other and of
the individual random terms εi (yi ) that enter the individuals’ random utilities. We specify
a functional form for the probability distribution of {αn , γ n } in order to put some structure
on the distribution of the realized {cn , Jn }.


5.3    Identification of parameters

In the general case presented above, where the estimation is run on data from all schools
jointly, the parameters cn , JnL , JnG are identified separately by the variation in demographic
                                      

attributes within schools, in smoking prevalence across personal networks, and in school-
wide smoking prevalence across schools. The parameter ruling school-wide interactions,
JnG , is identified separately from the intercept in cn – which is assumed constant across
schools – by the variation in the fraction of smokers across schools. The parameter for
local interactions, JnL , is identified by the variation in smoking behavior across personal


                                                  25
friendship networks, both within and across schools.
      In a single-school setting, the school-wide interaction parameter is identified separately
from the slope coefficients in cn as long as there is some variation in demographic attributes
within the school. Similarly, the local interaction parameter is identified as long as there
is some variation in smoking prevalence across individual networks. However, JnG is not
identified separately from the intercept term in cn . Therefore, in the school-by-school
estimation we present below, we focus on the specification with local interactions only,
arbitrarily setting JnG = 0.


5.4      Empirical results

In what follows, we present summaries of the parameter estimates for a selection of spec-
ifications. Standard errors of the parameter estimates were computed using the bootstrap
method. We then perform some simulation exercises to compute the estimated effect on
the incidence on smoking of changes in the level of social interactions.
      In the general case in which interactions have both a school-wide (“global”) and a
local (personal network) component, and random fixed effects {αn , γ n } are added to the
                                                           
parameters, the likelihood of the data yn given π n , π g(i) i∈I , θn in school n is:
                                                                       n


                                      
             log     L(yn |π n , π g(i) i∈I ; θn ) =
                                      n                                             
                                  1+yi                                 Gπ + J Lπ
                                         · log   1 + exp  −2  c  x
                                                               n i  + J n n    n g(i)
                             2
                       X
                     −                                                                 
                                    1−yi                               G       Lπ
                       i∈In     +     2     · log  1 + exp  2 c  x
                                                                n i + J   π
                                                                        n n + J n g(i)

                     + Pr(αn ) + Pr(γ n ).


5.4.1      School-by-school estimation

In this section, the model parameters are estimated separately for each school, that is we
maximize a separate likelihood for each school. (See Section 5.3 for a discussion of identi-
fication in this case.) Table 5 reports the means and medians of the parameter estimates
across schools for the specification with local interactions only because, as discussed earlier,
the global interaction parameter is not identified separately from the constant in this case31 .
 31
      The parameter estimates for each school are available from the authors upon request.




                                                     26
                                                         Local interactions
                             Variable                     Mean     Median
                             Black                       -0.7358 -0.6737
                             Asian                       -0.0576 -0.2356
                             Hispanic                    -0.0206 -0.1690
                             Female                      0.1248     0.1844
                             Age                         0.1084     0.0795
                             Does not belong to a club   0.3394     0.2917
                             GPA                         -0.3281 -0.3231
                             Mom college                 -0.0237    0.1585
                             Dad at home                 -0.2056 -0.2174
                             Local Interactions          0.7964     0.8241
                             Constant                    -0.7270 -0.8506


       Table 5: Mean and median parameter estimates, all schools estimated separately


      The parameter estimates are qualitatively consistent with other studies of smoking:32
minorities (blacks, Asians, Hispanics) tend to smoke less than whites. Female students,
older students, and students who do not participate in any school clubs, organizations, or
athletic teams tend to smoke more. Students who perform better academically and students
whose father is present at home tend to smoke less. Finally, the local interaction parameter
estimate is positive and statistically significant in all schools. Its median size is roughly two
and a half times as large as that of a student’s GPA (in absolute value).
      Figure 2 reports the distribution of parameter estimates for this specification. Only
parameter estimates with t test statistics greater than unity are plotted. There is consid-
erable dispersion around the medians across schools, especially with regard to the Hispanic
category and the education level of the mother. The results are strongest (in terms of con-
sistency of coefficient signs across schools) for age, club, and GPA: in almost all schools,
being younger (in a lower grade), belonging to a club, organization, or team, and having
a higher GPA are unequivocally associated with less smoking. This pattern is confirmed
across all specifications we have estimated. As noted, the local interaction parameter es-
timates are positive and statistically significant at the 5 percent level in all schools. This
finding is strongly suggestive of the presence of social interaction effects operating through
individual friendship networks, although, as we mentioned earlier, it may also be consistent
 32
      See, for instance, Gruber and Zinman (2000) or Gilleskie and Strumpf (2005).



                                                    27
        4                                                        1


        2                                                       0.5


        0                                                        0
       −1.2   −1       −0.8       −0.6    −0.4      −0.2         −1            −0.5            0           0.5       1
                              Black                                                          Asian
        4                                                       10


        2                                                        5


       0                                                         0
       −1     −0.5       0       0.5          1      1.5        −0.6      −0.4         −0.2      0           0.2     0.4
                          Hispanic                                                        Female
       10                                                       15

                                                                10
        5
                                                                 5

       0                                                         0
       0.05    0.1     0.15         0.2   0.25       0.3              0               0.5              1             1.5
                              Age                                                           No Club
       10                                                       10


        5                                                        5


        0                                                        0
       −0.6   −0.5     −0.4     −0.3      −0.2      −0.1         −1               −0.5            0                  0.5
                              GPA                                                     Mom college
       10


        5


        0
       −0.6     −0.4      −0.2            0          0.2
                       Dad at home
       15                                                        6

       10                                                        4

        5                                                        2

        0                                                        0
        0.4    0.6      0.8        1          1.2    1.4         −4       −3          −2      −1       0         1   2
                          Jn (local)                                                        Constant


Figure 2: Distributions of parameter values, all schools separately, local interactions only




                                                           28
                       Variable                     Coefficient Std. err.
                       Black                         -0.4415      0.0355
                       Asian                         -0.0664      0.0392
                       Hispanic                      -0.1622      0.0288
                       Female                        0.0693       0.0174
                       Age                           0.0441       0.0060
                       Does not belong to a club     0.2022       0.0208
                       GPA                           -0.2695      0.0121
                       Mom college                   0.0166       0.0199
                       Dad at home                   -0.0877      0.0230
                       Global interactions           0.7191       0.0717
                       Local interactions            0.8252       0.0152
                       Constant                      0.1889       0.1062
                       Log Likelihood                     -11252.50


                         Table 6: All schools, constant parameters


with sorting into networks along unobservable traits.


5.4.2   Multiple schools

Having estimated (cn , Jn ) independently across schools, we now report the estimation re-
sults for specifications that impose some functional form on the way in which the model
coefficients vary as a function of observed school-level characteristics. To do so, we estimate
our social interactions model jointly for all schools in our sample, where the overall log
likelihood is the sum of the individual schools’ contributions.
   First, we report, as a baseline, estimation results for a specification in which the model
parameters (cn , Jn ) are the same across all schools. This specification is obviously not a
good fit of the data, since we have shown in the previous discussion that the distribution
of parameter estimates across schools exhibits a significant amount of dispersion for all
variables. All the same, this is a good robustness check to see if our estimation results seem
consistent across specifications.
   Table 6 collects results for the general case with both school-wide and local interac-
tions. The estimates are qualitatively similar to the distribution medians reported for the
unconstrained case in Section 5.4.1. Again, minorities tend to smoke less; female and older
students are more likely to smoke; and students with higher GPAs, those who participate


                                               29
in school organizations or teams, and those whose fathers are present at home smoke less.
The parameter estimate for local interactions is very similar in magnitude to the median
estimate for the case in which each school is treated separately. The school-wide interaction
parameter, which is identified in this specification because of the variation in smoking preva-
lence across schools, is slightly smaller than that for local interactions, but still positive and
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
   Next, we turn to a specification in which parameters – while still deterministic – are a
function of observed school attributes zn , as in equations (10) and (11). We have chosen
the following list of attributes describing the presence of tobacco-related policies at a given
school: whether the school enacts state-mandated training on the use of tobacco products,
whether the school has implemented rules regarding the use of tobacco products by students,
and whether the school has implemented rules regarding the use of tobacco products by its
staff. We have also added the following list of attributes pertaining to the county in which
the school is located: whether the county is urban or rural, the percentage of families under
the poverty line, the fraction of college-educated individuals in the population twenty-five
years and older; and the fraction of female (male) adults in the labor force.
   The estimation results are reported in Figure 3 and Table 7. The first observation is that
the distributions of estimated coefficients across schools reported in Figure 3 are qualita-
tively similar to those in the unrestricted specifications in Figure 2. However, the parameter
estimate distributions tend to exhibit less dispersion across schools than the unconstrained
ones; for instance, the distribution of the age parameters in Figure 3 ranges from about
0.01 to about 0.08, whereas in the unrestricted case it ranges from about 0.05 to 0.25. The
same is true for most of the other attributes, as well as for the local interaction parameters:
the latter ranges between 0.7 and 0.95, whereas in the school-by-school estimation it ranges
between 0.5 and 1.2. This observation motivates our use of the random coefficients speci-
fications, to better capture the wide dispersion across schools of the coefficients associated
with individual attributes. Finally, the distribution of school-wide interaction estimates
exhibits a much wider dispersion than that of local interactions, ranging between 0 and 2.
   Some of the parameter estimates for the c(zn ) and J(zn ) functions are noteworthy.
For instance, the mostly positive coefficients associated with female students are greatly
reduced in neighborhoods with higher poverty levels, a lower fraction of college graduates,



                                                30
                Distribution of C−female (C = C(Z)); all                         Distribution of C−age (C = C(Z)); all
       15                                                             15



       10                                                             10



        5                                                              5



        0                                                              0
       −0.4          −0.2          0             0.2       0.4             0       0.02      0.04         0.06      0.08      0.1

                Distribution of C−noclub (C = C(Z)); all                       Distribution of C−gradeavg (C = C(Z)); all
       20                                                             15


       15
                                                                      10

       10

                                                                       5
        5


        0                                                              0
            0         0.1         0.2            0.3       0.4        −0.3          −0.25          −0.2          −0.15       −0.1

            Distribution of C−momcollege (C = C(Z)); all                       Distribution of C−dadhome (C = C(Z)); all
       15                                                             10

                                                                       8
       10
                                                                       6

                                                                       4
        5
                                                                       2

        0                                                              0
       −0.2          −0.1          0             0.1       0.2        −0.2        −0.15     −0.1         −0.05       0       0.05

                 Distribution of J−local (J = J(Z)); all                        Distribution of J−global (G = G(Z)); all
       15                                                              8


                                                                       6
       10

                                                                       4

        5
                                                                       2


        0                                                              0
        0.7       0.75      0.8   0.85     0.9     0.95    1          −0.5         0      0.5        1       1.5         2    2.5

Figure 3: Distributions of parameter values, all schools, deterministic coefficients function
of school characteristics




                                                                 31
                                      Female                 Age                No club
         Intercept                  1.4904   (0.1300)   -0.0037   (0.0067)   -0.5867   (0.2113)
         % Urban                    0.0034   (0.0601)    0.0333   (0.0080)   -0.0122   (0.0726)
         % Poverty                 -1.6764   (0.3644)    0.1857   (0.0400)    0.4575   (0.4327)
         % College over 25          0.6127   (0.3485)    0.0370   (0.0238)    0.2228   (0.4275)
         Female Labor Force P.R.   -1.4867   (0.2978)   -0.0900   (0.0133)    0.9968   (0.5351)
         Male Labor Force P.R.     -0.8336   (0.1841)    0.0106   (0.0076)    0.2586   (0.3100)
         Tobacco training          -0.0888   (0.0379)    0.0223   (0.0058)    0.0122   (0.0482)
         Tobacco student policy     0.0922   (0.0880)   -0.0179   (0.0068)    0.2056   (0.1004)
         Tobacco staff policy      -0.1237   (0.0882)    0.0388   (0.0061)   -0.1809   (0.0956)

                                        GPA             Mom college           Dad Home
         Intercept                  0.1427   (0.0325)   -0.3879   (0.1720)   -0.2364   (0.0966)
         % Urban                    0.0001   (0.0370)    0.1338   (0.0730)   -0.0185   (0.0707)
         % Poverty                  0.0711   (0.1740)   -0.0321   (0.3909)    0.3613   (0.3915)
         % College over 25         -0.0967   (0.1322)   -0.4370   (0.3739)    0.2692   (0.3856)
         Female Labor Force P.R.   -0.4700   (0.0734)   -0.4900   (0.4452)   -0.6471   (0.2632)
         Male Labor Force P.R.     -0.1830   (0.0449)    0.9316   (0.2464)    0.4012   (0.1495)
         Tobacco training          -0.0128   (0.0245)   -0.0264   (0.0457)    0.1201   (0.0485)
         Tobacco student policy    -0.0375   (0.0386)   -0.0075   (0.1104)   -0.1367   (0.0996)
         Tobacco staff policy       0.0106   (0.0402)   -0.0205   (0.1065)    0.1388   (0.0923)

                                    Local Inter.        Global Inter.          Constant
         Intercept                  0.3394   (0.1373)    2.5743   (0.1562)   0.1882 (0.1099)
         % Urban                   -0.1048   (0.0517)    0.9509   (0.1878)
         % Poverty                 -0.2967   (0.3193)    4.4323   (0.7985)
         % College over 25         -0.0294   (0.2953)    1.2494   (0.6009)
         Female Labor Force P.R.    0.5911   (0.3383)   -6.8403   (0.3243)
         Male Labor Force P.R.      0.5800   (0.2016)   -0.8632   (0.1961)
         Tobacco training          -0.0403   (0.0397)    0.6166   (0.1487)
         Tobacco student policy     0.0038   (0.0821)   -0.6505   (0.1554)
         Tobacco staff policy      -0.0951   (0.0816)    1.0344   (0.1506)



Table 7: All schools, deterministic coefficients function of school characteristics (standard
errors in parenthesis, log likelihood -11130.5654)


and higher female labor force participation, suggesting that female smoking may be related
to higher socioeconomic status. The positive relationship between student age and smoking
is stronger in higher poverty areas. The finding that Dad’s presence at home is associated
with less smoking is reinforced in neighborhoods with higher female labor force participation,
perhaps indicating that one parent’s presence and control is even more crucial when the
other parent works outside the home.
   Interestingly, a school’s tobacco-related policies can have a large impact on the strength
of the social interaction terms. The presence of tobacco rules for students is associated with
lower school-wide interactions parameters, whereas tobacco training programs and tobacco
rules for the staff seem to increase the strength of school-wide interactions but slightly
reduce the strength of local interactions (however, the latter estimates are not statistically
significant). Of course, these school policy variables are likely endogenous, but the finding

                                                 32
that various tobacco policies may be related to stronger or weaker social interaction terms
is important, and we will return to it in our discussion of counterfactual experiments.
   Finally, it is worth noting that neighborhood poverty levels and female labor force
participation have a very large impact on school-wide interactions estimates. This suggests
that some of the variation in smoking across schools that is unexplained by observed student
attributes and is attributed in the estimation to school-wide interaction effects may in fact
be a school-wide fixed effect related to the area’s socioeconomic status and other attributes.
This possibility stresses the value of having individual friendship network data to estimate
local social interaction effects.


5.4.3   Multiple schools, random coefficients

As mentioned in the previous section, letting (cn , Jn ) depend on observed school charac-
teristics in a deterministic fashion may not be sufficient to capture the wide variation of
parameter estimates across schools found in the unrestricted case. Therefore, we also use
the random coefficient specification described in Section 5.2, to better capture the dispersion
in coefficient values across schools. We first estimate a version with only an intercept and a
random term, as in (12)-(13), and then augment it with school-level characteristics zn as in
(14)-(15). For computational feasibility, we use only two individual student attributes – age
and grade point average – since the introduction of random coefficients raises considerably
the number of parameters to be estimated.
   Figure 4 reports the distributions of the estimated parameters for two specifications
without zn : with only school-wide interactions (left three panes) and with both school-
wide and local interactions (right four panes). Results are qualitatively consistent with the
specifications presented so far. As expected, the range of values for the age, GPA, and
local interaction coefficients is wider than in the deterministic case (Figure 3) and very
similar to that of the unrestricted school-by-school specification (Figure 2). Introducing
local interaction effects generally lowers the school-wide interactions estimates relative to
the case with school-wide interactions only.
   Interestingly, we find a very large dispersion in the strength of school-wide social inter-
action effects, ranging roughly between zero and eight. We conjecture that this dispersion
may reflect differences across schools in terms of neighborhood attributes, or in the extent


                                               33
    Distribution of Cage0 + CageN (random coeffs); only signif Distribution of Cage0 + CageN (random coeffs); only signif
       10                                                             15

        8
                                                                      10
        6

        4
                                                                       5
        2

        0                                                              0
       −0.1          0          0.1        0.2         0.3            −0.1             0              0.1            0.2       0.3

    Distribution of Cgra0 + CgraN (random coeffs); only signif     Distribution of Cgra0 + CgraN (random coeffs); only signif
       15                                                             10

                                                                       8
       10
                                                                       6

                                                                       4
        5
                                                                       2

        0                                                              0
       −0.8       −0.6        −0.4        −0.2          0             −0.8          −0.6             −0.4           −0.2       0

        Distribution of J0 + JN (random coeffs); only signif      Distribution of Jlocal0 + JlocalN (random coeffs); only signif
        4                                                              6

        3
                                                                       4
        2
                                                                       2
        1

        0                                                              0
            0        2           4          6           8              0.4       0.6           0.8          1          1.2     1.4

                                                                 Distribution of Jglobal0 + JglobalN (random coeffs); only signif
                                                                       3


                                                                       2


                                                                       1


                                                                       0
                                                                           1    2          3           4        5          6   7

Figure 4: Distributions of parameter values, random coefficients. Left three panes: global
interactions only; right four panes: both local and global interactions




                                                                 34
                    Cage0+Cage(Z)+CageN (random coeffs); signif              Cgravg0+Cgravg(Z)+CgravgN (random coeffs); signif
                    7                                                          4

                    6
                                                                               3
                    5

                    4
                                                                               2
                    3

                    2
                                                                               1
                    1

                    0                                                          0
                   -0.1         0           0.1       0.2        0.3          -0.6     -0.5     -0.4       -0.3   -0.2    -0.1


                    Jlocal0+Jlocal(Z)+JlocalN (random coeffs); signif        Jglobal0+Jglobal(Z)+JglobalN (random coeffs); signif
                    5                                                          3

                    4                                                        2.5

                                                                               2
                    3
                                                                             1.5
                    2
                                                                               1
                    1                                                        0.5

                    0                                                          0
                    0.4      0.6      0.8         1     1.2      1.4               0       2           4          6         8




Figure 5: Distributions of parameter values, random coefficients and school characteristics



of stratification and segregation along racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic status lines within
schools. This finding highlights the unique nature of the Add Health data, that allows us to
contrast interactions occurring within individual networks to those occurring within larger
groups. Studies that do not use individual network data would not be able to detect these
stark differences in the nature of the interactions occurring for different reference groups33 .
    Figure 5 and Table 8 report estimation results for the model with random coefficients
and school attributes zn . The table only reports the parameters of the deterministic por-
tion of the c(zn ) and J(zn ) functions, i.e., the (α0 , αk , γ 0 , γ k ) parameters. The estimated
distributions in Figure 5 are remarkably similar to those estimated in the unrestricted case.
Smoking is positively associated with age and negatively associated with academic achieve-
ment. We also find significantly positive local interaction effects and a bimodal distribution
of school-wide effects, again with a large dispersion in the magnitude of the latter.
    Table 8 shows somewhat similar patterns to the deterministic specification in Table 7.
  33
     See Manski (1993) for the importance of having accurate data on the extent and definition of relevant
reference groups.



                                                                        35
                          Age                GPA               Local              Global
 Intercept           0.0134 (0.0058)   -0.4033 (0.0284)    1.2017 (0.1173)    2.8264 (0.1628)
 % Urban             0.0357 (0.0080)   -0.1293 (0.0417)   -0.1000 (0.1252)    0.4317 (0.1884)
 % Poverty          -0.0415 (0.0405)    0.6534 (0.1972)    1.1833 (0.6447)   -1.2664 (1.0062)
 Female LFPR         0.0068 (0.0126)   -0.0341 (0.0634)    1.0298 (0.2635)    1.6282 (0.3240)
 Tbc. training       0.0208 (0.0065)   -0.0153 (0.0330)   -0.7897 (0.1197)    0.4142 (0.1641)
 Tbc. stud. pol.     0.0147 (0.0067)    0.1088 (0.0359)   -0.0039 (0.1233)    0.1736 (0.1720)
 Tbc. staff pol.    -0.0089 (0.0069)    0.0252 (0.0346)   -0.4069 (0.1366)   -1.0318 (0.1702)
                        Constant
 Intercept           1.8125 (0.0846)


Table 8: All schools, random coefficients (standard errors in parenthesis, log likelihood
-11033.074)


Again, the presence of tobacco training programs is associated with stronger school-wide
interactions but weaker local interactions. Tobacco policies for the staff are associated with
weaker social interactions both within personal friendship networks and school-wide. As
we discuss in the next section, however, such policy effects do not necessarily imply less
smoking in a given school.


6    Counterfactual experiments

In this section, we use our estimation results to perform two sets of exercises. First, given
the estimates, we compute the set of feasible equilibria in each school, to see whether
the estimated model parameters lie in regions of the parameter space that give rise to
multiplicity. This allows us to determine whether a given school is in the equilibrium with
the lowest possible smoking prevalence, or if there are other equilibria that exhibit lower
levels of smoking. Second, we simulate the effect of lowering or increasing the strength of
the interaction parameters on smoking. Because our previous results reveal that tobacco-
related policies may affect interaction effects, this analysis could shed some light on the
possible effects of such policies.
    We carry out this analysis both in the case of school-wide interactions only and in the
case of local as well as school-wide interactions. In the former case, we can compute the set
of equilibria directly from the equilibrium mapping, since it has a closed-form solution. We
can then see how the mapping moves as we vary the strength of interactions. In the case


                                             36
                                                         Percentage of smokers
         School ID     N      Global int. (J)
                                                 Data    Equil. 1 Equil. 2 Equil. 3
             41       1056          2.67          5.9       5.9      17.2       99.8
             56       1093          6.50         18.7       0.2      18.4      100.0
             72        899          0.14         24.4      24.8        –         –


                  Table 9: Equilibrium smoking levels in a sample of schools


with both local and school-wide interactions, on the other hand, we rely on simulations of a
Markov process that captures the Brock-Durlauf model and characterize how its stationary
distribution changes as we change its parameters (including, but not limited to, those
capturing the strength of interactions).


6.1   The prevalence of multiplicity

To perform our first set of simulations, we use the model specification with random effects
(no school covariates zn ) and school-wide interactions only, whose results are reported in
the left three panes of Figure 4. This specification makes it manageable to compute the
equilibrium mapping because it uses only two student attributes, thus making it easier to
numerically integrate over the empirical distribution of these covariates (see equation (6)).
At the same time, we have seen that this specification seems to capture well the variability
of parameter estimates found in the unrestricted case. Here, we focus on the school-wide
interactions case as an illustration, again for computational ease. Later, we study the case
with both local and school-wide interactions.
   Table 9 reports the equilibria computed for a sample of schools, as an illustration (results
for all schools used in this exercise are in Appendix B). The first and second columns report
school ID and number of observations; the third column contains the estimated school-wide
interactions parameter; average smoking in each school in the data is reported in column 4;
columns 5-7 report the computed equilibria in the case of multiple equilibria, or the single
equilibrium that arises for that school.
   Actual smoking averages are very close to smoking levels in one of the simulated equilib-
ria in all schools; small differences are due to the fact that we had to discretize the support of
the GPA variable for computational reasons. Therefore, this model specification captures
the large variation in smoking behavior across schools very well. Multiple equilibria are

                                                37
  0.5                                                                                                       0.4


  0.4                                                                                                       0.3


  0.3                                                                                                       0.2


  0.2                                                                                                       0.1


  0.1                                                                                                         0


    0                                                                                                       -0.1


  -0.1                                                                                                      -0.2


  -0.2                                                                                                      -0.3
     -1    -0.8     -0.6      -0.4      -0.2         0        0.2       0.4       0.6        0.8   1           -1   -0.8    -0.6       -0.4     -0.2        0        0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8   1
             Dashed line: 10% reduction of J-global; Dot-dashed line: 40% reduction of J-global                            Dashed line: 50% reduction of C; Dot-dashed line: 90% reduction of C



Figure 6: Equilibrium mapping as a function of global interactions J (left pane) and direct
utility from smoking cn (right pane). The mapping becomes flatter’ as J decreases and
moves down as cn decreases.


present in forty out of forty-one cases, given our parameter estimates (see, e.g., schools #41
and #56 in the table).34 This validates our approach, as it shows that, in this application,
multiple equilibria are prevalent. Finally, in thirty-five out of the forty schools exhibiting
multiple equilibria, the fraction of smokers is consistent with the intermediate equilibrium
(see, e.g., for school #56). Thus in most of the schools where multiple equilibria arise,
there exists one other equilibrium with a lower (and typically substantially lower) smoking
prevalence. This is again very important from a policy perspective as it raises the question
of whether it is feasible to move a school from one equilibrium to another, and if so how.
         To give an idea of the magnitude of the changes in smoking levels across equilibria, we
computed the average smoking that would arise if all schools that are estimated to be in the
middle equilibrium were instead in the lowest smoking equilibrium (details for each school
are reported in the last column of Table 12 in Appendix B). The differences are economically
significant, ranging from 6.3 to 31.6 percentage points. The average difference in smoking
across schools in our sample (weighted by the number of observations in each school) that
would arise if all schools were in the lowest equilibrium is 14.3 percentage points. This is
quite a large difference, illustrating the importance of equilibrium selection in determining
aggregate smoking behavior.
         Before turning to the counterfactual exercises with school-wide only interactions, we
  34
    We report results only for forty-one of the forty-five schools used in the estimation. The remaining four
schools also exhibit multiple equilibria, but for these the equilibrium mapping lies at the knife-edge case in
which the low and intermediate equilibria coincide. To capture this, our simulation algorithm requires a
much finer discretization than that needed for the other schools; therefore, for convenience we drop them
from this exercise.


                                                                                                       38
                                                     Percentage of smokers
              School ID    Interactions
                                             Data     Equil 1 Equil 2 Equil 3
                           Baseline           5.9       5.9      17.2      99.8
                  41       J reduced 3%                  9.1     11.8      99.8
                           J reduced 5%                 99.8       –        –
                           J reduced 10%                99.8       –        –

                           Baseline           18.7      0.2      18.4      100.0
                  56       J reduced 3%                 0.3      17.0      100.0
                           J reduced 5%                 0.4      16.0      100.0
                           J reduced 10%                0.9      13.0      100.0


                  Table 10: Simulations with global interaction estimates


illustrate the effects of changes in the strength of social interactions Jn in Figure 6. The
dotted line in the left pane shows how the equilibrium mapping moves for a representative
school following a 10 percent reduction in the level of Jn (the mapping has been “rotated” so
that the 45-degree line is horizontal; the axes domain is {−1, +1}, with -1 corresponding to
no students smoking and +1 to all smoking). The mapping becomes “flatter,”and as a result
the equilibria (points where the mapping crosses the 45-degree line) move in interesting
ways: specifically, the low equilibrium moves up, whereas the intermediate and the high
equilibria both move down. Thus, depending on whether a given school is in the low or the
intermediate equilibrium, the same reduction in social interactions may increase or decrease
the equilibrium level of smoking (assuming the school stays in the same equilibrium). This
is in contrast to simple regression analyses that did not consider the existence of multiple
equilibria: here, a change in the strength of one estimated parameter would have a univocal
effect on the outcome variable. In addition, as Jn decreases even further (dash-dotted line),
the equilibrium mapping ends up crossing the 45-degree line only once (at the previous
“high” equilibrium), thus inducing a very large change in smoking prevalence.
   These patterns are confirmed in our counterfactual simulations. For simplicity, Table 10
reports two examples to illustrate our findings (the full results of this exercise are available
from the authors). The top panel of Table 10 focuses on school #41. Here, the prevalence of
smokers in our sample is 5.9 percent, and the school is in the low equilibrium. If the strength
of social interactions is reduced by 3 percent, the fraction of smokers in the low equilibrium



                                              39
actually rises to 9.1 percent (consistent with Figure 6, smoking prevalence increases in the
low equilibrium). When the school-wide interaction parameter is reduced even further, by
5 percent and 10 percent, a large discontinuity occurs: the equilibrium mapping flattens to
the point that it crosses the 45 degree line only once, at the high equilibrium. Thus smoking
prevalence jumps to a very high level, where nearly everyone smokes.
   The bottom panel, representing school #56, tells a different story. Here, because the
school finds itself in the intermediate equilibrium, a reduction in Jn is accompanied by
a reduction in smoking prevalence (from 18.4 percent to 13.0 percent for a 10 percent
decrease in the interaction parameter). If social interactions were reduced even further
(e.g., by reducing Jn by 20 percent, not reported here), the multiplicity of equilibria would
disappear, leaving only the high smoking equilibrium, in which almost everyone smokes.
   These strong nonlinearities in the effect of a reduction in social interactions stress the
importance of estimating a structural model that explicitly takes into account the possibility
of multiple equilibria induced by the positive feedbacks among agents’ actions. These are
very important from a policy perspective. As a mere illustration, if the adoption of rules for
tobacco use by school staff indeed reduces the strength of school-wide social interactions,
such a policy may have the unintended consequence – in some schools – of actually increasing
smoking prevalence in the school. It would be impossible a priori to predict the direction of a
change in smoking behavior resulting from various policies without an estimation approach
that fully incorporated multiple equilibria.
   Finally, we study the effect of shutting down social interactions completely. As expected,
multiplicity disappears in all schools, with only the high equilibrium surviving everywhere
(see Table 13 in Appendix B). What is interesting is that, at our parameter estimates, the
high equilibrium at Jn = 0 is associated with a large fraction of smokers in most schools. The
last column in Table 13 reports the difference in smoking between the estimated prevalence
and the level of smoking that would prevail in this counterfactual. The average increase in
smoking across all schools is about 70 percentage points. Thus, according to our estimates,
the presence of social interactions actually reduces equilibrium smoking in our sample of
schools. This is an important point, since in the context of social pathologies such as
smoking, drug and alcohol use, teenage pregnancies, crime, or dropping out of school,
network interactions (or peer effects) are often viewed as one of the channels that can



                                               40
help sustain and propagate such pathologies.35 Here, instead, shutting down the social
interactions channel would lead to a large increase in the prevalence of smoking.
      A final caveat concerns equilibrium selection. Both the model we use in this application
and our estimation approach are silent on the actual mechanism through which an equi-
librium is selected. It could very well be that equilibria are “sticky” and that it is very
difficult to move a school from one equilibrium to another. Even so, our illustration shows
that the same policy may have very different effects in different schools, depending on the
specific equilibrium the school finds itself in.


6.2      Accounting for the variation of smoking across schools

Results presented in the previous subsection show that most schools choose the intermediate-
level of smoking equilibrium. The correlation between the percentage of smokers and the
school-wide interaction coefficient across schools is small: -0.04. Hence, even though equilib-
rium selection and preferences for interaction play an important role in determining the level
of smoking, they do not seem to account for most of the variation in smoking across schools.
The correlation between smoking and the coefficient relating the utility from smoking and
the student’s GPA, cGPA is 0.01, whereas the correlation between smoking and cage is -0.16.
Therefore, most of the variation seems to be driven by the different interactions of age and
smoking across schools. We investigated this possibility by running various simulations.
      First, we simulated equilibrium smoking when the preference parameters (c, J) are the
same for all schools and equal to the mean of their estimated values. Results are reported
in the second row of Table 11.36 We find that the standard deviation of smoking across
schools in each type of equilibrium is smaller when compared to the standard deviation
computed in the original parameter estimates. We interpret this result as indicating that
heterogeneity in the distribution of students is not driving much of the smoking variation
in the data, and that school heterogeneity is more important.
      To confirm this intuition, we simulated smoking behavior using the estimated values of
(c, J) in each school, but assumed that all schools have the same student body, that of school
#56. In the low-level equilibrium, the variance of smoking in this simulation is similar to
 35
      See, for instance, Crane (1991) or Patacchini and Zenou (2009).
 36
      We excluded from these simulations all schools with less than three equilibria.




                                                      41
             Simulation                                                  Eq. 1    Eq. 2     Eq. 3
             Original estimates                                           2.7      4.8       0.1
             All schools same c, J                                        0.6      3.0       0.0
             All schools same set of students as School #56               2.2      6.0       0.2

                  Table 11: Standard deviation of smoking in various simulations


that computed from the estimates (see the third row of Table 11).37 When schools have the
same set of students, the variance of smoking in equilibrium 2 is larger than in the original
estimates, confirming that smoking variation is not determined by differences between the
students’ distributions across schools.


6.3      Counterfactuals with both local and school-wide interactions

We now focus on a single school and perform two sets of simulation exercises using the
Brock-Durlauf (BD) model with both local and school-wide interactions. First, given our
estimates for a representative school, we simulate the smoking process over time for a
variety of different scenarios: changing the intensity of local and/or school-wide interactions;
changing the direct (personal) utility of smoking (this experiment can also be interpreted as
introducing a tax on cigarettes); and changing the number of friends in students’ friendship
networks. Second, again given our estimated parameter values, we simulate the smoking
process for an artificial school, to study the impact of different network structures (in the
presence of student heterogeneity) on outcomes. In particular, we focus on two polar cases,
looking at perfectly segregated versus perfectly integrated personal networks.
      Because we allow for both local and school-wide interactions, it is very difficult to com-
pute the model equilibria and to obtain a closed-form solution for the stationary distribution
of the model. This is why we resort to simulations to compute the long-run fraction of smok-
ers. Specifically, we simulate the BD model as a first-order Markov process in discrete time,
where the agents’ state in each period (a configuration of smokers and nonsmokers in the
school) is a function of the state of all agents at the previous period.
      All agents change state at each period, based on the smoking configuration in the pre-
vious period. Our simulation results do not change if we instead allow only one randomly
drawn agent to change her state in each period. We let the process run for many periods
 37
      Simulations performed using the student bodies of different schools provide the same qualitative results.



                                                       42
 Local interaction parameter
   3J                                                     0
   2J                                                     0.03
 1.5J                                         0.09
 1.2J                                         0.12
 1.1J                                         0.13
1.05J                                         0.15                  U
                                                                   Percentage of smokers in low-level equilibrium
1.01J                                         0.16
    J                                         0.16        W
0.99J                                         0.16        Length of line represents the
0.95J                                         0.18        basin of attraction of low-level equilibrium
 0.9J                                         0.20
 0.8J                                         0.24
 0.5J                                         0.47
 0.2J                             0.94
 0.1J                             1.22
0.05J                             1.39
    0                             1.5
        0        5         10        15         20            25        30               100
                                                                        Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 7: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in a repre-
sentative school for different values of the local interaction parameter (high-level equilibrium
is at 100 percent smokers in every simulation)


(2,400) and report the long-run average out of the last 1,000 iterations (we have also let
the process run for up to 10,000 periods as a robustness check; the reported results do not
change). We use the parameter estimates from the model specification with random coef-
ficients (no school covariates zn ) and both local and school-wide interactions, as a parallel
to the specification we use for the counterfactuals with school-wide interactions only.38


6.3.1       Results for a representative school

We chose school #56 as a representative school, in terms of both its demographics and its
parameter estimates. Figures 7-11 report the results of our counterfactual experiments to
show the importance of multiple equilibria and nonlinearities. Figure 7 reports the equilibria
we find for several values of the local interactions parameter (displayed in the vertical axis).
The horizontal lines display the basin of attraction of the low-level equilibrium. For example,
at the estimated value of J, when setting an initial fraction of smokers between 0 and about
  38
   We have also performed all counterfactual exercises using parameter estimates from other specifications.
The results are qualitatively very similar.



                                                     43
     Global interaction parameter

      3G                                                                                   0
      2G                                                                    0
    1.5G                                                             0
    1.2G                                                   0.02
    1.1G                                                   0.05
   1.05G                                          0.09
   1.01G                                          0.14
       G                                          0.16
   0.99G                                          0.18
   0.95G                                          0.29
    0.9G                                0.53
    0.8G                         2.55
    0.5G     Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100% smokers)
    0.2G     Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100% smokers)
    0.1G     Only   high-level   equilibrium   (99.99% smokers)
   0.05G     Only   high-level   equilibrium   (99.98% smokers)
       0     Only   high-level   equilibrium   (99.96% smokers)

         0            5          10       15         20        25     30       35     40      45
                                                                    Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 8: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in a
representative school for different values of the global interaction parameter; high-level
equilibrium at 100 percent smokers unless indicated


17 percent, the procedure converges to a low-level equilibrium with almost no students
smoking. For all other initial levels of smoking, the procedure converges to the high level
of smoking, with 100 percent of students smoking. Figure 8 repeats the exercise by varying
the school-wide interaction parameter, Figure 9 by changing the number of friends, Figure
10 by changing both local and global interactions, and Figure 11 by changing the direct
utility of smoking.
   Overall, multiple equilibria are pervasive. In our simulations, only the high and low
equilibria appear in the long run. Because we are using a dynamic process in which agents
are myopic, the middle equilibrium does not seem to be stable, even though for certain
choices of parameter values and for certain starting points (in terms of smoking averages)
the process seems to tend to an intermediate equilibrium for a few iterations. Eventually,
however, it goes to one of the two extreme equilibria.
   Changes in the strength of local and/or school-wide interactions, or in the number of
friends in students’ personal networks, all go in the same direction (see Figures 7-9). As we
reduce J, G, or the number of friends, the basin of attraction of the low equilibrium (i.e.,


                                                          44
             Number of friends

              Baseline                              0.16
            One fewer                               0.29
               2 fewer                              0.48
               3 fewer                   0.7
               4 fewer                   1.99

                       0     5     10     15        20
                                                    25     30
                                                   Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 9: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in a
representative school for different number of friends
                Interaction parameters
               2J, 2G                                                         0
             2J, 1.2G                                             0
            2J, 1.05G                                        0.01
            2J, 0.95G                              0.08
             2J, 0.8G                              0.25
            2J, G = 0 Only high-level equilibrium (100% smokers)
             1.2J, 2G                                                     0
           1.2J, 1.2G                                        0.01
          1.2J, 1.05G                                        0.11
          1.2J, 0.95G                              0.19
           1.2J, 0.8G               1.37
          1.2J, G = 0 Only highlevel equilibrium (99.98% smokers)
             0.8J, 2G                                                     0
           0.8J, 1.2G                                    0.03
          0.8J, 1.05G                              0.14
          0.8J, 0.95G                              0.45
           0.8J, 0.8G Only high-level equilibrium (100% smokers)
          0.8J, G = 0 Only high-level equilibrium (99.95% smokers)
            J = 0, 2G                                                 0
          J = 0, 1.2G                              0.14
         J = 0, 1.05G                    0.59
         J = 0, 0.95G Only high-level equilibrium (100% smokers)
         J = 0, 0.8G) Only high-level equilibrium (100% smokers)
         J = 0, G = 0 Only high-level equilibrium (99.7% smokers)
                      0       5     10         15        20
                                                          25      30     35
                                                        Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 10: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in a rep-
resentative school for different values of local and global interactions; high-level equilibrium
always 100% smokers unless indicated


                                                    45
                      Utility from smoking

                Ci + 2med(C) P
                              P- Only high-level equilibrium (100% smokers)
                               q
                 Ci + med(C)
              Ci + 0.5med(C)          0.86
              Ci + 0.2med(C)                 0.3
              Ci + 0.1med(C)                 0.22
             Ci + 0.05med(C)                 0.19
             Ci − 0.05med(C)                 0.14
              Ci − 0.1med(C)                 0.12
              Ci − 0.2med(C)                      0.09
              Ci − 0.5med(C)                            0.04
                 Ci − med(C)                                 0.01
                 Ci − max(C)                                         0
                       Ci = 0                                0
                                 0         10        20        30       40
                                                   Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 11: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in a
representative school for different values of direct utility from smoking


the set of initial conditions from which the process reaches it) shrinks, until it eventually
disappears; this is consistent with the left panel of Figure 6 (which illustrates movements in
the equilibrium mapping following a change in G). The fraction of smokers increases slightly
at the low equilibrium, until it jumps to a near totality of smokers in the high equilibrium
when the low equilibrium disappears. Local and school-wide interactions appear to be
“strategic complements” (Figure 10): Keeping the strength of local (respectively, school-
wide) interactions fixed, the basin of attraction of the low equilibrium shrinks as the strength
of school-wide (respectively, local) interactions decreases, and vice versa.39
    Therefore, as is the case for school-wide only interactions, a decrease in the magnitude
of social interactions leads, in a very nonlinear fashion, to a sharp increase in the prevalence
of smoking in the representative school. For low levels of social interactions, only the high
equilibrium survives, in which almost every student smokes. This confirms the observation
made earlier: that the presence of social interactions may actually lead to lower equilibrium
smoking than would be the case in their absence.
    Figure 11 reports the effect of changes in the individual cost of cigarettes (measured
in “utils”): Specifically, a decrease in the cost of smoking is modeled as an increase of the
intercept in the random utility of smoking of each student. This experiment changes the
  39
     When school-wide interactions (G) are set to zero and only local interactions (J) are present, multiple
equilibria persist for sufficiently large values of J (not reported here).



                                                    46
     Local interaction parameter
       3J                                                        0
       2J                                             0.02
     1.5J                                             0.05
     1.2J                                             0.09
     1.1J                                             0.11           R
    1.05J                                             0.12      % smoking in low-level equilibrium
    1.01J                                  0.13
        J                                  0.14       W
    0.99J                                  0.14     Length of line represents the
                                                    basin of attraction of low-level equilibrium
    0.95J                                  0.15
     0.9J                                  0.17
     0.8J                                  0.21
     0.5J                                  0.4
     0.2J                                  0.78
     0.1J                          1
    0.05J                          1.14
        0                          1.3
         0         5        10       15        20           25        30
                                                          Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 12: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in artificial
school for different values of the local interaction parameter; high-level equilibrium at 100%
smokers in all simulations


long-run level of smoking in the direction that one would expect from the right panel in
Figure 6. As the utility cost of smoking goes down (i.e., the intercept of Ci rises), the basin
of attraction of the low equilibrium shrinks and the fraction of smokers in the school rises
slightly, until the process jumps to the high equilibrium where everyone smokes.


6.3.2   Results for an artificial school

For these experiments, we construct an artificial school with characteristics similar to those
of the actual school we used above. We consider a school with 800 students disposed on a
circle. Every student i has R friends, defined as the R students directly to the right of i.
The baseline number of friends is R = 4 (which is the median number of friends for students
in our representative school #56), but we vary this parameter in the simulations. Note that
friendship ties are modeled as directed links: Student i “names” student j as a friend, but
not vice versa. Initially all students are homogeneous and have the same characteristics as
the median student in school #56: 16 years old and with a 3.0 GPA. Subsequently, we allow
for different types of students, with varying propensity to smoke.
   Figures 12-14 report the results of our experiments on the strength of local and global

                                              47
   Global interaction parameter
     3G                                                                                      0
     2G                                                                            0
   1.5G                                                                     0
   1.2G                                                              0.02
   1.1G                                                      0.05
  1.05G                                                      0.08
  1.01G                                                      0.12
      G                                         0.14
  0.99G                                         0.15
  0.95G                                         0.24
   0.9G                                         0.43
   0.8G                              1.66
   0.5G     Only   high-level equilibrium (100% smokers)
   0.2G     Only   high-level equilibrium (99.99% smokers)
   0.1G     Only   high-level equilibrium (99.99% smokers)
  0.05G     Only   high-level equilibrium (99.98% smokers)
      0     Only   highlevel equilibrium (99.97% smokers)

        0             5        10         15        20          25      30        35
                                                                      Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 13: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in artificial
school for different values of the global interaction parameter; high-level equilibrium at 100%
smokers unless indicated


interactions (changes in J, G) and on the number of friends R. The artificial school behaves
very similarly to the representative one. Reductions in local interactions J, in school-wide
interactions G, or in the number of friends R all induce the basin of attraction of the
low equilibrium to become smaller and eventually disappear. While the low equilibrium
persists, reductions in these parameters are associated with a slight increase in the fraction
of smokers in the school. As with the actual school, holding fixed any two parameters
in (J, G, R) while reducing the third one has the same qualitative effect on the basin of
attraction of the low equilibrium and on the fraction of smokers in this equilibrium while
it persists. Thus, as in the representative school case, stronger social interactions and/or a
larger number of friends tend to reduce smoking, according to our estimates.
   Figure 15 reports the effects of changing the demographic characteristics of all artificial
students in the school; agents are still homogeneous here. These experiments are equivalent
to shifting the intercept of the individual utility of smoking (conceptually, it is the same as
introducing a “tax/subsidy” on cigarettes). For younger students, or those with a higher
GPA, the intercept shifts down relative to our baseline student, which induces the basin of


                                                     48
200   friends                                                        0.14
 80   friends                                                        0.14
 40   friends                                                        0.14
 16   friends                                                        0.14
  8   friends                                                        0.14
  4   friends                                             0.14
                                                                     J, G = baseline
  3   friends                                             0.14
  2   friends                                             0.14
  1   friends                                             0.15
  0   friends                              1.3
200   friends                              0.74
 80   friends                       0.77
 40   friends      0.81
 16   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
  8   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
  4   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
                Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
                                                                      J = 4∗ baseline, G = 0.25∗ baseline
  3   friends
  2   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
  1   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
  0   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)

200   friends                                                        0.07
 80   friends                                             0.07
 40   friends                                             0.07
 16   friends                              0.07
  8   friends                       0.07
  4   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
                Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
                                                                     J = 4 ∗ baseline, G = 0.5 ∗ baseline
  3   friends
  2   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
  1   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)
  0   friends   Only   high-level   equilibrium   (100%   smokers)

            0            5           10           15         20         25       30               100
                                                                                 Initial percentage of smokers
 Figure 14: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in artificial
 school for a different number of friends and interaction parameters; high-level equilibrium
 at 100% smokers unless indicated (continues on next page)


 attraction of the low-smoking equilibrium to widen. Changing our baseline artificial student
 to an older student, or to a student with a lower GPA, induces the opposite effect.
      Figures 16 and 17 look at the effects of introducing two different types of students in
 the artificial school: Type L students are the least likely to smoke based on their individual
 characteristics; type M students are the most likely to smoke. We vary both the fraction
 and the arrangement of the two types within the artificial school (i.e., along the circle),
 focusing on two polar cases. In Figure 16, we vary the relative fraction of the two types,


                                                             49
200   friends                                                                     0
 80   friends                                                                     0
 40   friends                                                                     0
 16   friends                                                                     0
  8   friends                                                          0
  4   friends                                                          0          J = 4∗baseline, G = baseline
  3   friends                                                          0
  2   friends                                              0
  1   friends                                    0.01
  0   friends                     1.29

200   friends                                                                          0
 80   friends                                                                          0
 40   friends                                                                          0
 16   friends                                                                          0
  8   friends                                                                     0
  4   friends                                                          0
  3   friends                                                          0
  2   friends                                                 0                    J = 8∗baseline, G = baseline
  1   friends                                   0
  0   friends                      1.29
            0       5        10        15            20           25        30      35
                                                                   Initial percentage of smokers
 Figure 14: (continued) Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilib-
 rium in artificial school for different number of friends and interaction parameters; high-level
 equilibrium at 100% smokers unless indicated



                                          1 19yo, GPA=2

            Most                          0.7
                                                          :       16yo, GPA=3
        Baseline                                     0.13 13yo, GPA = 4
                                                          >
           Least                                                           0.03
                0       5         10            15        20           25       30
                                                                  Initial percentage of smokers
 Figure 15: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in artificial
 school for different artificial (homogenous) students; high-level equilibrium at 100% smokers
 unless indicated




                                                     50
                                                                                     J, G =baseline
 LLLLLLLM 1 friend                                                           0.33
LLLLLLLM 4 friends                                                                     0.33
LLLLLLLM 8 friends                                                                     0.33
      LLLM 1 friend                                              0.33
     LLLM 4 friends                                                          0.33
     LLLM 8 friends                                                          0.33
     LM LM 1 friend                                              0.33
    LM LM 4 friends                                              0.33
    LM LM 8 friends                                              0.33
                                                                                    J = 4∗baseline , G =baseline
 LLLLLLLM 1 friend                                                           0.33
LLLLLLLM 4 friends                                                                             0.33
LLLLLLLM 8 friends                                                                             0.33
      LLLM 1 friend                                                          0.33
     LLLM 4 friends                                                                            0.33
     LLLM 8 friends                                                                            0.33
     LM LM 1 friend                                              0.33
    LM LM 4 friends                                                                    0.33
    LM LM 8 friends                                                                    0.33
                                 5           10            15           20      25           30
                                                                                     Initial percentage of smokers
         Figure 16: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in per-
         fectly integrated artificial school for different arrangements of two types of students: L:
         least smoker; M : most smoker;high-level equilibrium at 100% smokers in all simulations


           1 friend              0.45
          4 friends                     0.34                         J, G =baseline
          8 friends                     0.34
           1 friend              0,08
          4 friends                            0                     J = 4∗baseline , G =baseline
           8 friend                                0
           1 friend Only high-level equilibrium (100)
          4 friends            0.01                                  J = 4∗baseline , G = 3/4baseline
          8 friends                  0.01
           1 friend
          4 friends     q-                                  J = 4∗baseline , G = 0.5∗baseline
                         : Only high-level equilibrium 100%
          8 friends
                   0        10          20             30        40
                                                       Initial percentage of smokers
         Figure 17: Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equilibrium in
         perfectly segregated artificial school for different groupings of students; type of students:
         L=50%, M=50%; high-level equilibrium at 100% smokers unless indicated


                                                                51
 1 friend                  0.34
4 friends                  0.34                                    J, G =baseline
8 friends                  0.34
 1 friend                  0.01
4 friends                            0                             J = 4∗baseline , G =baseline
8 friends                  0                  25.01 (3 equilibria)
 1 friend Only high-level equilibrium (100)
4 friends            0.01                                          J = 4∗baseline , G = 3/4baseline
8 friends  0                    25.04 (3 equilibria)
 1 friend
4 friends      q-                                                  J = 4∗baseline , G = 0.5∗baseline
                : Only high-level equilibrium (100)
8 friends
         0        10           20        30         40        50        60        70            100
                                                                        Initial percentage of smokers
Figure 17: (continued) Percentage of smokers and basins of attraction of low-level equi-
librium in perfectly segregated artificial school for different groupings of students; type of
students: L=75%, M=25%; high-level equilibrium at 100% smokers unless indicated


but maintain an arrangement that is “perfectly integrated”: LM LM..., or LLLM LLLM...,
or LLLLLLLM LLLLLLLM.... In Figure 17, instead, we simulate perfect “segregation”:
The school is divided into two subgroups, one where everyone is of type L and the other
where everyone is of type M . Local interactions occur only within the two subgroups
(that is, friendship networks are perfectly segregated), but global interactions still occur
school-wide (hence, across groups).
    To summarize the results, in both the perfectly integrated and the perfectly segregated
schools the basin of attraction of the low-smoking equilibrium widens as local or school-
wide interactions increase, as the number of friends increases, and as the fraction of “high
smokers” decreases in the school. In addition, in the segregated school there are parameter
values for which a new intermediate equilibrium appears. This equilibrium is characterized
by a fraction of smokers that is equal to the proportion of high smokers in the school. Thus,
when students are heterogeneous, the arrangement of students within the school and the
composition of students’ personal networks play a role in determining equilibrium outcomes.


7     Conclusions

In this paper, we present a general framework for studying models with multiple equilibria in
economies with social interactions. We show that point identification of model parameters


                                                     52
is conceptually distinct from the presence of multiple equilibria, and derive some general
conditions for identification. We then present a two-step estimation strategy that, while
less efficient than the direct maximum-likelihood estimator, has two significant advantages.
First, it is computationally feasible, as it is several orders of magnitude faster than the direct
or the Dagsvik-Jovanovic method; second, it does not rely on making explicit assumptions
about the nature of the selection mechanism across equilibria, as in the D-J method.
   We then apply our estimation approach to a version of the Brock-Durlauf binary choice
model with social interactions, using data on teenage smoking. We find statistically signif-
icant evidence of both school-wide and local (within personal networks) interactions. Our
estimates are consistent across specifications that take into account school and local neigh-
borhood attributes. Given our estimates, multiple equilibria are prevalent in our data: the
estimated parameter values give rise to multiplicity in forty out of forty-one schools. In
many cases where multiple equilibria are present, there exists one other equilibrium with a
lower smoking prevalence than that observed in a given school.
   Having estimated the parameters of a structural model, we are able to run several
counterfactual experiments. In specifications with school-wide interactions only, we show
that reductions in the strength of social interactions may increase or decrease smoking
prevalence, depending on whether the school is in the low or intermediate equilibrium. Large
reductions in school-wide interactions eventually make equilibrium multiplicity disappear,
with only the high smoking equilibrium surviving. Thus, tobacco policies that are associated
with lower school-wide social interactions may have the counterintuitive and undesirable
effect of actually increasing smoking prevalence in a school, sometimes by a large amount.
   Simulations in settings where both school-wide and local interactions are present show
that reductions in local and/or global interactions, or in the number of friends, make the
basin of attraction of the low-smoking equilibrium shrink until it disappears; while this
equilibrium persists, smoking prevalence rises slightly. Reductions in the utility cost of
smoking also make the basin of attraction of low equilibria become smaller, and smoking
prevalence increases. When the low equilibrium disappears, the fraction of smokers in a
school jumps dramatically to an equilibrium where almost everyone smokes. Finally, the
arrangement of students within a school, and hence the structure of personal networks
(e.g., segregation versus integration by demographics), can influence the number and types



                                               53
of smoking equilibria that may arise.
    These results should be taken as an illustration of the kind of policy experiments that
one may carry out after having obtained structural parameter estimates for a behavioral
model of smoking with social interactions that exhibits multiple equilibria. However, they
should not be taken literally: here, we assume that personal networks are given and that
tobacco use policies are exogenous, the model does not incorporate dynamic features such
as addiction, and we do not take a stand on the way in which agents select a specific
equilibrium. This is left for future work. In a companion paper (Bisin, Moro, and Topa (in
progress)), we study settings where friendship networks are endogenous. Agents sort on the
basis of both observable and unobservable attributes, which in turn may be related to one’s
propensity to smoke. Taking this endogeneity explicitly into account can help identify the
extent of social interactions.


A     Appendix: Regularity assumptions on general societies
      and proofs of propositions

In this appendix, we detail the construction of general societies in Section 2, as well as our
analysis of identification and estimation in Sections 3 and 4. We also sketch the proofs of
Propositions 1-3, that depend on this construction. While assumptions are overly strong in
several dimensions, it is left for a separate paper to obtain tighter conditions.


A.1    First-order conditions

Let agent i’s maximization problem be:

                                                                           
                                 max V yi , xi , yg(i) , π n , εi , zn , un .
                                 yi ∈Y

                                   
Let Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un denote the first-order conditions of the problem.
                                                    
   We assume that Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un is continuous and differentiable, for any i.
This is guaranteed if either
                                                                                                           
 (i) the choice set Y is convex and compact, the utility function V yi , xi , yg(i) , π n , εi , zn , un
      is C 2 in its arguments and Inada conditions to avoid corner solutions are imposed,


                                                     54
         the density p(εi | zn , un ) is non-atomic and C 2 as a function of (zn , un ); or

 (ii) the choice set Y is discrete, the utility function V yi , xi , yg(i) , π n , εi , zn , un is C 2 in
                                                                                               

         its arguments for any yi ∈ Y , the density p(εi | zn , un ) is non-atomic and C 2 as a
         function of (zn , un ).
                                                   
We also assume that Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un is strictly positive.


A.2       The probability distribution P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un )

Recall that, at an equilibrium in sub-population n, given π n , there exists an ergodic proba-
bility distribution on the configuration of actions and characteristics (yn , xn ), P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un )
such that

                                                                                     
            P yi = y, xi = x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un = Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un , P − a.s.,


   Existence of such a P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) is guaranteed if the probability distribution
                               
Pi y, x | yg(i) , π n , zn , un has a Markovian structure across agents i; for the proof of this
statement, see Follmer (1974), Section 3, and Preston (2008). In our context, this in turn
is essentially guaranteed by the assumption that | g(i) |< ∞ for any i. More precisely,
existence also requires a weak homogeneity condition on the network structure implied by
the map g; e.g., translation invariance on a lattice is sufficient; see Follmer (1974) and Horst
and Scheinkman (2006). This assumption is always satisfied in the examples and we avoid
making it formally explicit.
       To guarantee that the probability distribution P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) is ergodic (and that
it preserves the homogeneity property) it is sufficient that preferences in society satisfy a
Moderate Social Influence condition,40 which bounds the strength of the local interactions.
In the case Y is a continuous space, for instance, these conditions require, for any j ∈ g(i),
       ∂V (yi ,xi yg(i) ,π n ,εi ,zn ,un )
that |               ∂yj                   | has a uniform (in the arguments of V ) and small enough
bound k; see Horst and Scheinkman (2006), Theorem 19 (ii).
   Uniqueness of such a P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) requires a stronger Moderate Social Influence
                             P             ∂V (yi ,xi yg(i) ,π n ,εi ,zn ,un )
condition, e.g., bounding the j∈g(i) |                   ∂yj                   |; see Horst and Scheinkman
  40
    Such conditions, and the associated terminology, have been introduced by Glaeser and Scheinkman
(2001, 2003).


                                                     55
(2006), Theorem 19 (iii). Furthermore, a straightforward extension of Theorem 3.1.2 in
Follmer (1974) to our context implies that uniqueness is also guaranteed if the network
induced by the map g is one-dimensional; that is, if agents i ∈ In can, without loss of
generality, be disposed on a line.
    Ergodicity of P (yn , xn | π n , zn , un ) implies that

                  1 X
        lim           A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un ) = EP [A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un )] , for any i ∈ In ,
      |In |→∞   |In |
                     i∈In


so that π n is well defined; in particular, if

                                                              1 X
                                        π n = lim                 yi .
                                               |In |→∞      |In |
                                                               i∈In


More generally, existence of π n requires e.g., the standard boundary conditions on A (yi , xi , π n , zn , un )
which are typically satisfied by excess demand functions in general equilibrium theory; see
e.g., Mas Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995), Chapter 17, C, D.


A.3     The correspondence L(y, x | z; θ)

Recall that                                    Z
                            L(y, x | z; θ) =       [Πn∈N P(zn , un ; θn )] p (u) du

where P(zn , un ; θn ) = P(π n (zn , un ; θeq               f oc
                                                                         R
                                           n ), zn , un ; θ n ) and          denotes the Aumann integral,
since P(zn , un ; θn ) is a correspondence. The Aumann integral is constructed by taking
the union of the Riemann integrals of all measurable selections of the correspondence; it
coincides with the Riemann integral when applied to a measurable function; see Aumann
(1965) and Molchanov (2005) for details.


A.4     Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. It is straightforward to check that the conditions in Proposition
1 guarantee identification.
    If P(π n , zn , un ; θfnoc ) maps (π n , un , θfnoc ) onto P yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θfnoc , the inverse
                                                                                                




                                                       56
map from P yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θfnoc to (π n , un , θfnoc ) is one-to-one. Therefore, given zn ,
                                          

                                                                                                                         
(π n , un , θ fnoc ) 6= (π 0n , u0n , θfnoc0 ) ⇒ P yn , xn | π n , zn , un ; θ fnoc 6= P yn , xn | π 0n , zn , u0n ; θ fnoc0 .


Moreover, If π n (θeq                    eq
                   n , zn , un ) maps (θ n , un ) onto π n (given zn ), then the inverse map from

π n into (θeq
           n , un ) is one-to-one.

    As a consequence, then


              (θ n , un ) 6= (θ 0n , u0n ) ⇒ P (yn , xn | zn , un ; θ n ) 6= P yn , xn | zn , u0n ; θ 0n ,
                                                                                                        


and hence identification is satisfied.
    Furthermore, conditions for the non-parametric identification of p(u), from the obser-
vation of un , for all n ∈ N , can be obtained as an application of the previously cited results
on interacting systems of conditional probabilities in Follmer (1974), Section 3, and Preston
(2008). In particular, it is required that the process un has a Markovian (and homogeneous)
structure across populations n ∈ N and that it satisfies Moderate Social Influence condi-
tions.


Proof of Proposition 2.                  Under our assumptions the correspondenceL(y, x | z; θ) is
compact valued and measurable selections are non-atomic. It follows that the set induced
by Aumann integration, L(z; θ), is compact.
    Consider now the problem maxl(y,x|z;θ)∈L(z;θ) l(y, x|z; θ) Because of compactness of
L(z; θ) a maximum exists and the argmax is a upper-semi-continuous function of θ.
    Consistency of the maximum-likelihood estimator (for an identified set of parameters)
now follows along the standard path of arguments: i) the strong Law of Large Numbers
in fact holds for upper-semi-continuous functions; see Lebanon (2008), Proposition 1 (from
Ferguson, 1996, Theorem 16(a); and non-negativity of the KL divergence applies to arbitrary
densities (see Lebanon (2008)).

    The Proof of Proposition 3 is straightforward. Consistency of the second step, given
π n P , does not require any extension of the standard result for maximum-likelihood esti-
mators. As long as π n and P are estimated consistently, then θn will be as well.



                                                            57
B     Appendix: Simulation results for all schools

                                                      Percentage of smokers
 School ID    N     Local int. (J)                                                          Pct. Diff.
                                      Data   Simulated eq. Equil. 1 Equil. 2     Equil. 3
     13       444          7.78       15.5       15.1           0.2       15.4    100.0       15.3
     18       417          3.48       19.7       20.1           2.4       18.9    100.0       16.6
     23       427          6.40       22.2       18.3           0.1       22.1    100.0       22.0
     29       602          7.28       15.9       13.1           0.2       15.8    100.0       15.7
     31       866          4.25       23.7       23.7           0.7       23.3    100.0       22.6
     33       479          3.19       23.2       24.4           2.2       22.6    100.0       20.4
     34       418          3.48       16.3       13.6           4.3       15.3    100.0       11.1
     35       501          3.52       19.2       16.2           2.3       18.8    100.0       16.5
     40       458          5.75       22.9       19.7           0.2       22.8    100.0       22.6
     41      1056          2.67        5.9        5.3           5.9       17.2     99.9        0.0
     42       679          5.01       18.9       18.6           0.6       18.7    100.0       18.2
     44       939          2.37       18.2       16.9           7.8       17.3     99.8        9.5
     47       452          3.79       24.6       24.3           1.1       24.2    100.0       23.2
     49       896          3.97       19.0       17.3           1.6       18.5    100.0       16.9
     50      1085          3.63       18.3       19.0           2.1       18.1    100.0       16.0
     52       479          2.66        7.1        9.2           8.0       13.5     99.9       0.0
     53       935          2.32       19.8       17.2           7.5       19.0     99.7       11.5
     54       448          4.05       25.2       26.6           0.6       25.0    100.0       24.4
     56      1093          6.50       18.7       17.6           0.2       18.5    100.0       18.3
     57       421          2.73       21.6       18.8           4.5       20.8     99.9       16.3
     58       578          2.95       33.6       32.5           1.4       33.0     99.9       31.6
     60      1105          3.87       21.2       18.6           1.4       20.7    100.0       19.3
     62      1510          2.45       22.7       20.5           5.6       22.0     99.7       16.4
     65      1225          3.45        6.4        7.0           7.9      100.0      —          0.0
     67       449          3.91       24.9       24.3           0.8       24.7    100.0       24.0
     71       549          3.24       20.9       22.8           2.5       20.6    100.0       18.2
     72       899          0.14       24.4       25.0          24.8         —       —          0.0
     73       422          3.41       15.2       17.1           4.1       14.4    100.0       10.3
     74       435          3.53       20.7       20.5           2.1       20.1    100.0       18.0
     76       662          5.50       16.2       17.4           0.7       16.0    100.0       15.3
     77       818          2.44        9.0        8.8           9.3       13.9     99.8       0.0
     82       452          6.64       20.6       16.8           0.1       20.3    100.0       20.2
     86       911          2.72       19.5       17.1           5.4       18.4     99.9       13.1
     87       450          2.88       23.3       21.3           3.9       22.2     99.9       18.4
     91       862          2.09       25.3       25.2           7.6       24.4     99.2       16.8
    149       484          6.74        9.1        9.7           1.3        8.8    100.0        7.6
    259       936          5.11       26.3       24.8           0.2       26.0    100.0       25.8
    267       402          2.85       17.9       13.9           5.8       16.6     99.9       10.8
    268       792          2.50        9.6       10.0           9.8       99.9      —          0.0
    269       711          7.48       26.6       25.5           0.1       26.5     99.9       26.4
    271       552          5.67        9.1        7.6           2.3        8.6    100.0        6.3
 Simple average                                                                               15.0
 Weighted average (by n.   of students)                                                       14.3


Table 12: Equilibrium smoking, actual smoking, and percent difference with lowest smoking
equilibrium in every school

                                                  58
                                         Percentage of smokers
               School ID    N     Data    Simulated eq. Equilibrium   Pct. Diff.
                   13       444   15.5        100.0          99.8       -84.4
                   18       417   19.7         93.4          93.5       -73.7
                   23       427   22.2         99.6          99.3       -77.4
                   29       602   15.9         99.9         100.0       -84.0
                   31       866   23.7         95.7          96.5       -72.0
                   33       479   23.2         89.3          88.1       -66.1
                   34       418   16.3         91.8          90.7       -75.5
                   35       501   19.2         93.9          90.8       -74.7
                   40       458   22.9         99.0          99.3       -76.1
                   41      1056    5.9         85.4          86.8       -79.5
                   42       679   18.9         99.1          98.5       -80.2
                   44       939   18.2         81.4          80.8       -63.1
                   47       452   24.6         91.5          91.2       -66.9
                   49       896   19.0         96.1          96.1       -77.1
                   50      1085   18.3        95.5           94.9       -77.1
                   52       479    7.1         86.2          85.4       -79.1
                   53       935   19.8         78.6          74.4       -58.8
                   54       448   25.2         94.6          94.9       -69.4
                   56      1093   18.7        99.8           99.6       -81.1
                   57       421   21.6         83.9          80.8       -62.2
                   58       578   33.6         74.1          72.0       -40.5
                   60      1105   21.2        94.3           93.7       -73.1
                   62      1510   22.7        78.3           79.2       -55.5
                   65      1225    6.4         95.3          96.5       -88.9
                   67       449   24.9         93.9          92.9       -69.0
                   71       549   20.9         91.0          91.3       -70.0
                   72       899   24.4         27.3          27.3         -2.9
                   73       422   15.2         94.0          94.8       -78.8
                   74       435   20.7         92.5          93.3       -71.8
                   76       662   16.2         99.5          99.8       -83.3
                   77       818    9.0         82.6          82.5       -73.5
                   82       452   20.6         99.6          99.6       -79.0
                   86       911   19.5         84.6          83.0       -65.1
                   87       450   23.3         81.1          80.7       -57.7
                   91       862   25.3         70.4          70.4       -45.1
                  149       484    9.1        100.0          99.8       -90.9
                  259       936   26.3        97.2           97.5       -70.9
                  267       402   17.9        86.3           86.3       -68.3
                  268       792    9.6         85.0          85.9       -75.4
                  269       711   26.6        99.8           99.7       -73.1
                  271       552    9.1         99.8          99.8       -90.7
               Simple average                                            -70.7
               Weighted average (by n. of students)                     - 69.8


Table 13: Simulation with global interactions set to zero; equilibrium smoking, actual
smoking, and percent difference with lowest smoking equilibrium in every school




                                               59
  References
Aguirregabiria, V. (2004): ”Pseudo Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Structural Models
    Involving Fixed-Point Problems,” Economics Letters, 84(3), 335-40.

Aguirregabiria, V. and P. Mira (2007): “Sequential Estimation of Dynamic Discrete
    Games,” Econometrica, 75(1), 1-53.

Aiyagari, S.R. (1995): ”Comments on Farmer and Guo’s ‘The Econometrics of Indetermi-
    nacy: An Applied Study’,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Research Depart-
    ment Staff Report 196.

Andrews, D.W.K., S.T. Berry, and P. Jia (2004): “Confidence Regions for Parameters
    in Discrete Games with Multiple Equilibria, with an Application to Discount Chain
    Store Location”, Yale University, mimeo.

Aumann, R.J. (1965): ”Integrals of Set Valued Functions,” Journal of Mathematical Anal-
    ysis and Applications, 12, 1-12.

Bajari, P., H. Hong, and S. Ryan (2010): “Identification and Estimation of a Discrete
    Game of Complete Information”, Econometrica, 78 (5), 1529-1568.

Bajari, P., L. Benkard, and J. Levin (2007): “Estimating Dynamic Models of Imperfect
    Competition”, Econometrica, 75 (5), 1331-1370.

Bajari, P., H. Hong, J. Krainer, and D. Nekipelov (2006): “Estimating Static Models of
    Strategic Interactions,” NBER Working Paper 12013.

Bauman, K. and L. Fisher (1986): “On the Measurement of Friend Behavior in Research
    on Friend Influence and Selection: Findings from Longitudinal Studies of Adolescent
    Smoking and Drinking,” Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 15, 345-53.

Benhabib, J. and R. Farmer (1999): “Indeterminacy and sunspots in macroeconomics,” in
    J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, 387-448.

Beresteanu, A., I. Molchanov, and F. Molinari (2008): “Sharp Identification Regions in
    Games,” Cemmap working paper CWP15/08.


                                         60
Berry, S.T. and E. Tamer (2007): ”Identification in Models of Oligopoly Entry,” in
    Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World
    Congress, vol. II, Chap. 2, 46-85, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bisin, A., A. Moro and G. Topa (in progress): “Social Interactions, Endogenous Networks
    and Teenage Smoking”, mimeo.

Bisin, A., G. Topa and T. Verdier (2004): “Religious Intermarriage and Socialization in
    the United States” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112 (3), 615-664.

Bjorn, P.A. and Q.H. Vuong (1985): “Simultaneous Equation Models for Dummy Endoge-
    nous Variables: A Game Theoretic Formulation with an Application to Labor Force
    Participation,” Caltech, Working Paper 537.

Blume, L.E., W.A. Brock, S.N. Durlauf and Y.M. Ioannides (2011): “Identification of
    Social Interactions”, in Benhabib J., A. Bisin and M.O. Jackson (Eds.) Handbook of
    Social Economics, Vol. 1B, Chapter 18, 853-964, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Blume, L. and S. Durlauf, (1998): “Equilibrium Concepts for Social Interaction Models,”
    mimeo, Cornell University.

Blume, L. and S. Durlauf, (2001): “The Interactions-Based Approach to Socioeconomic
    Behavior,” in S. Durlauf and P. Young (eds.), Social Dynamics, Brookings Institution
    Press and MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bramoulle’ Y., H. Djebbari and B. Fortin (2009): “Identification of Peer Effects through
    Social Networks”, Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 150(1), pp. 41-55.

Bresnahan, T. F. and P. C. Reiss (1991): “Empirical Models of Discrete Games”, Journal
    of Econometrics 64, 57-81.

Brock, W.A. and S. N. Durlauf (2001a): “Interaction-Based Models,” in J. J. Heckman
    and E. E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, North-Holland, Chapter V.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf (2001b): “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions”, The Review
    of Economic Studies, 68, 235-260.



                                          61
Brock, W. and S. Durlauf (2007): “Identification of Binary Choice Models with Social
    Interactions,” Journal of Econometrics, 140, 52-75.

Calvo-Armengol, A., E. Patacchini, and Y. Zenou (2009): “Peer Effects and Social Net-
    works in Education,” The Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Ciliberto, F. and E. Tamer (2009): “Market Structure and Multiple Equilibria in Airline
    Markets,” Econometrica, 77 (6), 1791-1828.

Conley, T.G. and G. Topa (2002): “Socio-Economic Distance and Spatial Patterns in
    Unemployment ”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 17 (4), 303-327.

Conley, T.G. and G. Topa (2007): “Estimating Dynamic Local Interactions Models”,
    Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 140 (1), 282-303.

Crane, J. (1991): “The Epidemic Theory of Ghettoes and Neighborhood Effects of Drop-
    ping Out and Teenage Childbearing,” American Journal of Sociology, 96, 1229-59.

Dagsvik, J. and B. Jovanovic (1994): “Was the Great Depression a Low-Level Equilib-
    rium?” European Economic Review, 38, 1711-29.

Davezies, L., X. D’Haultfoeuille, and D. Fougere (2006): “Identification of Peer Effects
    Using Group Size Variation,” CEPR Discussion Paper 5865.

De Giorgi, G., M. Pellizzari, and S. Redaelli (2010): “Identification of Social Interactions
    through Partially Overlapping Peer Groups,” American Economic Journal: Applied
    Economics, 2, 241-275.

Echenique, F. and I. Komunjer (2005): “Testing Models with Multiple Equilibria by Quan-
    tile Methods,” California Institute of Technology Social Science Working Paper 1244.

Fang, H. (2006): “Disentangling the College Wage Premium: Estimating a Model with
    Endogenous Education Choices,” International Economic Review, 47(4), 1151-1185.

Farmer, R. and J.-T. Guo (1995): “The Econometrics of Indeterminacy: An Applied
    Study,” Carnegie-Rochester Series in Public Policy, 43, 225-272.

Ferguson, T.S. (1996): A Course in Large Sample Theory, New York, Chapman & Hall.

                                            62
Follmer, H. (1974): “Random Economies with Many Interacting Agents,” Journal of Math-
    ematical Economics, 1, 51-62.

Follmer, H. and U. Horst (2001): “Convergence of Locally and Globally Interacting Markov
    Chains,” Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 96, 99-121.

Galichon, A. and M. Henry (2008): “Inference in Models with Multiple Equilibria,” Uni-
    versite’ de Montreal, mimeo.

Gaviria, A. and S. Raphael (2001): “School-Based Peer Effects and Juvenice Behavior,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(2), 257-68.

Gilleskie, D.B. and K.S. Strumpf (2005): “The Behavioral Dynamics of Youth Smoking”,
    Journal of Human Resources, XL(4):822-866.

Glaeser, E. and J.A. Scheinkman (2001): “Measuring Social Interaction,” in S. Durlauf
    and P. Young (eds.), Social Dynamics, Cambridge, MA: Brookings Institution Press
    and MIT Press. (2001)

Glaeser, E. and J.A. Scheinkman (2003): “Nonmarket interactions,” in M. Dewatripont,
    L.P. Hansen, S.J. Turnovsky (eds), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: The-
    ory and Applications, Eighth World Congress 1: 339 - 369, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press.

Glaeser, E., B. Sacerdote, and J. Scheinkman (1996): “Crime and Social Interactions,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 507-548.

Graham, B.S. and J. Hahn (2005): “Identification and Estimation of the Linear-in-Means
    Model of Social Interactions,” Economics Letters, 88, 1-6.

Gruber, J. and J. Zinman (2000): “Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Evidence and Implica-
    tions”, NBER Working Paper No. 7780, July 2000.

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2008): “Detection of Local Interactions from the Spatial Patterns
    of Names in France,” Journal of Regional Science, 48(1), 67-95.

Horst, U. and H. Follmer (2001): “Convergence oflocally and globally interacting Markov
    chains,” Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 96, 99121.

                                          63
Imrohoroglu, S. (1993): “Testing for Sunspot Equilibria in the German Hyperinflation,”
    Journal of Economics Dynamics and Control, 17(2), 289-317.

Ioannides, Y.M., and J.E. Zabel (2008): “Interactions, Neighborhood Selection and Hous-
    ing Demand,” Journal of Urban Economics, 63, 229-252.

Ioannides, Y.M. and G. Zanella (2008): “Searching for the Best Neighborhood: Mobility
    and Social Interactions,” mimeo, Tufts University.

Jones, A. (1994): “Health, Addiction, Social Interaction, and the Decision to Quit Smok-
    ing,” Journal of Health Economics, 13, 93-110.

Jovanovic, B. (1989): “Observable Implications of Models with Multiple Equilibria,”,
    Econometrica, 57, 1431-1437.

Judd, K.L. and C.-L. Su (2006): “Constrained Optimization Approaches to Estimation of
    Structural Models,”mimeo, University of Chicago.

Krauth, B.V. (2006): “Simulation-Based Estimation of Peer Effects,” Journal of Econo-
    metrics, 133, 243-71.

Krosnick, J. and C. Judd (1982): “Transitions in Social Influence in Adolescence: Who
    Induces Cigarette Smoking,” Develomental Psychology, 81, 359-68.

Lebanon, G. (2008): “Consistency of the Maximum Likelihood Estimator, ”mimeo, Geor-
    gia Tech.

Lee, L.f (2007): “Identification and Estimation of Econometric Models with Group Inter-
    actions, Contextual Factors and Fixed Effects,” Journal of Econometrics, 140, 333-74.

Lehmann, E.L. and G. Casella (1998): Theory of Point Estimation, New York, Springer.

Manski, C.F. (1993): “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Prob-
    lem”, Review of Economic Studies, 60 (3), 531-542.

Manski, C.F. and E. Tamer (2002): “Inference on Regressions with Interval Data on a
    Regressor or Outcome,” Econometrica, 70, 519-546.



                                          64
Mas Colell, A., M. Whinston, and C. Green (1995): Microeconomic Theory, Oxford, Oxford
    University Press.

Molchanov, I. (2005): Theory of Random Sets, London, Springer Verlag.

Moro, A. (2003): “The Effect of Statistical Discrimination on Black-White Wage Inequal-
    ity: Estimating a Model with Multiple Equilibria,” International Economic Review,
    44 (2), 457-500.

Nakajima, R. (2007): “Measuring Peer Effects on Youth Smoking Behavior,” Review of
    Economic Studies, 74(3), 897-935.

Norton, E.C., R.C. Lindrooth, and S.T. Ennett (1998): “Controlling for the Endogeneity
    of Peer Substance Use on Adolescent Alcohol and Tobacco Use,” Health Economics,
    7(5), 439-53.

Pakes, A., and D. Pollard (1989): “Simulation and the Asymptotics of Optimization Esti-
    mators”, Econometrica, 57, 1027-1057.

Patacchini, E. and Y. Zenou (2011a): “Juvenile Delinquency and Conformism”, Journal
    of Law, Economics, and Organization, forthcoming.

Patacchini, E. and Y. Zenou (2011b): “Social Network Effects and Parental Behavior in
    the Intergenerational Transmission of Religion,” Universita’ di Roma, La Sapienza
    and Stockholm University, mimeo.

Pesendorfer, M. and Schmidt-Dengler (2004): “Least Squares Estimators of Dynamic
    Games,” LSE, mimeo.

Powell, L.M., J.A. Tauras, and H. Ross (2003): “Peer Effects, Tobacco Control Policies,
    and Youth Smoking Behavior,” University of Illinois at Chicago, mimeo.

Preston, C.J. (2008): Gibbs States on Countable Sets, Cambridge, Cambridge University
    Press.

Soetevent, A.R. and P. Kooreman (2007): “A Discrete-Choice Model with Social Inter-
    actions: With an Application to High School Teen Behavior,” Journal of Applied
    Econometrics, 22, 599-624.

                                         65
Tamer, E. (2003): “Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response Model with Multiple Equi-
    libria,” The Review of Economic Studies, 70, 147-65.

Tincani, M. (2011): “Market for education and market for teachers: A joint analysis using
    data on the Chilean Large-Scale Voucher Plan,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Tyas, S.L. and L.L. Pederson (1998): “Psychosocial Factors Related to Adolescent Smok-
    ing: A Critical Review of the Literature,” Tobacco Control, 7(4), 409-20.

van der Vaart, A.W (1998): Asymptotic Statistics, Cambrdige, Cambrdige University
    Press.

Wang, M.Q., E.C. Fitzhugh, R.C. Westerfield, and J.M. Eddy (1995): ”Family and Peer
    Influences on Smoking Behavior among American Adolescent: An Age Trend,” Jour-
    nal of Adolescent Health, 16(3), 200-03.

Wang, M.Q., J.M. Eddy, E.C. Fitzhugh, (2000): “Smoking Acquisition: Peer Influence
    and Self-selection,” Psychological Reports, 86, 1241-46.




                                           66
