                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ISSUER QUALITY AND THE CREDIT CYCLE

                                         Robin Greenwood
                                         Samuel G. Hanson

                                        Working Paper 17197
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17197


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




This paper was previously circulated under the title “Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns.”
For helpful suggestions, we are grateful to Malcolm Baker, Effi Benmelech, Dan Bergstresser, John
Campbell, Sergey Chernenko, Lauren Cohen, Ian Dew-Becker, Martin Fridson, Victoria Ivashina,
Chris Malloy, Jun Pan, Erik Stafford, Luis Viceira, Jeff Wurgler, seminar participants at Columbia
GSB, Dartmouth Tuck, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
Harvard Business School, MIT Sloan, NYU Stern, Ohio State Fisher, University of Chicago Booth,
University of Pennsylvania Wharton, Washington University Olin, Yale SOM, and especially David
Scharfstein, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Adi Sunderam. We thank Annette Larson and Morningstar
for data on bond returns and Mara Eyllon and William Lacy for research assistance. The Division
of Research at the Harvard Business School provided funding. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Robin Greenwood and Samuel G. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Issuer Quality and the Credit Cycle
Robin Greenwood and Samuel G. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 17197
July 2011
JEL No. E32,E51,G12,G32

                                             ABSTRACT

We show that the credit quality of corporate debt issuers deteriorates during credit booms, and that
this deterioration forecasts low excess returns to corporate bondholders. The key insight is that changes
in the pricing of credit risk disproportionately affect the financing costs faced by low quality firms,
so the debt issuance of low quality firms is particularly useful for forecasting bond returns. We show
that a significant decline in issuer quality is a more reliable signal of credit market overheating than
rapid aggregate credit growth. We use these findings to investigate the forces driving time-variation
in expected corporate bond returns.


Robin Greenwood
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 267
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rgreenwood@hbs.edu

Samuel G. Hanson
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
shanson@hbs.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17197
I.       Introduction
         In most modern accounts of the credit cycle, fluctuations in the quantity of credit are
driven by time-varying financing frictions, due to changes in borrowers’ net worth or in bank
capital (Bernanke and Gertler (1989); Holmstrom and Tirole (1997); Kiyotaki and Moore (1997);
and Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox (1993)). Notably absent from these accounts is the possibility
that time-varying investor beliefs or tastes play a role in determining the quantity and allocation
of credit. This absence is surprising given abundant evidence of historical periods – such as the
1980s junk bond era or the credit boom of 2004-2007 – when credit markets appear to have
become overheated, potentially reflecting heightened investor risk appetites or over-optimism.1
During these periods, investors granted credit at low promised yields to borrowers of poor
quality, and experienced low returns when these borrowers later defaulted and credit spreads
widened. In this paper we show that this pattern of deteriorating issuer quality followed by low
investor returns should be understood as a recurring feature of the credit cycle.
         Our approach is to link patterns of corporate debt financing to time-series variation in the
pricing of credit risk. The key insight is that broad changes in the pricing of credit risk
disproportionately affect the financing costs faced by low credit quality firms. To the extent that
firms issue more debt when credit is “cheap,” the debt issuance of low credit quality firms may
then be a particularly useful barometer of financing conditions. Specifically, time-variation in
debt issuer quality may be useful for forecasting corporate bond returns: following periods when
debt issuers are of particularly poor credit quality credit assets should underperform.
         To test this hypothesis, we form time-series measures of debt issuer quality. Our primary
measure compares the average credit quality of firms with high debt issuance – proxied using
each firm’s expected default frequency – to the credit quality of firms with low debt issuance. A
second measure is constructed from credit ratings: each year from 1926 to 2008, we compute the
fraction of corporate bond issuance that is rated speculative grade. Building on Hickman (1958),
Atkinson (1967), and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996), we show that variation in issuer


1
  See Kaplan and Stein (1993) and Grant (1992) on the 1980s LBO and junk bond boom, Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) on the
2000s structured finance boom, and Axelson, Jenkinson, Stromberg, and Weisbach (2010), Ivashina and Sun (2010) and
Shivdasani and Wang (2009) on the 2000s leveraged loan and LBO boom.
                                                             1
quality is a central feature of the credit cycle: when aggregate credit increases, the average
quality of issuers deteriorates.
        We use these measures of issuer quality to forecast the excess returns on corporate bonds.
Following periods when issuer quality is poor, corporate bonds significantly underperform
Treasury bonds of similar maturities. The degree of return predictability is large in both
economic and statistical terms. The predictability is most striking for high yield bonds – with
univariate R2 statistics up to 30% at a 3-year horizon – but similar results obtain for investment
grade bonds, albeit with diminished magnitude. We show that issuer quality has incremental
forecasting power for corporate bond returns over and above traditional proxies for risk premia,
including credit spreads, short-term interest rates, and the term spread. Furthermore, the quality
of debt issuance is a better forecaster of excess corporate bond returns than the aggregate
quantity of debt issuance, suggesting that the quantity of debt issuance responds to common
shocks which are unrelated to the pricing of credit risk (e.g., common shocks to investment
opportunities). In summary, our results demonstrate a high degree of predictability in corporate
bond returns that is linked to the quality of corporate debt financing.
        We then use these findings to shed light on the forces that drive time-series variation in
expected corporate bond excess returns. We consider three potential sources of return
predictability: (1) countercyclical variation in the rationally determined price of risk as would
arise in consumption-based asset pricing models; (2) time-variation in intermediary risk
tolerance in markets characterized by limited capital or other intermediary financing frictions;
and (3) time-varying mispricing due to investor biases in evaluating credit risk over the cycle. In
attempting to discriminate between these sources, we recognize that it is generally impossible to
fully rule out one explanation or another. This is because theories of time-variation in expected
returns are quite flexible and there is little reason to believe that just one channel is operational.
        We first consider whether the results are consistent with consumption-based models in
which markets are integrated and the rationally determined price of risk varies in a
countercyclical fashion. For instance, investors’ risk aversion may vary due to habit formation as
in Campbell and Cochrane (1999). According to these explanations, investors are not

                                                   2
systematically surprised when the bonds of low quality firms who often receive funding during
booms later underperform.
       Our measures of issuer quality are correlated with fluctuations in the business cycle,
suggesting some promise for consumption-based asset pricing models. And, when included as
controls in our return forecasting regressions, current and lagged macroeconomic conditions
slightly attenuate the effects of issuer quality. However, a major stumbling block for these
models is that we forecast significantly negative excess returns in a number of sample years.
Because credit assets typically underperform Treasuries during bad economic times, rational
consumption-based models would always predict positive expected excess returns. Furthermore,
our quality measures are disconnected from traditional forecasters of the equity premium, and do
not forecast excess stock returns, cutting against the idea that issuer quality proxies for a
rationally time-varying price of risk in fully integrated stock and bond markets.
       Another source of variation in expected returns could stem from changes in intermediary
risk tolerance in markets characterized by limited capital. For example, a number of authors have
argued that fluctuations in intermediary equity capital may be tied to risk premia. We examine a
number of proxies for intermediary balance sheet strength, including lagged intermediary capital
ratios and balance sheet growth. Several of these measures are correlated with issuer quality in
the expected direction (e.g., issuer quality tends to be poor when insurers – who are large holders
of corporate bonds – have high equity capital ratios). However, the forecasting power of issuer
quality is not impacted by the addition of intermediary-related controls.
       A slightly different intermediary-based explanation is suggested by Rajan (2005), who
argues that agency problems may encourage delegated investors to “reach for yield,” buying
riskier assets with high promised yields when riskless interest rates are low. Consistent with this
idea, we show that issuer quality declines when yields on Treasury bonds are low or have
recently fallen. On the other hand, interest rate controls do little to affect the forecasting power of
issuer quality in our regressions.
       A third source of variation in expected returns could come from biased investor beliefs.
Specifically, investors may make biased assessments of default probabilities, leading to time-

                                                  3
varying mispricing of credit. A natural bias might stem from over-extrapolation of past default
rates or bond returns. For example, following a string of years in which few firms default,
investors may underestimate future default probabilities, leading them to bid up the prices of
risky corporate bonds. As a result, investors are systematically surprised by periods of elevated
corporate defaults, resulting in sharp declines in corporate bond prices.
       Explanations that appeal investor over-extrapolation are attractive because they allow for
negative expected excess returns, consistent with our findings. And, while it is difficult to
measure investors’ beliefs directly, the extrapolation story predicts that issuer quality should
decline following periods of low defaults or high credit returns. This pattern emerges quite
strongly in the data, suggesting that the recent experience of credit market investors may play a
role in shaping investors’ expectations or tastes.
       In summary, it is not possible to fully pin down the forces that drive variation in expected
returns. However, the evidence suggests that mispricing may play a role – i.e., investor
“sentiment” may play a role in driving credit cycles. And, if we adopt this interpretation, a
significant erosion in issuer quality may be a useful signal of credit market overheating.
       The plan for the paper is as follows. Section II motivates our empirical strategy. Section
III describes the data and the construction of our issuer quality measures, which we tie to
historical accounts of the credit cycle. Section IV presents our main return forecasting results.
We also discuss the link between issuer quality and aggregate credit growth, affirming the
central importance of issuer quality from the standpoint of credit cycles. Section V evaluates
competing explanations for the predictable variation in excess returns that we document. Section
VI concludes.

II.    Empirical Design
       Here we develop a simple reduced-form model in which corporate debt issuance responds
to changes in the pricing of credit. The model explains why debt issuer quality may be useful for
forecasting excess credit returns. The model pinpoints the circumstances under which quality is a
better barometer of the credit market than the quantity of issuance; it also explains why quality
may contain information about expected returns beyond what is revealed by credit spreads.
                                                     4
   A. A reduced-form model of credit spreads and debt issuance
             Following Duffie and Singleton (1999), credit spreads (the difference between corporate
bond yields and risk-free yields of the same maturity) are equal to expected credit losses plus
expected excess returns. At this point we can be agnostic about what drives variation in expected
returns: it might be a rationally time-varying credit risk premium, time-varying mispricing, or

both. As a simple reduced form, we write the credit spread s,t for firms of type θ as

             s ,t    ,t    t ,                                                               (1)

whereθ,t is the time-varying probability of default, δt denotes the time-varying expected return

on credit assets, and βθ is the exposure of type θ firms to the market-wide pricing credit risk.
Thus, the expected excess return on bonds of type θ is

             Et [rx ,t 1 ]    t .                                                              (2)

For simplicity, we assume that θ,t does not directly affect expected excess returns. Since default

probabilities θ,t vary over time, equations (1) and (2) capture the idea that spreads mean

different things at different times: spreads can be low because default probabilities are low or
because expected excess returns are low.
             For simplicity, suppose firms are either low default risk L or high default risk H, with

L,t < H,t for all t. Our central assumption is that L < H. This means that the bonds of high
default risk firms are more heavily exposed to market-wide changes in the pricing of credit risk.

             Firms of type θ choose their debt issuance d,t (or leverage) by trading off the benefits of

issuing additional cheap debt against the costs of deviating from their target capital structure, as

in Stein (1996). Target capital structure has two independent components: a part t that is

common to all firms and a part ,t that is specific to firms of type θ. A variety of factors

unrelated to expected returns may cause target leverage to fluctuate, such as changes in
investment opportunities. We assume that firms choose their issuance to solve

    max ( ,t  s ,t )  d ,t  ( / 2)  (d ,t  (t   ,t ))2 
     d ,t
                                                                                                     (3)
                               
                    max  t  d ,t  ( / 2)(d ,t  (t   ,t ))2 ,
                       d ,t
                                                                           

                                                                  5
where  reflects the cost of deviating from target leverage. The optimal choice of dθ,t is given by

          d*,t  t   ,t  ( /  )  t ,                                                                             (4)

so firms borrow more when the expected returns on credit assets are low.2 A classical
justification for this reduced-form appeals to familiar Q-theory logic: the optimal scale of
corporate investment, and hence debt issuance, rises when rationally required returns decline.
         The logic of our identification strategy can be seen immediately from equation (4). Debt

issuance is driven by changes in expected returns and changes in target leverage. Since L  H ,

fluctuations in expected returns t have a larger impact on the issuance of high default risk firms

than on the issuance of low default risk firms. Changes in target leverage are not informative
about expected returns and have a common component that is shared by all firms. Thus, it is
useful to examine the difference in debt issuance between high- and low-default risk firms.
         Now, suppose that half of the firms are low default risk and the other half are high default
risk, then equation (4) implies that the total quantity of debt issuance is

          dH* ,t  dL*,t  (2t   H ,t   L,t )  ((H   L ) /  )  t .                                              (5)

A proxy for the issuer quality mix is the difference in debt issuance between high and low
default risk firms

          dH* ,t  dL*,t  ( H ,t   L,t )  ((H  L ) /  )  t .                                                     (6)

By looking at the quality of issuance, we remove the impact of the common factor t which

affects the issuance of all firms. Thus, the quality mix helps isolate the information that issuance
contains about expected returns.

    B. Forecasting returns using issuance quantity and quality

         Under these assumptions, both quantity ( d H* ,t  d L*,t ) and quality ( d H* ,t  d L*,t ) will

negatively forecast excess returns in a univariate regression. In a bivariate forecasting regression

2
   The idea that firms can back out the component of credit spreads that is due to any time-varying mispricing may seem
objectionable: it seems implausible that firms could have an informational advantage over sophisticated investors in forecasting
broad changes in spreads. However, as emphasized by Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010), firms may have an institutional
advantage in exploiting aggregate mispricing even if they have no informational advantage. Sophisticated investors are often
subject to limits of arbitrage which may be particularly relevant in the case of market-wide mispricing. By contrast, operating
firms can exploit this kind of mispricing by adjusting their capital structures without the fear of performance-based withdrawals.
                                                                    6
that includes both quantity and quality, the coefficients on both variables will be negative so long

as  2  0 . However, quality becomes more informative than quantity as  2 grows large (the

Internet Appendix contains the relevant calculations.) Intuitively, examining the quality mix
should be particularly informative if aggregate debt issuance has an important time-series
component that is unrelated to future returns. For example, if aggregate debt issuance fluctuates
significantly due to shocks to aggregate investment opportunities, then the quality mix of
issuance may be a better predictor of returns. The model also suggests that the results will be
strongest when forecasting the returns of low-grade bonds which have the greatest exposure to
market-wide changes in the pricing of credit.

     C. Forecasting returns using spreads and issuance quality

          Credit spreads positively forecast excess returns on corporate bonds. Should issuer
quality have incremental forecasting power for returns beyond spreads? In a multivariate
forecasting regression of excess returns on credit spreads and issuer quality, the coefficient on

spreads is positive and the coefficient on d H* ,t  d L*,t is negative. This is because both spreads and

issuer quality are affected by factors other than expected returns. For instance, as the time-series

volatility of default probabilities  2 (i.e., fundamentals) grows large, spreads become less

informative about δt.3

     D. Measuring issuer quality empirically
          How should we measure issuer quality in the data? A first approach which follows
directly from equation (6) is to classify firms as either high or low default risks and then compare

the debt issuance of these two groups, i.e., d H* ,t  d L*,t . A related idea is to compute the share of

debt issuance accounted for by high default risk firms, i.e., dH ,t / (dH ,t  dL,t ) . It may also be useful
                                                               *        *       *




to construct measures which reflect the continuous nature of firm default risk. Thus, a third
measure compares the default risk of high debt issuers with that of low debt issuers each period
3
  To see the intuition, consider the related exercise of forecasting stock returns using equity issuance and the dividend yield, D/P.
Suppose a Gordon growth model holds, so D/P reflects expected returns and dividend growth – i.e., D/P = R – G. If issuance
responds mechanically to D/P, it will have no incremental forecasting power. If, however, issuance responds differentially to
changes in R, it may contain additional information beyond D/P.
                                                                 7
           ISSt  Et [  i | High d i*,t ]  Et [  i | Low d i*,t ],                                                               (7)

where we now allow quality βi and debt issuance vary continuously across firms. This
construction parallels the equity issuance-based “characteristic spreads” used in Greenwood and
Hanson (2011). It is straightforward to show that all three measures are decreasing in expected
returns δt. While ISSt is the measure we emphasize in the majority of the paper, we show that our
findings are not sensitive to the specific method we use to measure issuer quality.

III.      Measuring Debt Issuer Quality

       A. Compustat-based measures of issuer quality: 1962-2008
          Following the above discussion, we compare the credit quality of firms issuing large
amounts of debt to that of firms issuing little debt or who are retiring debt. Specifically, in each
year t, we compute

                            i High d        EDFi ,t       i Low d          EDFi ,t
           ISS   t
                  EDF
                                      i ,t
                                                                       i ,t
                                                                                         ,                                          (8)
                                Nt High di ,t                   Nt Low di ,t

where EDF is an estimate of the firm’s default probability, di ,t  Di ,t / Ai ,t 1 denotes debt

issuance, and N denotes the number of firms. Debt issuance is the change in assets minus the
change in book equity from Compustat, scaled by lagged assets. ISSEDF compares the average
default probability of high net debt issuers (net debt issuance in the top NYSE quintile) with the
default probability of low net debt issuers (net debt issuance in the bottom NYSE quintile). Thus,
ISSEDF takes on high values when debt issuers are of relatively poor credit quality.
          EDF is the Merton (1974) expected default frequency, computed following Bharath and
Shumway (2008).4 A simple way to think of EDF is that it is a statistical equivalent of a credit
rating, albeit one that we can compute reliably for a larger sample of firms starting in 1963 (the
correlation between EDF decile and S&P credit ratings is 0.54 for firm-years with a valid rating
in Compustat from 1985-2008). Highly levered firms with high asset volatility and low expected


4
  For firm i in year t,      ,    Φ      ln   ,     , / ,        ,   0.5 , / , where Ei,t is the market value of equity, Fi,t is the face
value of debt (computed as short-term debt plus one-half long-term debt), , is the asset drift (estimated using the prior 12-month stock
return),    ,
              is the asset volatility (estimated as   ,      , /   ,     ,    ,       , /   ,     ,  0.05 0.25 , where            ,
                                                                                                                                    is the
annualized volatility of monthly stock returns over the prior 12 months), and Φ ∙ is the standard normal CDF.
                                                                    8
returns have the highest EDFs. Firms with high EDFs also tend to be small and young, do not
pay dividends, have high leverage, and have low interest coverage. Naturally, these firms also
have high estimated default probabilities based on other forecasters, such as the Shumway (2001)
bankruptcy hazard rate. Debt issues, EDF, and several alternate measures of firm credit quality
are summarized in Panel A of Table 1, with the details of their construction given in the Internet
Appendix. EDF is close to zero for the median firm, while the mean EDF is 6%.
          When substituting a firm’s EDF into equation (8), we follow convention and use NYSE
deciles rather than the raw values. Using deciles minimizes the influence of outlier firms and
avoids the possibility of picking up compositional shifts in the set of listed firms or secular

trends.5 It also makes the units easy to interpret: ISStEDF  1 means that firms with high net debt

issuance had EDFs that were on average one decile higher than firms with low net debt issuance.
          We plot ISSEDF in Figure 1 and provide summary statistics for the time series in Table 1.
ISSEDF was high (i.e., high debt issuers were of relatively poor quality) in the mid-to-late 1960s,
1973, 1978, the mid-to-late 1980s, 1997-1998, and again in 2005-2007. ISSEDF drops sharply in
1970-1971, 1975-1976, the early 1990s, 2001-2002, and finally in 2008.
          Figure 1 also shows the relationship between ISSEDF and the business cycle. The shaded
bars denote NBER recessions. ISSEDF tends to be low in recessions and high in expansions.
However, this relation is not exact and the lead-lag relationship between the business cycle and
ISSEDF varies over time. For instance, ISSEDF falls during many recessions, but rises during the
1982 recession as the 1980s high yield boom was getting underway. The series also tends to peak
before recessions, but occasionally peaks after the economy is already in recession. We can
remove the influence of the business cycle by regressing ISSEDF on the output gap (Hodrick-
Prescott (1997) filtered log real GDP) and saving the residuals. This orthogonalized series,
shown as a dashed line in Panel B, still captures the same peaks and troughs of the original
series, consistent with the idea that the credit cycle is somewhat distinct from the business cycle.
          Our time series of issuer quality corresponds closely to historical accounts of credit

5
  For example, if we wanted to see whether issuance was concentrated among large firms, it would make little sense to compute
the average size of high issuers as the cross-sectional dispersion of size has increased over time. A limitation of using deciles is
that we throw out information about changes in the cross-sectional dispersion of EDFi,t.
                                                                 9
booms and busts. For example, Grant (1992) describes the credit boom of the late 1960s, when
our ISSEDF series reaches its sample peak. This period saw booming corporate bond issuance and
the rise of the short-term commercial paper market, which grew from $10 billion in 1966 to over
$40 billion by early 1970. The boom came to an abrupt end following the Penn Central
commercial paper default of June 1970. Officials at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
noted the “deterioration in the quality of outstanding paper” in the run-up to Penn Central. These
events are reflected in the sharp drop in ISSEDF between 1968-1969 and 1970-1971.
       The decline of issuer quality during the 1980s junk bond boom has been noted by a
number of authors (Grant (1992) and Kaplan and Stein (1993)). Klarman (1991) notes that
financier Michael Milken marketed new issue junk bonds on the assumption that their default
rates would be similar to those of recent high yield issues. However, default rates had been low
due to strong economic growth in an environment of declining interest rates. Klarman argues that
the denominator in the default rate calculation soared during the issuance boom, leading
investors to underestimate the likelihood of future defaults (Asquith, Mullins, and Wolff (1989)).
       The robust credit markets of the mid-to-late 1990s and 2004-2007 are by now familiar.
However, ISSEDF is unlikely to capture the full extent of the 2004-2007 boom, because it is based
on corporate credit, whereas much of the credit growth during this period was in residential
mortgages and structured products. While we do not expect ISSEDF to capture the full scale of
this activity, the basic arc of the boom is apparent in Figure 1.
       Panel B of Table 1 also summarizes alternate time-series measures of issuer quality,
constructed similarly to ISSEDF. We follow the same procedure as in equation (8), but use
different firm characteristics to proxy for credit quality. For example, ISSIntcov is the difference
between the average interest coverage (decile) of high and low debt issuers. In each case, we
order characteristics so that high values of the ISS variable indicate years in which lower credit
quality firms are issuing debt. These measures of quality are all highly correlated over time.

   B. The high yield share: 1926-2008
       A second quality measure can be formed using the credit ratings assigned to new
corporate bond issues. We define the high yield share as the share of nonfinancial corporate bond

                                                 10
issuance in each year with a high yield rating from Moody’s


          HYSt 
                             HighYield Bi,t           ,                                                                  (9)
                     HighYield Bi,t   InvGrade Bi,t
where Bi,t denotes the principal value of bond i issued in year t.6 In our forecasting regressions,
we take the log of the raw share so that our regression coefficients can be interpreted as the
change in returns following a one percent change in HYS.7 We use the Mergent Fixed Income
Security Database (FISD) to construct HYS from 1983-2008. We extend the series from 1926-
1965 using data from NBER studies by Hickman (1960) and Atkinson (1967) who report
aggregate issuance by credit rating based on a compilation of bond issues from Moody’s Bond
Surveys. Aggregate issues by credit rating are not available from 1966-1982, so we hand-collect
information on bond offerings from weekly editions of these books.8
         Figure 2 plots HYS alongside ISSEDF for comparison. Similar to ISSEDF, HYS takes on
high values when issuer quality is poor. The data show a small high yield debt boom in the late
1950s and early 1960s, and a more substantial boom in the late 1960s. Corporate bond issuers
were of particularly low quality in the late 1980s, in 1997 and 1998, and again in 2004 and 2005.
There appears to be a regime shift between the first and second halves of the sample: the level
and volatility of HYS are much higher starting in the early 1980s. The correlation between HYS
and ISSEDF is 0.47 prior to 1982, and 0.58 after 1982.
         The advantage of HYS is its simplicity. However, there are several reasons to prefer
ISSEDF. First, ISSEDF reflects a broader measure of debt issues, including both loan and bond
market financing. This means that unlike HYS, ISSEDF is not be impacted by secular shifts in the


6
  High yield bonds are those rated Ba1 or lower by Moody's or BB+ or lower by SS&P. For simplicity, we use the S&P
nomenclature (e.g., AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, B, and C) throughout, even when working with Moody's data.
7
  We use log(HYS) because it provides a good fit, but qualitatively similar results obtain if we forecast returns using HYS. To
compute log(HYS), we need to address the fact that HYS = 0 in 1974. To do so, we set HYS equal to 0.0024 for 1974 before
applying the log transformation (0.0024 is the second lowest value of HYS observed in sample). However, our treatment of this
single observation does not play an important role in driving our results.
8
  FISD is the current incarnation of the Moody’s Bond Survey, so we are using the same primary source throughout. We start
using FISD in 1983 because FISD only contains bonds that mature in 1990 or later. So long as speculative and investment grades
issues have similar maturity distributions, this truncation should impart no bias to HYS. We exclude financials, asset-backed
securities, sovereigns, and exchange offers to preserve comparability with Hickman (1960) and Atkinson (1967). The amount of
bond offerings by Moody’s rating from 1926-1943 is from Table 52 of Hickman (1960) and data from 1944-1965 is from Table
B-1 of Atkinson (1967). Following Atkinson and Hickman, we include convertible issues from 1966-1982. Prior to the surge in
high yield issuance in the 1980s, many speculative grade issues contained conversion features.
                                                             11
relative sizes of the markets for low-grade bonds and low-grade loans. Since the sizes of these
markets have fluctuated over time – the most prominent example being the rapid growth of the
high yield bond market in the early 1980s – this is a major strength of ISSEDF. Indeed, the level of
HYS is considerably lower prior to the early 1980s.9 Second, if loan and bond markets are
partially integrated components of the broader corporate credit market, measures based on total
debt issuance (loans plus bonds) may be more informative about future bond returns than
measures based solely on bond issuance. Specifically, if firms willingly substitute between loans
and bonds, isolated shocks to bank loan supply would induce a positive relationship between
bond issuance and expected excess bond returns. However, the relationship between total debt
issuance and expected excess bond returns would remain negative, even in the presence isolated
loan supply shocks.10 Third, ISSEDF holds constant the definition of firm quality. HYS, in
contrast, relies on the assumption that the meaning of credit ratings has remained constant.
However, Blume, Lim, and MacKinlay (1998) and Baghai, Servaes, and Tamayo (2010) argue
that the agencies have become more conservative in assigning ratings since the late 1970s.
Fourth, ISSEDF is based on net rather than gross debt issuance, thus better capturing changes in
the financial position of low quality firms.
          Figure 2 illustrates a final limitation of HYS as a measure of issuer quality: it can be
unduly volatile in years in which total issuance (the denominator in equation (9)) is particularly
low. This is most problematic in 1933 – the historical low point for total issuance, representing a
near collapse of the corporate bond market. Because investment grade issuance fell even more
dramatically than high yield issuance in 1933, HYS spikes to its sample maximum at the nadir of
the Great Depression. While we use the full time-series of HYS in the analysis that follows, we
note that removing this single outlier significantly strengthens our forecasting results.

9
   We can compute bonds outstanding as a share of total loans and bonds for non-financial corporations from Table 102 of the
Flow of Funds. This “bond share” fell steadily from 52% in 1962 to 39% in 1984 and then gradually rose again to 61% by 2003.
This trend reversed from 2004-2008 as the bond share again fell to 56%, reflecting the rapid growth of the leveraged loan market.
10
    To see why, suppose that lending standards are relaxed, while bond investment standards remain unchanged. Since
corporations substitute between loans and bonds (see e.g., Becker and Ivashina (2010)), banks’ willingness to grant cheap credit
would raise loan issuance, lower bond issuance, and lower expected bond excess returns. However, total debt issuance would
rise. In summary, assuming partial substitutability between bonds and loans, total debt issuance is likely to be better reflection of
broad credit supply, which in turn drives expected excess bond returns. Empirically, it appears that ISSEDF partially reflects
changes in lending standards: changes in ISSEDF are -0.51 correlated with the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion
Survey of changes in the stricture of bank lending standards from 1967-1983 (see Lown and Morgan (2006)) and 1990-2008.
                                                                12
      C. Returns and other data
          Our remaining time series are summarized in Panel D of Table 1. Short-term government

bond yields ( y SG,t ) and the term spread ( yLG,t  ySG,t ) are from Ibbotson. The credit spread (

    ,t  yL ,t ) is the difference between the log yield of the Moody’s BBB corporate index and the
 yLBBB    G



log long-term government bond yield from Ibbotson. Business cycle controls include industrial
production growth from the Federal Reserve, real aggregate consumption growth from the BEA
National Income and Product Accounts, and a dummy variable indicating whether the year is
classified as a recession by the NBER. As an alternate business cycle control, we use Hodrick-
Prescott (1997) filtered log real GDP as a measure of the output gap. We also use the
consumption wealth ratio (cay) from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) and the eight principal
components that Ludvigson and Ng (2010) extract from 130 macroeconomic time series.
          Returns on high yield bonds are from Morningstar/Ibbotson from 1927-1982 and from
Barclays Capital (formerly Lehman Brothers) starting in 1983. We construct high yield excess
returns     by     subtracting       the     log    return      on    intermediate         Treasuries       from      Ibbotson:

rx tH1Y  rt H1Y  rtG1 . Intermediate Treasuries (with a maturity of approximately 5 years) are the

appropriate benchmark for high yield bonds since the average duration on the Barclay’s high
yield index is just under 5 years.11 Excess returns on BBB-rated corporate bonds
( rx tBB1 B  rt B1B B  rtG1 ) and AAA-rated bonds ( rx tAA1 A  rt A1A A  rtG k ) are calculated in a similar

fashion using Morningstar/Ibbotson data from 1927-1989 and Barclays data beginning in 1990.
We compute 2- and 3- year cumulative log excess returns by summing 1-year log excess returns.

IV.       Issuer quality and excess corporate bond returns

      A. Univariate forecasting regressions
          Figure 3 shows our main result. We plot ISSEDF against cumulative high yield excess
returns over the following 2 years. Returns are plotted in reverse scale, so the negative
11
   Ibbotson bond return data are also used by Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Fama and French (1989) and Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2010). Ibbotson returns are based on a sample of corporate bonds with a remaining maturity greater than one
year. The Barclays Capital U.S. High Yield Index covers the universe of U.S. dollar high yield corporate debt. Index-eligible
issues must be fixed-rate, non-convertible, have a remaining maturity of at least one year, and have an outstanding par value of at
least $150 million. The value-weighted index return includes the price return that is realized upon the event of default.
                                                               13
correlation appears positive visually. The correlation between the two series is -0.51. Simply put,
periods of poor issuer quality are followed by low excess returns on corporate bonds.
         Table 2 shows forecasting regressions of cumulative excess returns on quality measures

              k  a  b  X t  ut  k ,
          rxtHY                                                                                                         (10)

where k denotes a forecast horizon of 1-, 2-, or 3-years and X is either ISSEDF or log(HYS).
Moving from left to right, we present forecasting regressions for ISSEDF for 1962-2008 and the
1983-2008 subsample, and HYS for 1926-2008 and the 1983-2008 subsample. We isolate the
1983-2008 period which corresponds to the modern high yield bond market. Moving from top to
bottom, the three panels show separate regressions for the excess returns on high yield, BBB-
rated, and AAA-rated corporate bonds. Here and in subsequent tables, t-statistics for k-year
regressions are based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors, allowing for serial correlation up
to k lags. A full discussion of statistical inference in this context is in the Internet Appendix.
         The top-left regression in Panel A shows that ISSEDF has an R2 of 12% for high yield
excess returns at a 1-year horizon. The coefficient of -9.534 implies that a one standard deviation
rise in ISSEDF (0.47 deciles) lowers excess high yield returns by 4.5% over the following year,
about 0.35 standard deviations. Thus, the level of predictability is strong in economic terms.12
         As we lengthen the forecast horizon from 1-year to 3-years, the R2 grows to 29% and the
coefficients increase in magnitude. Specifically, the coefficient on ISSEDF is -9.534 at a 1-year
horizon, -15.254 at a 2-year horizon, and -17.301 at a 3-year horizon. In untabulated results, we
extend this analysis to longer horizons, estimating (10) for horizons up to six years. The
forecasting power is concentrated in the first two years, with some additional power at three
years, after which it levels off.
         Moving down Table 2, the coefficients in Panel A for high yield bonds can be compared
to those for BBB-rated and AAA-rated bonds in Panels B and C. The coefficient on ISSEDF
declines in magnitude from -9.534 when forecasting 1-year high yield returns, to -5.311 when
forecasting BBB returns, and -2.278 when forecasting AAA returns. This pattern of coefficients,
12
  As can be seen in Figure 3, high levels of ISSEDF predict low or negative high yield excess returns. Conversely, low levels of
ISSEDF predict large positive excess returns. Furthermore, the impact of high and low values of ISSEDF is roughly symmetric.
Let          max              , 0 and          min             , 0 . If we estimate                ∙             ∙          , we
obtain b+ = -12.786 (t = -2.30) and b₋ = -17.008 (t = -3.24). However, the difference between b+ and b₋ is not significant.
                                                              14
apparent throughout Table 2, is consistent with the model in Section II in which lower-rated
bonds have greater exposure to a common credit-related factor. Moving to the right, Table 2
shows that the forecasting power of ISSEDF is present in both the full 1962-2008 sample as well
as the modern 1983-2008 subsample.
       The right half of Table 2 shows specifications involving log(HYS) as the predictor.
Starting with the full 1926-2008 sample, the coefficient of -1.517 for 1-year returns implies that
a one percent increase in HYS reduces high yield excess returns by -1.517%. In the 1983-2008
subsample, the corresponding coefficient is -11.483, so the relation between HYS and subsequent
returns is economically and statistically stronger than the full sample. More generally, because
HYS was formed by splicing together four separate time-series, we estimate the forecasting
regression for various additional subsamples in the Internet Appendix. The results for the
individual subsamples are generally stronger than the full 1926-2008 sample results. (The single
exception is the 1926-1943 period which is heavily influenced by the outlying 1933 observation.)
Overall, a consistent picture emerges whether we forecast returns using ISSEDF or HYS and when
we consider earlier or more recent subsamples.

   B. Multivariate forecasting regressions
       We now examine the incremental forecasting power of issuer quality over other potential
predictors of excess corporate bond returns. Two sets of control variables are of interest. First,
we want to know whether issuer quality has any forecasting power beyond common proxies for
ex ante risk premia such as the term spread (Fama and French (1989)) or the T-bill yield (Fama
and Schwert (1977)). Second, we want to understand to what extent the results in Table 2 are
driven by firms responding to some degree of mean reversion in credit spreads or excess returns.
If issuer quality were driven out by credit spreads, our findings might still be interesting from an
economic perspective, but would be less useful for forecasting returns.
       Is it reasonable to think that issuance could contain incremental information about returns
that is not contained in other observables such as credit spreads? If managers respond naively to
changes in credit spreads, then the answer is no. However, as suggested in Section II, spreads
mean different things at different times: they may be wide because expected credit losses are

                                                 15
high, or because expected returns are high. If managers issue more when they perceive credit as
being “cheap” (i.e., expected returns are low), then issuance may contain information beyond
spreads. The same logic can be extended to other observable variables. If credit valuations are
multi-dimensional, then corporate issuance decisions may integrate these disparate factors into a
single statistic that is informative about returns. If we could condition on all relevant
observables, issuance might become redundant in a forecasting regression. In practice, it may be
difficult for the econometrician to identify the full set of relevant conditioning variables.
       Table 3 shows return forecasting regressions of the form

            k  a  b  X t  c  ( yL ,t  yS ,t )  d  yS ,t  e  ( yL ,t  yL ,t )  f  rxt
        rxtHY                                                                                         ut k ,
                                      G       G             G             BBB     G               HY
                                                                                                                 (11)

where X again denotes ISSEDF or log(HYS). As before, we forecast 1-, 2- and 3-year cumulative
excess returns on high yield bonds. Controlling for the term spread and the T-bill yield has little
impact on the coefficient on ISSEDF. For example, in the univariate forecasting regression in
Table 2, the slope coefficient on ISSEDF is -9.534, and falls in magnitude to -7.636 when these
controls are added. The effects of the control variables are even more modest at 2- and 3-year
forecast horizons. In the case of HYS for the full-1926-2008 sample, the coefficient on log(HYS)
in the multivariate regressions actually larger in magnitude and more significant, than in the
corresponding univariate regressions. In the 1983-2008 subsample, controlling for the credit
spread and past high yield returns has a larger impact on the log(HYS) coefficient at a 1-year
horizon. However, once we extend the forecast horizon to 2- and 3-years, these controls have
little impact on the estimates and log(HYS) remains statistically significant.

   C. The quantity and quality of debt issuance over the credit cycle
       In this subsection, we discuss the relationship between aggregate credit growth, the
quality of debt issuance, and excess corporate bond returns. There is no mechanical relationship
between the quality of debt issuance and aggregate credit growth, yet it is natural to think the two
would be positively correlated, and indeed such a relationship is predicted by our discussion in
Section II. We show that while aggregate credit growth forecasts bond returns, focusing on the
credit growth of low quality firms is even more powerful. Reminiscent of Hickman (1958),
Atkinson (1967), and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996), this exercise suggests that
                                                               16
variation in credit quality is a defining feature of the credit cycle.
         We start by documenting the correlation between quantity and quality. Figure 4 shows
the strong correlation between issuer quality and aggregate credit growth. We calculate

aggregate debt growth, DAgg/DAgg, as the change in debt amongst non-financial Compustat

firms, scaled by the lagged debt of firms reporting in successive years. The correlation between

ISSEDF and DAgg/DAgg is 0.45.13 Another way to illustrate the relationship between aggregate

credit growth and issuer quality is to group Compustat firms into EDF quintiles, compute

aggregate debt growth for each group, and then regress each debt growth series (denoted D1/D1

to D5/D5) on aggregate debt growth, DAgg/DAgg. This exercise shows that D5/D5 has the

largest loading on DAgg/DAgg with b = 1.31 (t = 6.80), while D1/D1 has smallest loading, with b

= 0.71 (t = 8.13). Thus, if aggregate debt grows by 1.0%, the debt of high quality firms grows by
0.7%, while debt at low quality firms grows by 1.3%.
         A number of previous studies use corporate securities issuance to forecast returns (e.g.,
Loughran and Ritter (1995)).14 It is natural to ask whether there is anything special about issuer
quality per se – i.e., is there information in who is borrowing over and above the total quantity of
borrowing? In Table 4, we compare the forecasting power of issuer quality with that of aggregate
credit growth. As argued in Section II, if debt issuance is partially driven by time variation in
expected excess returns, the quantity and quality of debt issuance should both negatively forecast
returns. However, if uninformative common shocks affect the issuance of all firms, we might
expect issuer quality to outperform aggregate credit growth in a horserace.
         Table 4 shows forecasting regressions of cumulative 2-year high yield excess returns
without controls in Panel A and with controls in Panel B. The first three columns compare the

forecasting power of ISSEDF to aggregate credit growth from Compustat, DAgg/DAgg. While

DAgg/DAgg negatively forecasts returns, the horserace in column (3) shows that DAgg/DAgg has

little incremental forecasting power over and above ISSEDF.

13
   Aggregate credit growth for non-financial corporations can also be calculated from Table 102 of the Flow of Funds. The
correlation between ISSEDF and this measure of credit growth is 0.68.
14
   See also Fama and French (2008), and Pontiff and Woodgate (2008) for firm-level stock returns; Baker and Wurgler (2000)
and Greenwood and Hanson (2011) for equity market and equity-factor returns; and Baker, Greenwood, and Wurgler (2003) for
excess government bond returns.
                                                           17
          In a related exercise, columns (4) to (8) of Table 4 compare the forecasting power of debt

growth for firms in EDF quintiles 1 to 5, denoted D1/D1 to D5/D5. To preserve comparability

across columns, each series is standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. The
table shows that debt growth amongst low quality firms contains the most valuable information
about future corporate bond returns. Specifically, moving across columns (4)-(8), the economic
and statistical significance rises as we consider debt growth of lower quality firms. For example,

a one standard deviation rise in D1/D1 lowers returns by 3.47% over the following 2 years,

while a one standard deviation in D5/D5 lowers returns by 7.09%. When we include time-series

controls in Panel B, debt growth of high quality firms (D1/D1 and D2/D2) is only marginally

significant whereas that of low quality firms (D4/D4 and D5/D5) remains highly significant.

          We can also include debt growth among high and low quality firms jointly as predictive

variables. In the horserace between D1/D1 and D5/D5 shown in column (9), only D5/D5

remains significant. Alternately, we can examine the difference in debt growth between low

quality and high quality firms, D5/D5 – D1/D1. This construction, which corresponds to

dH* ,t  dL*,t in equation (6), is a different way to measure issuer quality.15 As shown in column (10),

D5/D5 – D1/D1 negatively forecasts future returns, and this remains true if we control for debt

growth at high quality firms in column (11). The bottom line is that much of the forecasting
power of aggregate credit growth derives from credit growth at the lowest quality firms.16

     D. Time-series robustness
          Table 5 shows robustness specifications with and without the usual suite of time-series
controls (the yield spread, the T-bill yield, the credit spread, and lagged excess high yield
returns). Our basic result holds in a variety of subsamples, including pre-1983, post-1983, and
dropping 2008-2009. Although Compustat has less reliable coverage prior to 1962, we can also

15
   ISSEDF compares the EDFs of high and low debt issuance firms. By contrast, D5/D5 – D1/D1 compares the debt growth of
high and low EDF firms: the correlation between this series and ISSEDF is 0.52.
16
   As shown in the Internet Appendix, the theme that low quality issuance is most useful for forecasting returns also emerges in
our corporate bond issuance data. Specifically, we can compute the growth in high yield and investment grade issuance,
       ln       / Σ         /5 and          ln       / Σ          /5 where          is the volume of high yield issuance in year t.
Alternately, we can scale issuance by GDP, ln            /         and ln      /        . In horseraces between       and       or
ln      /      and ln     /       , low quality issuance is the strongest predictor.
                                                               18
extend ISSEDF back until 1952, obtaining similar results over this longer 57-year sample. The
table also also suggest that the forecasting relationship has grown statistically and economically
stronger in recent years.
            We next add a number of additional control variables to our baseline forecasting
regression. We first consider a variety of business-cycle controls. The most extreme of these tests
is to include both lagged and future business cycle controls. ISSEDF still retains its forecasting
power, suggesting that its power does not derive – at least not exclusively – from its ability to
predict future GDP or macro conditions.17 We also include the 8 principal components that
Ludvigson and Ng (2010) extract from 130 macro variables. This has little impact on our results.
            We next add several forecasting variables studied in the recent literature. Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001) find that the consumption wealth ratio (cay) predicts stock market returns.
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) show that a tent-shaped linear combination of forward interest
rates forecasts the excess returns of long-term riskless bonds over short-term bonds. However,
adding either variable as a control has almost no impact on the estimated coefficient on ISSEDF.
            We then make various adjustments to the construction ISSEDF in equation (8). Using the
raw level of EDF rather than the EDF decile strengthens our basic result in both univariate and
multivariate specifications. We then examine the role of long-term versus short-term debt
issuance (we follow Baker, Greenwood, and Wurgler (2003) in the computation of long-term and
short-term debt issuance). These results suggest that the quality mix of long-term debt issuers is
quite informative about returns, while the quality mix of short-term issuers is less so. This is to
be expected given that major short-term debt issuers are almost always of exceptionally high
credit quality. As mentioned above, we also obtain similar results if we compute the value
weighted average EDF decile amongst high and low debt issuers (weighting by assets or total
debt issued), or if we exclude financial firms. In summary, our results do not appear to be
sensitive to variable construction.
            One might wonder whether our results are sensitive to how we measure firm credit
quality, namely using a Merton-style expected default frequency. For instance, Shumway (2001)

17
     Lown and Gertler (1999) and Stock and Watson (2003) find that high yield spreads forecast near-term GDP innovations.
                                                               19
provides an empirical model of bankruptcy with higher predictive power than the Merton model.
In row (18), we use Shumway’s bankruptcy predictor (as opposed to EDF) in equation (8) and
find that the resulting time-series, ISSSHUM, is also a strong predictor of returns. In rows (19)-
(24), we perform a similar exercise with other measures of firm credit quality, in each case
constructing ISSChar so that high values indicate disproportionate issuance from lower credit
quality firms. We examine interest coverage, leverage, stock return volatility, size, age, and
payout policy. All of these measures line up in the right direction, and in 6 out of 7 cases, ISSChar
is statistically significant.
        The final four rows of Table 5 explore the link between ISSEDF and the equity market. We
can control for contemporaneous equity returns (MKTRF), or, in the last line, for
contemporaneous realizations of the three Fama-French (1993) factors, MKTRF, SMB, and HML.
These controls do not meaningfully affect our results.
        Last, our results are potentially subject to the econometric issues that arise in return
forecasting regressions. In the Internet Appendix, we discuss these issues and conduct a number
of time-series robustness checks. We consider alternate procedures for computing standard
errors, including a moving-blocks bootstrap and parametric standard errors computed under the
assumption that residuals follow an ARMA process. We also examine the possible impact of
Stambaugh (1999) bias on our results. None of these adjustments alter our basic conclusions.

     E. Forecasting changes in credit spreads and future defaults
        Ideally, we would like to relate the initial quality of a cohort of bonds to holding period
returns on that cohort. Such cohort-level information is not available, so we use the holding
period return on bond indices composed of issues with a fixed credit rating. Excess returns on a
portfolio of low grade bonds are a function of the initial spread, the subsequent change in spreads
on      non-defaulted           bonds,    and      realized       default      and       recovery       rates:

rxt 1  (1  DEFt 1 )  [ st  Dur  ( st 1  st )]  DEFt 1  LGDt 1 , where DEFt 1 is the default rate,

st is the credit spread, Dur is bond duration, and LGDt 1 is the loss-given-default. Table 6

shows that high values of ISSEDF forecast both future increases in credit spreads as well as high


                                                     20
future default rates. Specifically, the left panel of Table 6 reports the results of regressions where
we use ISSEDF to forecast cumulative changes in the Moody’s BBB credit spread over the
following 1-, 2-, and 3-year periods. ISSEDF is a strong univariate forecaster of credit spread
changes and remains significant in multivariate specifications that also control for the initial
level of credit spreads. The right panel shows that ISSEDF is a reliable forecaster of future default
rates on high yield bonds over the subsequent five years. Specifically, we use ISSEDF to forecast
the k-year ahead issuer-weighted default rate on high yield bonds from Moody’s Annual Default

Survey, DEFt HYk for k = 1 to 3.


V.      Discussion
        The previous section demonstrates that deteriorating debt issuer credit quality forecasts
low excess returns on corporate bonds. This section evaluates potential explanations of the
underlying variation in expected returns. We first consider explanations in which the quantity or
rational price of risk varies over the credit cycle. Next, we discuss frictional explanations that
emphasize shocks to intermediary capital or, alternately, time-varying agency problems. Finally,
we examine explanations in which investor over-extrapolation plays a role.

     A. Time variation in the quantity of risk
        We first rule out explanations in which expected returns are mechanically linked to the
composition of bonds in the high yield index. Specifically, the most natural arguments suggest
that lower quality issuance should be associated with a larger quantity of risk, forecasting returns
in the opposite direction of our findings. For instance, suppose the risk-premium on C-rated
bonds is greater than that on B-rated bonds, which is greater than that on BB-rated bonds. This is
what we might expect given that factor loadings on MKTRF are largest for the lowest quality
issues. Thus, a shift towards lower quality issuance should increase – not lower – the expected
return on the high yield index as the average loadings on priced risk factors rise.
        More generally, since the correlation between high yield excess returns and MKTRF may
be time-varying, one might wonder if our results can be explained by a conditional-CAPM (e.g.,
high levels of ISSEDF might signal low future loadings on stock market excess returns). However,

                                                 21
we find that high values of ISSEDF are associated with higher, not lower, future loadings of rxHY
on stock market excess returns.

     B. Fluctuations in the rationally determined price of risk
          We now consider explanations in which time-variation in required returns is due to
changes in the rationally determined price of risk. Countercyclical fluctuations in the price of
risk arise in many consumption-based asset pricing models, such as those featuring habit
formation (Campbell and Cochrane (1999)), time-varying consumption volatility (Bansal and
Yaron (2004)), or time-varying consumption disaster risk (Barro (2006) and Gabaix (2010)).18
Under such explanations, a decline in investors’ required returns during booms leads to a decline
in issuer quality because changes in the price of risk have a greater impact on the investment
(and hence debt issuance) decisions of low quality firms.19 Under such explanations, investors
are not systematically surprised when the bonds of low quality firms who receive funding during
booms later underperform.
          Several of our findings are consistent with the idea that the rationally determined price of
risk moves in a countercyclical fashion. Specifically, issuer quality has a clear business cycle
component. In addition, adding macroeconomic controls often increases the R2 in our forecasting
regressions, while slightly reducing the magnitude of the coefficient on ISSEDF. Our forecasting
results are also strongest for lower-rated bonds, consistent with the idea that lower-rated bonds
may be more highly exposed to consumption risk.
          However, many of our findings are difficult to square with rational integrated-markets
explanations. First, as previously shown in Table 5, the overall forecasting power of ISSEDF
remains quite strong even if we control for macroeconomic variables. We may have overlooked
some macroeconomic variables, but our results remain strong even after controlling for future
realizations of macroeconomic variables, as well as the eight principal components Ludvigson

18
   Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009) argue that the habit formation models can explain the low level of defaults
relative to the BBB-AAA spread if default losses are countercyclical. Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2008) and Chen (2009)
combine consumption-based models in the long-run risks traditional with dynamic models of optimal capital structure.
19
   Suppose firms have access to projects that require an investment of I at t, yield E[CF] in expectation at t+1, and differ only in
their risk exposure, i. Firm i undertakes a bond offering and invests if I ≤ E[CF]/Et[rxi,t+1] ori ≤ ∗ =E[CF]/(It)The factor
loading of the marginal issuing firm, ∗ , and the average issuing firm, E[i | i≤ ∗ ] are decreasing in δt. According to this
interpretation, changes in the price of risk affect the quality of the marginal firm that is investing and issuing debt.
                                                                22
and Ng (2010) extract from 130 macroeconomic time series.
          Second, we show that our measures of issuer quality forecast significantly negative
excess returns on high yield bonds in a number of sample years. While consumption-based
models with a rationally time-varying price of risk can explain periods in which high yield bonds
command a larger or smaller risk premium, they would not generate negative risk premia. More
formally, so long as the covariance of the stochastic discount factor with excess credit returns is
negative – i.e., so long as credit assets are expected to underperform Treasuries during bad times,
then consumption-based models would always generate positive expected excess returns for high
yield bonds. This approach to testing asset pricing models avoids the joint hypothesis problem
noted by Fama (1970) and has been used by Fama and Schwert (1977), Fama and French (1988),
Kothari and Shanken (1997), and Baker and Wurgler (2000).
          Specifically, each year we forecast k-period cumulative excess returns, compute the
standard error of the fitted value, and count the number of years in which expected returns are
negative with 95% confidence. ISSEDF has forecast significantly negative 3-year cumulative
excess returns in 14 years since 1962, and all but one of these years was actually followed by
negative excess returns. ISSEDF has also forecast significantly negative excess returns at a 1-year
and 2-year horizon in 7 and 14 sample years, respectively. We also find that ISSEDF forecasts
significantly negative excess returns on BBB bonds over 1- and 2-year horizons on five
occasions, four of which were followed by negative excess returns.20 We can also estimate
nonlinear forecasting models which nest the null that expected returns are always non-negative,
enabling us to directly test this constraint. These tests are discussed in the Internet Appendix and
indicate that the null of non-negative expected returns is strongly rejected by the data.
          Third, the magnitude of the predictability we document is difficult to square with
frictionless stories in which the price of risk varies over time. As discussed in Campbell and
Thompson (2008) and Welch and Goyal (2008), it is useful to examine the out-of-sample

20
   We obtain similar results if we include higher powers of ISSEDF or if we include additional time-series controls. Another
concern is that the average excess return of high yield bonds is fairly low in our sample. We can deal with this concern by setting
a lower threshold. For instance, there are 12, 7, and 5 years in which the fitted 2-year excess return is significantly less than -1%,
-2%, and -3%, respectively. Alternately, we can work with simple excess returns, raising the average due to Jensen’s inequality.
Specifically, the average log excess return is 0.45% versus an average simple excess return of 1.15%. However, if we work with
simple excess returns, we predict significantly negative excess returns in almost the exact same number of years.
                                                                 23
forecasting power of a return predictor. Specifically, we compute out-of-sample R2 using

               1  ( t  s 1 (rxt  rx
                                       ˆ t )2 ) / ( t  s 1 (rxt  rxt )2 ),
           2                T                             T
          ROS                                                                                                               (12)

      ˆ t is the fitted value from the forecasting regression estimated through time t-1 and rxt
where rx

is the average excess return estimated through t-1.21 We find large out-of-sample R2 statistics:
 2
ROS  8.3% when using ISSEDF to forecast 1-year returns, ROS
                                                          2
                                                              16.9% for 2-year returns, and
 2
ROS  10.5% for 3-year returns. As noted by Campbell and Thompson (2008), a large R2 relative

to an asset’s Sharpe ratio implies large market-timing gains for mean-variance investors with
stable preferences. The annual Sharpe-ratio of our high yield excess return series is 4%, so an R2
of 8% implies that a mean-variance investor could increase her expected excess return by a
factor of 54 by observing ISSEDF.22 It is difficult to square the magnitude of such predictability
with fully-rational stories, even ones with meaningful fluctuations in the price of risk.
          Fourth, we showed in Table 5 that ISSEDF is largely disconnected from traditional
predictors of the stock market. For instance, we obtain similar results controlling for the dividend
yield or Lettau and Ludvigson’s (2001) cay. Similarly, while ISSEDF is a reliable forecaster of
excess credit returns, the Internet Appendix shows it has little ability to forecast stock market
returns. However, we do find that ISSEDF has some ability to negatively forecast the Fama and
French (1993) HML and SMB factors. Nonetheless, as previously shown in Table 5, the
coefficient and significance of ISSEDF when forecasting high yield excess returns are largely
unchanged even if we control for contemporaneous realizations of the Fama and French (1993)
factors or the term premium. While this does not rule out all risk-based explanations, it suggests
that issuer quality captures forces that are relatively specific to credit markets. This is consistent
with Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001), who argue that credit spreads may be driven
by localized supply and demand shocks.

21
  Following Campbell and Thompson (2008) and Welch and Goyal (2008), we use 20 years of data to fit our initial forecasting
regression for annual returns from 1953 to 1972, so our first return forecast is for 1973.
22
  A mean-variance investor with risk aversion earns an expected excess return of              where S is the Sharpe ratio. However,
an investor who observes the forecasting variable earns an average expected excess return of                      / 1       , so the
percentage increase is       / 1          1      / . The magnitude of predictability we document for high yield bonds is
generally greater than that found in the stock market, particularly in the post-war period. Specifically, an out-of-sample R2 of 8%
exceeds the statistics that Welch and Goyal (2008) obtain for univariate forecasts of annual stock returns. Similarly, Campbell
and Thompson (2008) obtain out-of-sample R2 statistics that are generally less than 5% and never exceed 8%.
                                                                24
    C. Frictional explanations linked to intermediary balance sheets
         We next consider frictional explanations in which risk premia fluctuate due to the health
of financial intermediary balance sheets. A growing literature argues that fluctuations in
intermediary equity capital or balance sheet health impact risk premia. Interpreting this literature
broadly, the mechanism is one in which intermediaries become more risk averse following
shocks to their capital, which is only rebuilt gradually due to various frictions.23 These theories
predict that ISSEDF will be high when intermediary balance sheets are strong. Additionally, since
intermediary capital is the driver of risk premia, these theories suggest that the coefficient on
ISSEDF should be attenuated once we control for intermediary balance sheet strength.
         Table 7 examines the relationship between ISSEDF and the balance sheet strength of
intermediaries. For each measure of financial intermediary health, Zt, we first estimate its
relationship with ISSEDF

          ISStEDF  a  b  Z t  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  ySG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                  ,t  y L ,t )  f  rxt
                                                                                         G               HY
                                                                                                             et .         (13)

We estimate (13) with and without the full suite of controls. These regressions are shown in the
first two columns of Table 7. In the remaining four columns, we ask whether controlling for
intermediary capital affects the ability of ISSEDF to forecast bond returns. Specifically, we
estimate regressions of the form

     2  a  b1  ISS t
 rxtHY                  EDF
                             b2  Z t  c  ( y LG,t  ySG,t )  d  ySG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                        ,t  y L ,t )  f  rxt
                                                                                               G               HY
                                                                                                                   ut  2 , (14)

where Zt denotes balance sheet variables for different intermediary groups, including equity-to-
asset ratios (E/A) and annual asset growth (dA/A), are constructed from Flow of Funds data
following Adrian, Moench, and Shin (2010).
         Which intermediaries are relevant in the present context? We first consider insurers,
which are the single largest group of corporate bond holders according to Flow of Funds data. As
shown in the first two columns of Table 10, ISSEDF tends to be high (i.e., issuer quality is low)
when insurer equity-to-asset ratios are high as would be predicted by these theories. However,
the remaining columns show that including measures of insurer balance sheet strength does not

23
   See, for example, Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Garleanu and Pedersen (2010), Duffie (2010), and He and Krishnamurthy
(2010). Many accounts of the credit cycle also emphasize a role for fluctuations in bank balance sheets, including Holmstrom and
Tirole (1997) and Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox (1993).
                                                                25
alter our forecasting results – neither the coefficient on ISSEDF nor its statistical significance is
much changed by the additional controls.
          We next consider broker-dealer balance sheets. While securities brokers are not major
holders of corporate bonds, they serve as underwriters and provide liquidity in the over-the-
counter secondary market for corporate bonds. Furthermore, Adrian, Moench, and Shin (2010)
find that broker balance sheets contain useful information about a variety of risk premia.
However, we do not find a strong relationship between broker-dealer balance sheets and ISSEDF.
          Last, we consider three sets of proxies for the health of bank balance sheets: balance
sheet variables (E/A and dA/A), lagged bank stock returns, and bank loan loss provisions. Again,
banks are not large holders of corporate bonds, but they are the main providers of corporate loans
– the key substitute for bonds from firms’ perspective. If a shortage of bank capital raises the
returns banks require on loans, firms should substitute from loans to bonds until the expected
returns on bonds and loans are equated. Thus, we might expect a negative shock to bank capital
to raise the required returns on corporate bonds. Table 10 shows that lagged bank stock returns
and bank loan loss provisions are correlated with ISSEDF in the expected direction. However,
adding these controls hardly impacts the coefficient on ISSEDF in our forecasting regressions.
          In summary, explanations involving limited intermediary capital go in the right direction,
but do not appear to full explain the predictive power of ISSEDF.24 We also note that these
explanations do not allow for negative expected excess returns, contrary to our findings.

     D. An agency-based explanation: “Reaching for yield”
          An alternate intermediary-related explanation is that time-varying risk premia are not
driven by institutions’ ability to take risk, but rather by their willingness to take risk due to
agency problems. Rajan (2005) argues that certain institutional investors “reach for yield” when
riskless interest rates are low or have recently fallen, hinting that the low flat yield curve of
2005-2006 may have led institutional investors to take on excessive risks. A number of observers

24
   The fact that issuer quality beats proxies for intermediary balance sheet strength in a horserace does not mean that fluctuations
in intermediary risk tolerance are unimportant. As discussed above, issuer quality is an equilibrium outcome that may function as
a sufficient statistic for a number of primitive forces, including the health of intermediary balance sheets, which drive risk premia
in credit markets. And, if a large number of primitive factors drive risk premia, we might expect issuer quality to win head-to-
head horseraces against proxies for each of those individual factors.
                                                                26
have pointed to the low level of nominal rates as a key driver of the surge in high yield issuance
in 2010. Similarly, Klarman (1991) argues that one impetus to the 1980s junk bond boom was
from investors eager to earn the same high nominal returns they had earned in the early 1980s.
       There are numerous forces encouraging intermediaries to reach for yield. A first is that
low interest rates make intermediaries with fixed liabilities – such as life insurers – willing to
take on more asset risk. When interest rates are high these intermediaries can meet fixed
obligations without taking on significant risk. By contrast, low interest rates create the equivalent
of a debt overhang problem and lead managers to engage in risk-shifting (Jensen and Meckling
(1976)), accepting greater risk in exchange for lower expected returns. A second force stems
from the incentives facing investment managers who are compensated based on nominal absolute
returns, which may also encourage risk-shifting when interest rates are low. These agency-based
explanations do not require mistaken beliefs on the part of investment managers, who are
assumed to respond optimally to incentives. Furthermore, these explanations are also potentially
consistent with negative expected returns.
       Further evidence on the reaching for yield hypothesis is shown in Table 8 which explores
the time-series determinants of issuer quality from 1962-2008. We regress the level of ISSEDF on
interest rates, the term spread, past high yield default rates, and past high yield excess returns

        ISStEDF  a  b  ySG,t  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  rxtHY
                                                                   1  e  DEFt
                                                                                 HY
                                                                                     ut .                          (15)

We also run this regression in changes

       k ISStEDF  a  b   k ySG,t  c   k ( y LG,t  ySG,t )  d  rxtHY
                                                                             k 1 t 1  e   k DEFt
                                                                                                        HY
                                                                                                             k ut , (16)

where Δk denotes the k-year difference and rxtHY
                                               k 1t 1 denotes the excess high yield return


between t-k and t-1 . Consistent with the reaching for yield hypothesis, ISSEDF rises when interest
rates or the term spread are low, or have recently fallen. Column (1) shows that the term spread
and T-bill yield alone capture 44% (or 36% when looked at in changes) of the variation in
ISSEDF. However, reaching for yield appears unlikely to be the whole story, since, as shown in
Table 3, interest rate controls do not affect our basic forecasting regressions.
       To summarize, both consumption-based explanations that emphasize rationally time-


                                                           27
varying discount rates, as well as frictional explanations that are based on limited intermediary
capital or agency problems have some ability to explain certain aspects of our findings.
However, the forecasting power of issuer quality is robust to a variety of controls suggested by
these theories. Given this, it is tempting to simply attribute the residual to some unspecified form
of mispricing. Below, we take a different route, articulating one a specific account of mispricing
that relies on over-extrapolation.

   E. Investor over-extrapolation and mispricing
       Finally, we consider explanations in which biased investor beliefs generate predictable
variation in excess corporate bond returns. A natural story is that investors over-extrapolate past
defaults or past volatility realizations, leading to time-varying mispricing of corporate bonds. For
instance, following a period of low defaults, investors may begin to believe that low credit
quality firms are safer than they truly are, leading them to bid up the prices of risky debt.
Recognizing that credit is cheap, low quality firms would then issue large amounts of debt,
making them even more likely to default in the future. As a result, issuer quality would
negatively forecast excess corporate bond returns.
       While extrapolative expectations deviate from the rational ideal, they may not be
unrealistic. Researchers have shown that subjects are prone to over-extrapolation in a wide
variety of settings. Specifically, subjects often use a “representativeness” heuristic, drawing
strong conclusions from small samples of data (Tversky and Kahneman (1974)). We also note
that many intermediaries use backward-looking risk management systems such as Value-at-Risk
when extending credit. These systems may result in over-extrapolation, leading financial
institutions to under-estimate future risks following periods of low volatility or low credit losses.
       A more formal account of over-extrapolation in credit markets might go as follows. (The
details of such a model are provided in the Internet Appendix.) Suppose the economy
exogenously switches between good times in which few firms default, and bad times in which a
higher fraction of firms default. However, following Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998),
investors think that the economy either evolves according to a more or less persistent process.
Following a string of low-default realizations, investors start to believe that the process

                                                 28
governing defaults is more persistent than it truly is, leading them to under-estimate future
default probabilities and bid up the price of risky corporate debt. These expectations will be
revised after a period of high corporate defaults, resulting in a sharp decline in bond prices. If
these bad times persist for long enough, investors will begin to over-estimate future default
probabilities. According to this interpretation, credit market “sentiment” is favorable
(unfavorable) when investors are underestimating (overestimating) future default probabilities.
These dynamics generate short-term return continuation and longer-term return reversals for
corporate bonds.
       To understand why the quality of corporate debt issuance might contain information
about future bond returns, consider how firms would behave in this environment. Low quality
firms would respond by issuing overpriced debt during booms, raising their leverage. Although
investors know that leverage impacts default probabilities, their growing belief that good times
are likely to persist leads them to underestimate the impact of rising leverage on default
probabilities. Following a string of low aggregate defaults, investors become willing to lend to
more highly levered firms for a given spread. Thus, a lower level of issuer quality is associated
with greater over-optimism about future default rates and lower expected returns.
       There are two reasons to take seriously an explanation in which investors make
expectational errors. First, it is consistent with the finding that expected excess returns may
sometimes be negative. Second, a distinguishing prediction is that issuer quality should be low
following a string of low realized defaults. The results in Table 8 bear this out. Specifically,
ISSEDF is high (i.e., issuer quality is low) following periods when default rates have been low and
high yield excess returns have been high. These patterns are particularly pronounced when
analyzed in changes: past defaults and returns explain 65% of the 2-year changes in ISSEDF.
Furthermore, these results continue to hold even if we control for recent macroeconomic
conditions or recent stock returns. Thus, Table 8 suggests that the recent experience of credit
market investors may play an important role in shaping their current expectations.
       Consistent with the idea that the extrapolation of past performance can explain much of
the time-variation in issuer quality, we obtain similar return forecasting results if we instrument

                                                29
                                                                             2  a  b  ISSt
for ISSEDF using past high yield default rates. Specifically, estimating rxtHY                     ut  2
                                                                                              EDF



using 2SLS yields b = -18.503 (t = -4.93) versus an OLS estimate of b = -15.254 (t = -5.29).

    VI.      Conclusions
          In the wake of the 2008-2009 financial crisis, a number of authors have argued that credit
booms and busts can have important consequences for real economic activity (e.g., Ivashina and
Scharfstein (2009) and Blinder (2010)). Since debt comprises the vast majority of external
corporate finance, it is surprising that little effort has been devoted to connect these booms and
busts to investor beliefs or tastes. For example, a large literature in corporate finance and
macroeconomics identifies reasons why the quantity of credit may fluctuate over the business
cycle, but makes little attempt to connect these changes to investor returns.
          Our main contribution is to construct a comprehensive measure of issuer quality and to
use this measure to forecast excess corporate bond returns. When issuer quality is low, corporate
bonds subsequently underperform Treasuries. We uncover a striking degree of predictability and
often forecast significantly negative excess returns. These results are difficult to fully explain
using rationally time-varying risk aversion or other drivers of countercyclical risk premia.
Instead, the findings suggest that it is worthwhile to consider explanations in which intermediary
frictions drive variation in required returns, or explanations in which investors may
systematically err in assessing credit quality at different stages of the credit cycle.
          The results in this paper have implications for the ongoing debate about whether central
banks should lean against incipient credit booms. For instance, the Basel Commmitee (2010) has
proposed varying bank capital buffers over the cycle to protect the banking sector against periods
of “excess aggregate credit growth.” A major challenge for any policy of this sort is identifying
the existence of a credit boom in the first place. Our results suggest that looking at credit
quantities alone may not be enough – we may also want to consider the credit quality of debt
market financing.




                                                    30
                                        References
Adrian, Tobias, Emmanuel Moench, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Macro Risk Premium and
       Intermediary Balance Sheet Quantities, IMF Economic Review, forthcoming.
Asquith, Paul, David Mullins, and Eric Wolff, 1989, Original Issue High Yield Bonds: Aging
       Analyses of Defaults, Exchanges, and Calls, Journal of Finance 44, 923-952.
Atkinson, Thomas R., 1967, Trends in Corporate Bond Quality, Columbia University Press, New
       York.
Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Stromberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2010, Leverage and
      Pricing in Buyouts: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Baghai, Ramin, Henri Servaes, and Ane Tamayo, 2010, Have Rating Agencies Become More
       Conservative?, London Business School Working Paper.
Baker, Malcolm, Robin Greenwood, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, The Maturity of Debt Issues and
       Predictable Variation in Bond Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 261-291.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate
       Stock Returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
       Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A Model of Investor Sentiment,
       Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.
Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare Events and the Equity Premium, Quarterly Journal of Economics
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2010, “The Basel Committee’s Response to the
      Financial Crisis: Report to the G20,” <http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs179.pdf>
Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina, 2010, Cyclicality of Credit Supply: Firm Level Evidence,
       Harvard Business School Working Paper 10-107.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,
      American Economic Review 79, 14-31.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1996, The Financial Accelerator and the
      Flight to Quality, The Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 1-15.
Bhamra, Harjoat S., Lars-Alexander Kuehn, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2008, The Aggregate
      Dynamics of Capital Structure and Macroeconomic Risk, Standard University Working
      Paper.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting Default with the Merton Distance
       to Default Model, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339-1369.
Blinder, Alan, 2010, The Squam Lake Report: Fifteen Economists in Search of Financial
       Reform, forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(7).
Blume, Marshall E., Felix Lim, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1998. The Declining Credit Quality of
                                             31
       U.S. Corporate Debt: Myth or Reality? Journal of Finance 53, 1389‐1413.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based
     Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
     205-251.
Campbell, John Y., and Samuel B. Thompson, 2008, Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of
     Sample: Can anything beat the historical average?, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1509-
     1531.
Chen, Hui, 2009, Macroeconomic Conditions and the Puzzles of Credit Spreads and Capital
      Structure, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Chen, Long, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2009, On the Relation between the
       Credit Spread Puzzle and the Equity Premium Puzzle, Review of Financial Studies 22,
       3367-3409
Cochrane, John, and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond Risk Premia, American Economic Review 95,
      138-160.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001. The Determinants of
       Credit Spread Changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177-2207.
Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2009, Economic Catastrophe Bonds.
       American Economic Review 99, 628-666.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital, Journal of Finance 65:
       1238-1268.
Duffie, Darrell, and John Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of Defaultable Bonds,
       Review of Financial Studies 12, 687-720.
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,
      Journal of Finance 25, 383-417.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,
      Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business Conditions and Expected Returns on
      Stocks and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25:23-50.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
      bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2008, Dissecting Anomalies, Journal of Finance 63,
      1653-1678.
Fama, Eugene F., and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset Returns and Inflation, Journal of
      Financial Economics 5, 115-146.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2010, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles
      in Macro-Finance, Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.
Garleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2010, Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations
                                             32
       from the Law of One Price, New York University Working Paper.
Gertler, Mark and Cara Lown, 1999, The Information Content of the High Yield Bond Spread
        for the Business Cycle, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 15, 132-150.
Grant, James, 1992, Money of the Mind, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York.
Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel Hanson, 2011, Share Issuance and Factor Timing, forthcoming
      Journal of Finance.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2010, A Gap-Filling Theory of
      Corporate Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of Finance 65, 993-1028.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with
      Constrained Arbitrageurs” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.
He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2010, Intermediary Asset Pricing, Working Paper.
Hickman, W. Braddock, 1958, Corporate Bond Quality and Investor Experience, Princeton
      University Press, Princeton.
Hickman, W. Braddock, 1960, Statistical Measures of Corporate Bond Financing Since 1900,
      UMI.
Hodrick, Robert, and Edward C. Prescott, 1997, Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
      Investigation, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 1-16.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1997,Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the Real
      Sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663-691
Ivashina, Victoria, and David Scharfstein, 2009, Bank Lending in the Financial Crisis of 2008,
       Journal of Financial Economics
Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun, 2010, Institutional Demand Pressure and the Cost of
       Corporate Loans, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.
Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
       Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305-360.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Jeremy C. Stein, 1993. The Evolution of Pricing and Financial Structure
      in the 1980s, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 313-357.
Kashyap, Anil K, Jeremy C Stein, and David W. Wilcox, 1993. Monetary Policy and Credit
      Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance, American Economic
      Review 83, 78-98.
Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting Returns in the Stock and Bond
      Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, 1997, Credit Cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105,
       211-248.
Klarman, Seth, 1991, Margin of Safety: Risk-Averse Value Investing Strategies for the
      Thoughtful Investor, Harper Collins, New York.
                                             33
Kothari, S. P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, Dividend Yield, and Expected Market
       Returns: A Time-series Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169-203
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2010, The Aggregate Demand for
       Treasury Debt, Northwestern University Working Paper.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional
       Test When Risk Premia are Time-Varying. Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238-
       1287.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The New Issues Puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23 – 51.
Lown, Cara and Donald P. Morgan., 2006, The Credit Cycle and the Business Cycle: New
      Findings Using the Loan Officer Opinion Survey, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
      38, 1575-97.
Ludvigson, Sydney, and Serena Ng, 2010, A Factor Analysis of Bond Risk Premia, Handbook of
      Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,
      Journal of Finance 29, 449-470.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
      Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55,
      703-708.
Rajan, Raghuram, 2005, Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?, Jackson Hole
       Economic Symposium Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 313-369.
Shivdasani, Anil and Yihui Wang, 2009, Did Structured Credit Fuel the LBO Boom? University
       of North Carolina Working Paper.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance 35-55.
Shumway, Tyler, 2001, Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple Hazard Model,
     Journal of Business 74, 101-124.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive Regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-
      421.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1996, Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World, Journal of Business
        69, 429 - 455.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2003, Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why? NBER
        Macroeconomics Annual 2002, 17, 159-230.
Tversky, Amos., and Daniel Kahneman, 1974. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
      Biases, Science 185, 1124-1131.
Welch, Ivo, and Amit Goyal, 2008, A Comprehensive Look at The Empirical Performance of
      Equity Premium Prediction, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455-1508.



                                              34
                 1.50


                 1.00


                 0.50
    ISSEDF




                 0.00


                 -0.50


                 -1.00
                         1962
                                 1964
                                        1966
                                               1968
                                                      1970
                                                             1972
                                                                    1974
                                                                           1976
                                                                                  1978
                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                1982
                                                                                                        1984
                                                                                                                1986
                                                                                                                       1988
                                                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                                                     1992
                                                                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                                                                              2008
                                Recession                           ISS EDF                            ISS EDF (Orthogonalized to Macro variables)

Figure 1. Issuer Quality. ISSEDF, is the difference between the average EDF decile between high and low debt issuers. EDF is
the expected default frequency of Merton (1974). The figure also shows shading for NBER-designated recessions. The dotted
line shows a version of ISSEDF that has been orthogonalized with respect to the output gap (Hodrick-Prescott filtered real GDP).




         0.7                                                                                                                                                                           3

         0.6                                                                                                                                                                           2.5

                                                                                                                                                                                       2
         0.5                                                                             ISSEDF
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
         0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                               ISSEDF
   HYS




                                                                                                                                                                                       1
         0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
         0.2                                                  HYS                                                                                                                      0

         0.1                                                                                                                                                                           -0.5

             0                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                 1925
                 1927
                 1929
                 1931
                 1933
                 1935
                 1937
                 1939
                 1941
                 1943
                 1945
                 1947
                 1949
                 1951
                 1953
                 1955
                 1957
                 1959
                 1961
                 1963
                 1965
                 1967
                 1969
                 1971
                 1973
                 1975
                 1977
                 1979
                 1981
                 1983
                 1985
                 1987
                 1989
                 1991
                 1993
                 1995
                 1997
                 1999
                 2001
                 2003
                 2005
                 2007




                                                                                         HYS                   ISSEDF


Figure 2. The High Yield Share. HYS is the log fraction of non-financial corporate bond issuance with a high yield rating from
Moody's. HYS is constructed using data from Hickman (1960) and Atkinson's (1967) NBER studies from 1926-1965, from hand-
collected data from Moody's Bond Survey's from 1966-1982, and from FISD for 1983-2008. For comparison, the figure plots
ISSEDF on the right-scale.




                                                                                                35
                            1.50                                                                                                                                                                               -60
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2-year Excess HY Returns (% )
                            1.00                                                                                                                                                                               -40
   Issuer Quality ISSEDF


                                                                                                                                                                                                               -30
                            0.50                                                                                                                                                                               -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -10
                            0.00                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                    1962
                                           1964
                                                  1966
                                                         1968
                                                                1970
                                                                       1972
                                                                               1974
                                                                                      1976
                                                                                             1978
                                                                                                    1980
                                                                                                           1982
                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                            -0.50                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                            -1.00                                                                                                                                                                              40

                                                                              ISS EDF                         2-year Excess High Yield Returns (%)


Figure 3. Issuer Quality and Subsequent High Yield Excess Returns. Issuer quality (left axis) plotted alongside cumulative
excess high yield bond returns for the following two years (right axis). Returns are plotted in reverse scale, so the negative
correlation appears positive visually. Issuer quality is measured with ISSEDF, the difference between the average EDF decile of
high and low debt issuers from 1962- 2008.




                           40%                                                                                                                                                                                 1.50


                           30%                                                                                                           ISS EDF                                                               1.00
   Credit Growth (% )




                           20%                                                                                                                                                                                 0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ISS EDF
                           10%                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00


                            0%                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.50

                                                  Credit Growth                                        Credit Growth
                           -10%                      (FOF)                                              (Compustat)                                                                                            -1.00
                                    1962
                                           1964
                                                  1966
                                                         1968
                                                                1970
                                                                       1972
                                                                               1974
                                                                                      1976
                                                                                             1978
                                                                                                    1980
                                                                                                           1982
                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008




                                                         Credit Growth (FOF)                                      Credit Growth (Compustat)                                       ISS EDF


Figure 4. Quality and Quantity and the Credit Cycle. The figure plots the Flow of Funds (FOF) and Compustat-based
measures of aggregate non-financial credit growth on the left axis versus our measures of issuer quality, ISSEDF, on the right-axis.




                                                                                                                   36
                                                            Table 1
                                                        Summary Statistics
Mean, median, standard deviation, and extreme values of firm characteristics (Panel A) and time-series variables (Panels B-E). Panel A
summarizes the firm-level characteristics, with the exact details of their construction given in the Internet Appendix. Net debt issuance is
the change in assets minus the change in book equity, scaled by by lagged assets. Net equity issuance is the growth of balance sheet
equity, net of retained earnings, scaled by lagged assets. External finance is the sum of net debt and net equity issuance. EDF is the
Merton (1974) expected default frequency, calculated following Bharath and Shumway (2008). SHUM is the bankruptcy hazard rate as
estimated by Shumway (2001). Interest coverage is EBITDA divided by annual interest expense. Leverage is book debt over assets. Age
is the number of years on CRSP. Dividends is annual cash dividend scaled by assets. For each characteristic X, ISSX compares the
average characteristic decile of high and low quintile debt issuers in that year, where quintiles are based on NYSE breakpoints. These
time-series are summarized in Panel B. Characteristics include EDF, SHUM, interest coverage, leverage, idiosyncratic volatility, size,
age, and dividend policy. “High” and “Low” are defined such that high is associated with a higher default probabilities. Panel C
summarizes the high yield share HYS, which is the dollar fraction of non-financial debt issues receive a high yield rating, according to
Moody’s. From 1983-2008, HYS is based on data from the Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD). HYS from 1966-1982 is based on
our assembly of bond issues from the Moody’s Bond Surveys, HYS from 1944-1965 is based on Table B-1 of Atkinson (1967), and HYS
from 1926-1943 is based on Table 52 of Hickman (1960). Panel D summarizes bond returns and the time-series control variables. yS the
log yield on the short-term government bond. yGL - yGS is the spread between the yields on the intermediate- and short-term government
bonds from Ibbotson, and yBBB - yGL is the BBB credit spread. Growth in industrial production, aggregate consumption growth, a
recession dummy, the output gap, and Lettau and Ludvigson’s (2001) consumption wealth ratio (cay) are macroeconomic control
variables. Log excess returns on corporate bonds are computed for bond index returns based on high yield (HY), BBB-rated, and AAA-
rated bonds, and are denoted rx. Excess stock returns (MKTRF), HML returns, and SMB are from Ken French. Panel E summarizes time-
series measures of intermediary balance sheet strength, including bank balance sheet capital (total assets minus liabilities all over assets)
and bank balance sheet growth (percentage change in total assets); insurer balance sheet capital (total assets minus liabilities all over
assets) and insurer balance sheet growth (percentage change in total assets); broker dealer balance sheet capital (total assets minus
liabilities all over assets) and balance sheet growth (percentage change in total assets); lagged equal weighted returns on bank stocks
based on Fama and French 48-industry classifications; and bank loan loss provisions scaled by total loans and leases from Table CB11
from the FDIC’s Historical Statistics on Banking. Bank, Insurer, and Broker Dealer data are from the Flow of Funds accounts. Banks
include commercial banks (Table L109), saving institutions (L114) and credit unions (L115). Insurance companies include property and
casualty (Table L116) and life (Table L117). Broker dealers are on Table L129.

                                                         Mean         Median               SD                         Min             Max
                                Panel A: Firm-level data (1962-2008, firm-year observations)
 Debt issues: d/A                                         0.09           0.04             0.40                      -4.13            6.50
 Equity issues: e/A                                       0.24           0.01             1.54                      -0.55           48.09
 External Finance: (d+e)/A                                0.30           0.09             1.31                      -0.75           40.96
 Expected Default Frequency: EDF                          0.06           0.00             0.18                       0.00            1.00
 Shumway Distress: SHUM                                   0.02           0.00             0.07                       0.00            0.97
 Interest coverage: i/EBITDA                             23.72           5.44          223.97                    -3976.00        5,779.57
 Leverage: D/A                                            0.23           0.20             0.19                       0.00            0.85
 Market Capitalization: Log(MV)                      1,166.39           75.62        8,367.79                        0.11      60,2432.90
 Age                                                     13.25           8.42           14.17                        0.00           83.00
 Dividends                                                0.02           0.00             0.03                       0.00            0.60
                                Panel B: Debt issuer quality (1962-2008, annual time series)
 ISSEDF Expected Default Frequency (high-low)                    0.25              0.31             0.48             -0.88            1.32
 ISSShum Shumway distress (high-low)                             0.11              0.14             0.32             -0.79            0.78
 ISSIntcov Interest coverage (low-high)                         -0.22             -0.24             0.39             -0.98            0.81
 ISSLev Leverage (low-high)                                      1.23              1.24             0.57             -0.03            2.58
     σ
 ISS CAPM σ (low-high)                                          -0.35             -0.30              0.54            -1.66            0.89
 ISSME Size (small-large)                                       -0.60             -0.60             0.29             -1.24            0.04
 ISSAge Age (young-old)                                          0.59              0.58             0.24             -0.09            1.06
 ISSNonpayer Dividends (nonpayer-payer)                      -0.06         -0.05             0.06                    -0.20            0.08
                                    Panel C: The High Yield Share (1926-2008, annual time series)
 HYS (FISD, 1983-2008)                                           0.32              0.34             0.12              0.05            0.56
 HYS (Moodys manuals & NBER, 1926-1982)                          0.11              0.08             0.10              0.00            0.64
 HYS (Spliced series, 1926-2008)                                 0.18              0.14             0.15              0.00            0.64


                                                                    37
                                                                Table 1 (Continued)
                                                                Summary Statistics

                                                                    Mean          Median              SD               Min     Max
                                     Panel D: Returns and macroeconomic controls % (1962-2008, annual time series)
Macroeconomic Controls:
    yGS,t                                                              5.61            5.23           3.12           0.03      16.86
    yGLt – yGS.t                                                       0.37            0.37           0.84          -1.73       2.28
    yBBBt – yGLt                                                       1.69            1.60           0.77           0.50       5.11
    Industrial Production                                              2.76            3.06           4.38          -9.74       9.52
    Aggregate Consumption Growth                                       3.36            3.46           1.81          -1.21       6.13
    Recession Dummy                                                    0.29            0.00           0.46           0.00       1.00
    Output Gap (HP filtered log GDP)                                   0.02            0.08           1.37          -3.68       3.09
    Cay                                                               -0.01            0.01           1.52          -3.52       3.28
    F1 (1964-2007)                                                    -6.21          -21.15         120.66        -198.90     490.20
    F2 (1964-2007)                                                    12.55           23.84         113.24        -361.34     268.16
    F3 (1964-2007)                                                   -12.57          -17.88          91.49        -373.68     250.01
Returns:
    rxHYt+1 (1-year excess High Yield return)                          0.45            1.98          13.10           -42.65    48.31
    rxBBB t+1 (1-year excess BBB return)                               0.53            0.64           7.02           -22.42    27.91
    rxAAA t+1 (1-year excess AAA return)                              -0.51            0.39           3.40            -8.44     4.22
      rxHYt+2 (2-year excess High Yield return)                       -0.23            1.42          14.34           -50.37    31.38
      rxBBB t+2 (2-year excess BBB return)                             0.42            2.61           7.93           -27.52    20.27
      rxAAA t+2 (2-year excess AAA return)                            -1.05            0.59           5.65           -13.59     7.91
      rxHYt+3 (3-year excess High Yield return)                       -0.13           -0.52          15.80           -42.28    36.42
      rxBBB t+3 (3-year excess BBB return)                             0.79            2.22           8.98           -26.35    25.56
      rxAAA t+3 (3-year excess AAA return)                            -1.46            0.16           7.33           -20.30     9.98
      MKTRFt+1                                                         3.46            8.93          17.65           -51.59    27.41
      HML t+1                                                          4.65            6.73          12.23           -30.58    32.95
      SMB t+1                                                          2.40            3.69          12.37           -29.02    34.88
      rxEDF t+1                                                       -1.89            8.93          13.14           -32.93    30.12
Default Rates and Changes in Spreads:
      DEFHYt+1                                                         3.36            2.09           3.10            0.00     12.97

       1 ( yL t  k  yL t  k )                                      0.02           -0.05           0.88            -3.41     3.07
              BBB         G




        2 ( yL t  k  yL t  k )                                     0.11            0.06           0.95            -1.41     3.87
               BBB         G




        3 ( yL t  k  yL t  k )                                     0.15            0.19           1.01            -1.89     3.49
               BBB         G



                                         Panel E: Intermediary Balance Sheets % (1962-2008, annual time series)
E/ABank                                                                5.83            5.21           2.88            1.70     12.10
dA/ABank                                                               8.21            8.57           3.68            -1.39    15.26
E/AInsurer                                                            12.20          12.30            1.35            8.58     14.27
dA/AInsurer                                                            8.11            8.29           4.09            -8.00    15.46
E/ABD                                                                  6.98            4.93           4.77            0.47     18.14
dA/ABD                                                                14.02          13.58           19.40           -28.29    74.11
RBank,t-3,t                                                           30.79          36.29           40.36           -99.42   124.55
LoanLossesBank                                                         0.75            0.58           0.64            0.12      3.53




                                                                           38
                                                       Table 2
                                 Issuer Quality and the Returns to Corporate Credit
Univariate time-series forecasting regressions of log excess returns on issuance quality ISSEDF and log(HYS):
                                                         rx t  k  a  b  X t  u t  k
ISSEDF is the difference between the expected default frequency deciles of high and low net debt issuers in each year. The high yield
(HYS) is the fraction of non-financial corporate bond issuance with a high yield rating from Moody’s. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is the cumulative 1-, 2-, or 3-year excess return on high yield bonds. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the cumulative 1-,
2-, or 3-year excess return on BBB-rated corporate bonds. In Panel C, the dependent variable is the cumulative 1-, 2-, or 3-year
excess return on AAA-rated corporate bonds. t-statistics for k-period forecasting regressions are based on Newey-West (1987)
standard errors allowing for serial correlation up to k-lags.

                                Xt = ISSEDF                                                            Xt = log(HYS )
          Full sample (1962-2008)                     1983+                        Full sample (1926-2008)                  1983+
        1-yr:      2-yr:       3-yr:      1-yr:        2-yr:       3-yr:        1-yr:       2-yr:      3-yr:      1-yr:      2-yr:      3-yr:

                                                  Panel A: High Yield Excess Returns (rxHY)

 b      -9.534     -15.254    -17.301    -11.132      -21.021     -27.966        -1.517     -2.917     -3.884    -11.483    -14.264    -17.798
 [t]     [3.97]      [5.29]     [3.68]     [2.64]       [5.20]      [6.19]        [1.77]     [1.98]     [1.93]     [2.77]     [4.23]     [5.76]
 R2    0.12           0.26       0.29         0.10       0.32     0.48       0.02       0.04             0.05       0.15       0.21       0.28
                                                                                    BBB
                                                     Panel B: BBB Excess Returns (rx )

 b      -5.311      -6.945     -6.645     -3.576       -6.092      -8.022        -0.874     -1.656     -2.100     -3.139     -3.344     -5.118
 [t]     [3.96]      [4.87]     [3.00]     [1.87]       [3.01]      [3.26]        [1.71]     [1.86]     [1.85]     [1.32]     [2.46]     [2.09]
 R2       0.13        0.18       0.13         0.04       0.15     0.23       0.02        0.04            0.05       0.05       0.06       0.13
                                                     Panel C: AAA Excess Returns (rxAAA)

 b      -2.278      -3.321     -3.372     -0.799       -2.184      -3.578        -0.310     -0.473     -0.108     -0.030     -1.015     -1.920
 [t]     [2.43]      [2.55]     [1.50]     [0.95]       [1.38]      [2.03]        [1.17]     [1.03]     [0.19]     [0.07]     [1.07]     [1.14]
 R2       0.10        0.08       0.05         0.02       0.07         0.13         0.02       0.01       0.00       0.00       0.02       0.05




                                                                       39
                                                            Table 3
                                              Multivariate Forecasting Regressions
Time-series forecasting regressions of log excess returns on speculative-grade bonds on measures of debt issuance quality,
controlling for the term spread, short-rate, credit spread, and lagged excess returns:
                      rxtHY
                         k
                             a  b  X t  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  y SG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                             ,t
                                                                                                 y LG,t )  f  rxtHY  ut  k
In Panel A, Xt is ISSEDF from 1962-2008; in Panel B, Xt is ISSEDF from 1983-2008; in Panel C, Xt is log(HYS) from 1926-2008; in
Panel D, Xt is log(HYS) from 1983-2008. t-statistics for k-period forecasting regressions are based on Newey-West (1987) standard
errors allowing for serial correlation up to k-lags.

                               1-yr returns                                  2-yr returns                                   3-yr returns
                                                      Panel A: Xt = ISSEDF (1962-2008)
 ISSEDF               -7.636        -8.617         -6.282      -11.022       -18.052   -13.890                  -14.214           -21.697    -19.343
                     [-3.45]        [-2.97]        [-2.40]      [-3.45]       [-4.60]   [-4.54]                  [-2.57]           [-3.83]    [-3.77]
 yLG,t  ySG,t         1.495                         2.031        5.025                   8.055                     4.61                        9.477
                      [0.62]                        [0.67]       [2.25]                  [3.36]                   [2.49]                       [5.68]
  y SG,t              -0.442                         -0.49        0.487                   0.845                    1.152                        2.102
                     [-0.62]                       [-0.68]       [1.02]                  [1.40]                   [1.86]                       [3.06]
  yLBBB
     ,t
         yLG,t                       3.836          3.773                     -1.498     -5.05                                    -3.595    -10.624
                                     [1.29]         [1.21]                    [-0.52]   [-1.59]                                    [0.86]     [-2.44]
      HY                             -0.264          -0.29                     -0.498    -0.729                                    -0.667      -0.936
 rx   t                             [-1.77]        [-1.62]                    [-2.35]   [-3.46]                                     [3.45]    [-5.20]
 R2                    0.15            0.28           0.32         0.31          0.34      0.45                     0.33              0.39       0.51
                                                     Panel B: Xt = ISSEDF (1983-2008)
 ISSEDF               -6.120        -7.609         -4.492     -15.578       -24.240   -15.865                   -31.055           -35.796    -35.669
                     [-1.07]        [-1.50]        [-0.85]     [-2.67]       [-5.33]   [-2.49]                   [-4.60]           [-5.78]    [-7.09]
 yLG,t  ySG,t        2.537                          4.478           6.687                        10.175           3.773                       7.136
                      [0.52]                        [0.89]          [1.57]                         [2.16]         [1.41]                      [3.08]
  ySG,t               -1.036                         0.392           0.608                          0.262          2.874                       2.566
                     [-0.60]                        [0.27]          [0.67]                         [0.26]         [3.02]                      [2.90]
  yLBBB
     ,t
         yLG,t                       9.948          9.214                         -4.242          -6.044                         -15.979    -17.903
                                     [2.00]         [1.88]                        [-0.48]         [-0.70]                          [-1.83]    [-2.11]
      HY                            -0.020          -0.114                    -0.536               -0.773                          -0.823     -0.899
 rx   t                             [-0.08]        [-0.45]                   [-2.29]              [-3.07]                         [-4.80]    [-7.66]
 R2                    0.13            0.33           0.35          0.37        0.39                 0.51           0.56             0.60       0.70
                                                     Panel C: Xt = log(HYS) (1926-2008)
 log(HYS)            -1.495          -1.925         -1.717        -3.154      -3.438              -3.250          -4.067           -4.543     -4.254
                     [-1.88]        [-2.32]        [-2.14]       [-2.51]     [-2.57]              [-2.63]        [-2.21]          [-2.23]    [-2.20]
 yLG,t  ySG,t         2.201                          0.275       6.269                              5.577         5.555                        3.076
                      [1.20]                        [0.12]       [2.47]                            [1.46]         [1.31]                      [0.51]
  ySG,t               -0.375                        -0.514       -0.054                            -0.057         -0.240                      -0.515
                     [-0.78]                       [-0.94]      [-0.07]                           [-0.06]        [-0.20]                     [-0.38]
  yLBBB
     ,t
         yLG,t                       3.492           2.936                   4.552                  1.024                          5.904       3.658
                                     [1.53]         [1.13]                   [1.60]                [0.28]                          [1.78]     [0.76]
      HY                              0.172           0.131                   0.307                  0.130                          0.201       0.067
 rx   t                              [1.06]          [0.80]                  [1.27]                 [0.49]                         [0.73]      [0.21]
 R2                    0.07            0.07            0.09        0.14        0.09                   0.14          0.11             0.10        0.12
                                                    Panel D: Xt = log(HYS) (1983-2008)
 log(HYS)           -11.180          -6.632        -5.326      -11.889     -12.432                -9.525        -15.000           -17.516    -14.451
                     [-2.89]        [-1.58]        [-1.20]      [-3.21]     [-3.12]               [-2.32]        [-5.05]           [-4.02]    [-5.19]
 yLG,t  ySG,t        1.803                          4.203           8.188                        11.651           8.269                     11.254
                      [0.39]                        [0.81]          [2.10]                         [2.55]         [2.34]                      [3.52]
  ySG,t               -1.751                        -0.225          -1.052                         -1.173         -0.105                      -0.430
                     [-1.19]                       [-0.15]         [-1.14]                        [-1.11]        [-0.08]                     [-0.34]
  yLBBB
     ,t
         yLG,t                     11.227           8.335                          5.693          -4.489                          -0.161     -9.068
                                     [2.42]         [1.56]                         [0.53]         [-0.57]                         [-0.01]    [-0.85]
      HY                              0.138         -0.059                         -0.025          -0.620                          -0.077     -0.585
 rx   t                              [0.56]        [-0.27]                        [-0.08]         [-2.20]                         [-0.22]    [-2.79]
 R2                    0.24            0.33           0.36            0.40           0.22            0.48           0.39             0.28       0.45

                                                                        40
                                                                               Table 4
                                                          Quantity and Quality and Future Returns to Credit
Annual time-series regressions of the form                ∙        ∙    ,      ,      ∙ ,      ∙    ,        ,       ∙             , where rxHY is the cumulative 2-year excess return on
high yield bonds, DAgg/DAgg is the annual percentage change in total debt for nonfinancial Compustat firms, Dk/Dk denotes aggregate debt growth in NYSE EDF deciles k. Panel A
shows regressions without controls. Panel B shows regressions with controls: the term spread, short-rate, credit spread, lagged excess high yield returns. t-statistics are based on
Newey-West (1987) standard errors allowing for serial correlation up to 2-lags.

                                                                                             Panel A: Univariate
                                                    (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)
 Issuer Quality         ISSEDF                 -15.254                  -12.978
                                                [-5.29]                  [-3.78]
 Agg. debt growth       DAgg/DAgg                           -5.212       -2.433
                                                            [-3.97]      [-1.49]
 Low EDF                D1/D1                                                         -3.474                                                        -1.565                    -4.917
                                                                                      [-2.04]                                                        [-0.86]                   [-3.16]
 2                      D2/D2                                                                      -3.806
                                                                                                   [-2.97]
 3                      D3/D3                                                                                 -2.842
                                                                                                               [-2.31]
 4                      D4/D4                                                                                               -4.025
                                                                                                                            [-1.92]
 High EDF               D5/D5                                                                                                            -7.091      -6.631
                                                                                                                                         [-3.76]     [-3.09]
 High-Low               D5/D5 - D1/D1                                                                                                                            -5.420       -6.538
                                                                                                                                                                  [-2.39]      [-3.09]
                        R2                        0.26         0.13        0.29         0.06        0.07          0.04        0.08         0.24         0.26         0.14         0.26
                                                                   Panel B: Including additional time-series controls
 Issuer Quality         ISSEDF                 -13.890                  -11.442
                                                [-4.54]                  [-3.73]
 Agg. debt growth       DAgg/DAgg                           -6.497       -5.126
                                                            [-3.22]      [-2.40]
 Low EDF                D1/D1                                                         -3.329                                                        -2.357                    -5.808
                                                                                      [-1.77]                                                        [-1.23]                   [-2.49]
 2                      D2/D2                                                                      -2.367
                                                                                                   [-1.17]
 3                      D3/D3                                                                                 -3.104
                                                                                                               [-1.96]
 4                      D4/D4                                                                                               -4.629
                                                                                                                            [-2.68]
 High EDF               D5/D5                                                                                                            -7.053      -6.827
                                                                                                                                         [-3.21]     [-3.04]
 High-Low               D5/D5 - D1/D1                                                                                                                           -5.429       -6.731
                                                                                                                                                                  [2.60]       [-3.04]
                        R2                        0.45         0.43         0.51        0.34         0.33          0.34       0.39         0.51         0.52        0.44          0.52

                                                                                           41
                                                                    Table 5
                                                                   Robustness
Robustness checks on the time-series forecasting regression from Tables 2 and 3
                     rxtHY
                        2
                            a  b  ISS tEDF  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  y SG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                                 ,t
                                                                                                     y LG,t )  f  rxtHY  u t  2
The dependent variable is the 2-year cumulative excess log return on high yield bonds. The table reports the coefficient and t-statistic on the
main variable of interest, ISSEDF, as well as the regression R2. The multivariate specifications include controls for the term spread, short-rate,
credit spread, and lagged excess high yield returns. We adjustment the baseline regression in row (1) in a number of ways. Rows (2)-(5)
present subsample results. In rows (6)-(11) we consider additional controls, including the output gap (Hodrick-Prescott filtered real GDP) in
(6); other macroeconomic controls (industrial production, consumption growth, and a recession dummy) in (7); leads and lags of those macro
controls in (8); the 8 macro factors from Ludvigson and Ng (2010) in (9); cay from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) in (10); and the Cochrane-
Piazzesi (2005) tent factor in (11). Rows (12)-(17) consider alternate constructions of ISSEDF. Rows (18)-(24) consider alternate quality-
related firm characteristics, including the Shumway (2001) bankruptcy hazard, interest coverage, leverage, idiosyncratic volatility, market
capitalization, age, and payout policy. Finally, rows (25) and (26) control for ontemporaneous equity market returns in (25); and for
contemporaneous realizations of the Fama and French (1993) factors in (26). t-statistics are based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors
allowing for serial correlation up to 2 lags.


                                                                                  Univariate                          With time-series controls
                                                                                                            2
                                                                               b              [t]         R                b                [t]     R2
 (1)      Baseline Result                                                -15.254         [-5.29]        0.26         -13.890           [-4.54]    0.45
          Subsamples:
 (2)        Longer 1952-2008 sample                                       -9.403         [-3.03]        0.16          -8.367           [-3.00]    0.38
 (3)        Pre-1983                                                      -8.994         [-3.90]        0.23          -9.383           [-2.48]    0.40
 (4)        1983-Present                                                 -21.021         [-5.20]        0.32         -15.865           [-2.49]    0.51
 (5)        Dropping 2008-2009                                           -14.556         [-5.32]        0.33         -13.997           [-4.33]    0.47
          Additional Controls:
 (6)        Output Gapl                                                  -13.592         [-4.05]        0.27         -13.548           [-4.32]    0.46
 (7)        Other Macro Variables                                        -12.975         [-2.97]        0.30         -10.045           [-3.08]    0.50
 (8)        Leads/Lags of Macro Variables                                -11.834         [-2.67]        0.46         -11.639           [-2.36]    0.59
 (9)        Eight macro factors                                          -12.303         [-4.29]        0.48         -13.659           [-4.13]    0.56
 (10)       Cay                                                          -12.910         [-3.99]        0.41         -11.550           [-3.11]    0.49
 (11)       Cochrane-Piazzessi Tent Factor                               -14.499         [-4.87]        0.30         -13.818           [-3.66]    0.45
          Alternate Constructions of ISSEDF:
 (12)       Debt Iss, EDF Level                                         -372.414         [-5.37]        0.26        -274.561           [-6.72]    0.44
 (13)       Long-term Debt Iss, EDF Decile                               -18.663         [-4.28]        0.24         -15.087           [-4.21]    0.44
 (14)       Short-term Debt Iss, EDF Decile                               -3.531         [-0.86]        0.02          -3.668           [-0.98]    0.33
 (15)       Asset Weighted                                                -5.890         [-3.83]        0.21          -3.700           [-2.70]    0.38
 (16)       Debt Iss Weighted                                             -4.970         [-3.44]        0.16          -3.597           [-3.20]    0.39
 (17)       Nonfinancials Only                                           -15.178         [-4.02]        0.21         -13.234           [-3.64]    0.42
          Alternate Measures of Credit Quality:
 (18)       Shumway Distress                                             -18.751         [-3.60]        0.18         -15.560           [-3.31]    0.40
 (19)       Interest coverage (Low – High)                               -15.318         [-3.41]        0.16         -12.077           [-2.51]    0.39
 (20)       Leverage (Debt/Assets)                                        -7.804         [-2.42]        0.10          -4.711           [-1.30]    0.34
 (21)       CAPM                                                        -8.696         [-3.25]        0.11          -4.310           [-0.91]    0.33
 (22)       Size (Small – Big)                                           -10.967         [-1.71]        0.05          -3.222           [-0.50]    0.32
 (23)       Age (Young – Old)                                            -15.141         [-2.38]        0.07         -16.263           [-2.18]    0.37
 (24)       Dividends (Non-payer – Payer)                                -83.443         [-2.84]        0.12         -69.163           [-2.15]    0.37
          Link to Equity Market:
 (25)       Contemporaneous Equity Returns (MKTRF)                       -13.409         [-5.32]        0.64         -12.232           [-3.80]    0.72
 (26)       Contemporaneous Fama-French Factors                          -11.011         [-4.88]        0.69         -12.603           [-4.79]    0.76




                                                                          42
                                                                                           Table 6
                                                                      Forecasting Changes in Credit Spreads and Defaults
Annual time-series forecasting regressions of changes in BBB-rated credit spreads:
                                  k ( y LBBB
                                           ,t  k
                                                   y LG,t  k )  a  b  ISS tEDF  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  y SG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                                                                       ,t
                                                                                                                                           y LG,t )  f  rxtHY  g  DEFt HY  ut  k .
                                          DEFt HYk  a  b1  ISS tEDF  b2  DEFt HY  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  y SG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                                                                          ,t
                                                                                                                                              y LG,t )  f  rxtHY  ut  k ,
where Δk denotes the k-year difference,          denotes the issuer-weighted default rate for high yield bonds in year           from the annual Moody’s default survey, yBBB-yG is the credit
                 EDF
spread, and ISS is the difference between the expected default frequency decile of high and low net debt issuers in each year. Control variables include the term spread, short-rate,
credit spread, lagged excess high yield returns, and the time-t default rate. t-statistics for k-period forecasting regressions are based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors allowing for
serial correlation up to k-lags.

                                                                 Change in Credit Spreads                                                                                        Defaults in Year:
                            1-year change                            2-year change                                     3-year change
                                                                                                                                                                 t+1                   t+2                   t+3
                       1 ( y L , t 1  y L , t 1 )                2 ( y L ,t  2  yL ,t  2 )                3 ( y L ,t  3  y L ,t  3 )
                                BBB          G                               BBB          G                               BBB           G




                    0.609          0.352                0.237    0.925          0.449                 0.419    0.879          0.519                 0.296    1.502      1.352      2.990       3.322     2.488       3.269
 ISS EDF
                   [4.07]          [2.26]               [1.45]   [5.33]         [1.85]               [2.14]   [6.25]         [1.81]                [1.05]   [2.48]     [2.39]     [3.53]      [4.62]    [1.78]      [1.91]
 yLG,t  ySG,t                   -0.244              -0.280                    -0.582            -0.631                      -0.562            -0.427                   0.281                 -0.827                -1.063
                                 [-1.39]            [-1.75]                   [-2.59]           [-2.23]                     [-2.36]           [-1.91]                  [0.41]                [-1.20]               [-1.25]
 y SG,t                            0.024                0.042                  -0.070                 0.004                  -0.156           -0.066                   0.005                 -0.084                -0.033
                                   [0.43]               [0.86]                [-1.62]                [0.09]                 [-3.46]           [-0.98]                   [0.03]                [-0.34]               [-0.22]

    ,t  yL,t
 yLBBB    G                                          -0.523                                      -0.668                                        -0.663                   0.824                 1.401                 1.501
                                                    [-3.32]                                     [-2.78]                                       [-1.76]                  [1.39]                 [1.23]                [1.53]
 rxtHY                                                  0.010                                        0.025                                     0.020                   -0.084                 0.048                 0.128
                                                        [1.53]                                       [1.34]                                   [-1.50]                  [-2.05]                [1.12]                [2.01]
                                                        0.052                                        0.093                                    -0.013        0.786       0.618      0.614       0.681     0.359       0.538
 DEF HY                                                 [1.50]                                       [2.17]                                   [-0.27]       [4.08]     [2.31]     [3.53]      [2.90]    [2.04]      [2.47]
 R2                  0.11             0.17               0.45     0.22             0.36               0.60     0.18             0.36                0.55     0.37        0.56      0.25         0.30     0.13         0.22




                                                                                                                  43
                                                          Table 7
                                        Intermediary Balance Sheets and Issuer Quality
This table explores the relationship between ISSEDF and measures of intermediary balance sheet strength Z. The first two columns in
each panel report the coefficient on Zt from regressions of the form
                        ISS tEDF  a  b  Z t  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  y SG,t  e  ( y LBBB
                                                                                                  ,t
                                                                                                      y LG,t )  f  rxtHY  u t  k .
Columns (3) to (6) report the coefficients on ISSEDF and Zt from return forecasting regressions of the form
                rxt  2  a  b  ISSt
                   HY                    EDF
                                                b  Z t  c  ( yLG,t  ySG,t )  d  ySG,t  e  ( yLBBB
                                                                                                        ,t
                                                                                                            yLG,t )  f  rxtHY  ut  2 ,
where rxHY denotes the 2-year excess return on high yield bonds. The regressions alternately omit ISSEDF, and include the term
spread, short-rate, credit spread, and lagged excess high yield returns as controls. Measures of intermediary balance sheet strength,
summarized in Table 1, include insurer equity capital E/A (total assets minus liabilities all over assets) and balance sheet growth dA/A
(year-over-year percentage change in total assets); broker dealer equity capital E/A and balance sheet growth dA/A; bank equity
capital E/A and balance sheet growth dA/A; lagged equal weighted returns on bank stocks based on Fama and French 48-industry
classifications; and bank loan loss provisions scaled by total loans and leases. t-statistics for 2-year forecasting regressions are based
on Newey-West (1987) standard errors allowing for serial correlation up to 2 lags.

                                                                    Depvar: ISSEDF                                     Depvar: rxtHY
                                                                                                                                  2

                                                                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)                (5)       (6)
                                               EDF
 Insurer Balance Sheets                   ISS                                                                       -13.102                        -14.251
                                                                                                                     [-3.41]                        [-3.69]
                                          E/AInsurer                 0.156           0.133           -4.104           -2.058           -1.336        0.563
                                                                    [3.58]          [2.54]          [-3.78]          [-1.68]          [-0.76]       [0.33]
                                          dA/AInsurer              -0.008          -0.005           -0.382           -0.493               0.382     0.314
                                                                   [-0.35]         [-0.21]          [-0.89]          [-1.06]              [0.70]    [0.53]
                                          Controls                     No             Yes               No               No                 Yes       Yes
                                          R2                          0.21            0.48             0.15             0.30                0.33      0.45
 Broker-Dealer Balance Sheets             ISSEDF                                                                    -16.006                        -14.579
                                                                                                                     [-5.25]                        [-4.20]
                                          E/ABD                    -0.017           -0.018            0.160           -0.105           -0.025        -0.289
                                                                   [-0.98]          [0.86]           [0.31]          [-0.27]          [-0.04]       [-0.55]
                                          dA/ABD                   -0.005           -0.003           -0.008           -0.088           -0.035        -0.080
                                                                   [-1.60]         [-1.06]          [-0.08]          [-0.96]          [-0.49]       [-1.58]
                                          Controls                     No              Yes               No               No              Yes           Yes
                                          R2                          0.06            0.42             0.00             0.28             0.32          0.46
 Bank Balance Sheets                      ISSEDF                                                                    -14.032                        -13.648
                                                                                                                     [-4.28]                        [-4.81]
                                          E/ABank                  -0.013          -0.032            -0.558           -0.734           -0.208        -0.642
                                                                   [-0.40]         [-0.96]            [0.50]           [0.88]         [-0.15]       [-0.51]
                                          dA/ABank                  0.036           0.019            -1.285           -0.780           -0.768        -0.512
                                                                    [1.48]          [0.71]          [-2.64]          [-1.60]          [-1.58]       [-1.04]
                                          Controls                     No             Yes                No               No              Yes           Yes
                                          R2                          0.07            0.43              0.12             0.32            0.35          0.47
 Lagged Bank Stock Returns                ISSEDF                                                                    -13.927                        -13.165
                                                                                                                     [-4.19]                        [-3.73]
                                          RBank,t-3,t                0.005           0.004           -0.105           -0.039           -0.068        -0.018
                                                                    [2.54]          [3.36]          [-3.60]          [-1.18]          [-2.40]       [-0.50]
                                          Controls                      No             Yes               No               No              Yes           Yes
                                          R2                          0.16            0.50             0.09             0.27             0.35          0.45
 Bank Loan Loss Provisions                ISSEDF                                                                    -13.594                        -13.913
                                                                                                                     [-4.30]                        [-4.42]
                                          LoanLosses               -0.397          -0.139           10.182             4.783               1.777     -0.161
                                                                   [-1.72]         [-0.59]           [2.00]           [1.34]              [0.36]    [-0.05]
                                          Controls                     No             Yes               No                No                 Yes        Yes
                                          R2                          0.14            0.41             0.10             0.28                0.32       0.45


                                                                              44
                                                                                           Table 8
                                                                                 Determinants of Issuer Quality
Time-series regressions of issuer quality ISSEDF on levels and past changes of interest rates:
    ISS tEDF  a  b  y SG,t  c  ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  rxtHY
                                                                 1
                                                                     e  DEFt HY  ut , or  k ISStEDF  a  b   k y SG,t  c   k ( y LG,t  y SG,t )  d  rxtHY
                                                                                                                                                                     k 1 t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                  e   k DEFt HY   k ut .
ySG denotes the short-term Treasury bill yield; yLG-ySG denotes the term spread, DEFHY is the issuer-weighted high yield default rate from Moody’s, rLHY-rLG is the excess high yield return, and Δk
denotes the k-year difference. In columns (1) to (5) we regress the level of ISSEDF on a number of covariates, columns (6) to (10) repeat this analysis in first differences, and columns (11) to (15)
in second differences. In the last two columns in each block we add additional controls for lagged stock market returns and macroeconomic variables (the growth in industrial product, real
consumption growth, and a recession indicator). Robust t-statistics are shown in brackets.

                                                              ISSEDF                                                  1ISSEDF                                                 2ISSEDF
                                              (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)        (11)       (12)       (13)        (14)       (15)
 Levels:        y SG, t                   -0.047               -0.036     -0.035      -0.026
                                         [-1.63]              [-1.22]    [-1.14]     [-0.99]
               ( y LG,t  ySG,t )         -0.277               -0.233     -0.218      -0.204
                                         [-4.91]              [-3.41]    [-2.98]     [-2.61]
               rxtHY
                  1
                                                    0.014       0.015      0.009       0.016
                                                    [1.57]      [2.78]     [1.42]      [3.14]
               DEFt                                  -0.076    -0.013     -0.017      -0.010
                                                    [-3.11]   [-0.59]    [-0.68]     [-0.40]

 1-year
               1 y SG,t                                                                         -0.107
                                                                                                [-2.41]
                                                                                                                        -0.072
                                                                                                                       [-1.65]
                                                                                                                                    -0.073
                                                                                                                                   [-2.04]
                                                                                                                                               -0.078
                                                                                                                                              [-2.58]
 Changes:
               1 ( y LG,t  y SG,t )                                                            -0.335                 -0.173      -0.165     -0.137
                                                                                                [-5.99]                [-2.74]     [-2.71]    [-2.05]
               rxtHY
                  1
                                                                                                             0.031       0.025       0.014      0.018
                                                                                                             [6.60]     [5.00]      [2.24]     [3.25]
               1 DEFt                                                                                       -0.043     -0.025      -0.031     -0.020
                                                                                                            [-1.74]    [-1.11]     [-1.36]    [-1.11]

 2-year         2 y SG,t                                                                                                                                 -0.134                -0.062       -0.061     -0.084
 Changes:                                                                                                                                                [-3.31]                [-1.94]     [-1.70]    [-1.92]
                2 ( y LG,t  y SG,t )                                                                                                                    -0.410                 -0.164      -0.154     -0.168
                                                                                                                                                         [-7.63]                [-2.52]     [-2.11]    [-1.53]

               rxtHY
                   3t 1
                                                                                                                                                                       0.036      0.027       0.019      0.018
                                                                                                                                                                      [6.91]     [4.47]      [2.17]     [2.65]
                2 DEFt                                                                                                                                               -0.065     -0.049      -0.064     -0.083
                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.77]    [-2.72]     [-2.78]    [-2.45]
               Other controls             None      None       None      Lagged      Macro       None        None       None       Lagged      Macro       None       None       None       Lagged      Macro
                                                                          MKT        Vars                                           MKT        Vars                                          MKT        Vars
               R2                          0.44       0.34       0.53       0.55        0.61       0.36        0.49       0.55       0.62        0.74       0.47        0.59       0.62        0.64       0.75


                                                                                                      45
