NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LABOR MARKET IMPACT OF EMPLOYER HEALTH BENEFIT MANDATES:
EVIDENCE FROM SAN FRANCISCO’S HEALTH CARE SECURITY ORDINANCE
Carrie H. Colla
William H. Dow
Arindrajit Dube
Working Paper 17198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17198

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

We acknowledge funding support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the University of California
Labor and Employment Research Fund, and the California Program on Access to Care. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Carrie H. Colla, William H. Dow, and Arindrajit Dube. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Labor Market Impact of Employer Health Benefit Mandates: Evidence from San Francisco’s
Health Care Security Ordinance
Carrie H. Colla, William H. Dow, and Arindrajit Dube
NBER Working Paper No. 17198
July 2011
JEL No. I18,J2,J3
ABSTRACT
A key issue surrounding employer benefit mandates is the incidence on workers through wages and
employment. In this paper, we address this question using a pay-or-play policy implemented in San
Francisco in 2008 that requires employers to either provide health benefits or contribute to a public
option health plan. We estimate the impact on employment and earnings for the private sector overall,
as well as for high impact sectors: retail and accommodation and food services. We develop a novel
approach for individual case studies by combining both spatial discontinuity in policies and permutation-type
inference using other MSAs. We find that, compared to control counties, employment and earnings
patterns in San Francisco did not change appreciably following the policy. This was true for industries
most affected by the mandate, as well as for overall private sector employment. The results are generally
robust to inclusion of different control groups, county-specific time trends, and varying pre-periods.
In contrast to the small effects on the labor market, we do find that about 25% of surveyed restaurants
imposed customer surcharges, with the median surcharge being 4% of the bill. These results indicate
that while little of the burden of the mandate fell on San Francisco workers, approximately half of
the incidence of the mandate fell on consumers.
Carrie H. Colla
The Dartmouth Institute for
Health Policy and Clinical Practice
Dartmouth Medical School
35 Centerra Parkway
Lebanon, NH 03766
carrie.colla@dartmouth.edu
William H. Dow
University of California, Berkeley
School of Public Health
239 University Hall, #7360
Berkeley, CA 94720-7360
and NBER
wdow@berkeley.edu

Arindrajit Dube
Department of Economics
1030 Thompson Hall
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
and IZA
adube@econs.umass.edu

1.

Introduction

Employer mandates to provide health benefits have become increasingly popular mechanisms for
insurance coverage expansion, and are incorporated into many health reform proposals,
including the U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Mandates of this type are popular
because they allow policy makers to finance social policy without government funds, and in the
case of a “pay-or-play” mandate such as the one in the Affordable Care Act, raise money from
employers to finance coverage expansion. Economic theory and past research have suggested
that in demographically identifiable groups who value the benefit at its cost, the incidence of
such a mandate is likely to affect workers through reductions in wages or jobs (Gruber 1994,
Summers 1989). Wage adjustment and employment effects hinge on employee valuation of the
benefit and features of the labor market, such as the minimum wage or collective bargaining
agreements. In addition to being of interest at a theoretical level, the impact of an employer
mandate to provide health benefits is of policy relevance and the likely effect of the Affordable
Care Act on jobs has been politically controversial (Pear 2011).
In late 2006, San Francisco enacted ambitious healthcare legislation with a goal of
attaining universal access to health care for the city’s residents. As part of the initiative, San
Francisco implemented a “pay-or-play” employer mandate to finance health care for residents.
This law provides a natural experiment to estimate how the labor market (employment and
earnings) responds to a pay-or-play mandate.
Beginning in 2008, the San Francisco Health Care Security Ordinance mandates firms
with more than 20 employees to spend a minimum contribution per worker-hour on health
benefits. Employers with 100 or more employees were required to contribute $1.76 per hour in
health spending for each employee in 2008 (with subsequent annual increases of about 5%)
while for smaller firms between 20 and 99 employees the hourly requirement was $1.17 (San
Francisco OLSE website 2009). This benefit represented a 13-19% increase over San Francisco’s
2008 minimum wage of $9.36, so it is a substantial requirement—more stringent than the
requirements in the Affordable Care Act or the employer “fair share” requirement that began in
Massachusetts in 2007. It is similar in magnitude to the mandate in Hawaii (although Hawaii is
not a pay-or-play mandate). Employers can meet this requirement by paying for insurance
directly, paying into medical reimbursement accounts, or by paying into the city’s “Healthy San
1

Francisco” public option, which offers heavily subsidized access to care.1 Colla, Dow and Dube
(2011) found that although more than 90% of San Francisco firms with 20 or more employees
offered insurance prior to implementation of the law, about 75% of firms needed to increase
health spending to meet the Ordinance’s requirements. The same study found that many firms
chose to “play” by expanding benefit generosity, but about 18% of firms chose to “pay” into the
city’s Healthy San Francisco public option for at least some of their employees. The present
paper builds on this research to estimate the impact of these changes in health benefits on jobs,
earnings, and cost to consumers over the first 27 months of implementation.
One problem with case studies of policies affecting few units (in this case, one county) is
the difficulty of constructing reliable control groups and forming credible inference. In this
paper, we develop a novel approach to address both of these problems by merging recent
methodological developments—a spatial discontinuity design, and permutation-type inference as
developed by Conley and Taber (2011). Thus we include plausible local controls (e.g., Card and
Krueger 1996, Dube, Naidu and Reich 2007) while addressing the problem of improper
inference (Donald and Lang 2007). We use a spatial discontinuity approach to identify the
effects of the employer mandate on labor market outcomes, comparing San Francisco to other
counties within the broader metropolitan area. The Conley-Taber approach to inference uses
asymptotic approximations that let the number of control units grow large, while the number of
treated units remains small. Thus, we consider other top 25 metro areas to account for the
possibility of differential trends by city center and peripheries and to consistently estimate the
distribution of the treatment effect.
In general, we rule out all but small effects on overall private sector employment and
earnings, even after more than two years of mandate implementation. We also consider highimpact sectors such as retail and accommodation and food services, and further consider
restaurants as a subsector with particularly large treatment intensity. In all cases, the point
estimates are close to zero or positive, and in most cases the Conley-Taber confidence intervals
rule out employment or earnings declines of more than one percent. While we cannot rule out the
1

San Francisco’s mandate varies from the traditional definition of a “pay-or-play” mandate and the federal
Affordable Care Act in that the “pay” portion directly benefits the employee and is not general tax revenue. The
distinction is relevant for the legal question of which mandates are preempted by ERISA. In this paper, we use the
terms “pay-or-play mandate” and “employer health benefit mandate” interchangeably.

2

null hypotheses of full or no pass-through in the overall private sector—simply because the
compliance costs across all firms are so low—we find that only $0.08 per hour (12% of the
industry gap in spending at baseline) is passed through to earnings in a high impact sector like
the restaurant industry, and we can statistically rule out pass-through of more than $0.16 per hour
(26% pass-through of the gap).
The low pass-through to wages in the restaurant industry is likely due to a combination of
a relatively high proportion of workers close to the minimum wage, and the potential for passthrough to consumer prices. In a survey that we conducted of San Francisco restaurants, we
found many establishments had instituted a specific surcharge (a line item on the bill, rather than
simply increased menu prices) to cover the cost of the mandate. This surcharge—typically
around 4% of the bill—could cover the entire required health spending level for an average
restaurant even if it had zero health spending previously. When we take into account that many
restaurants already provided some level of health benefit spending, restaurant price surcharges
are estimated to account for about 51% of the required spending increases, suggesting substantial
pass-through to consumers at least in this local service sector.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the economics of
employer mandates and the specifics of the San Francisco law, while Section 3 surveys the
existing empirical evidence. Section 4 presents our methodology and data sources, and our
results are discussion in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

2.

The Economics of Employer Mandates

A simple supply and demand framework is a useful starting point for analyzing the effects of an
employer mandate to provide health benefits on the labor market (Summers 1989). A benefit
mandate such as the Health Care Security Ordinance will cause the labor demand curve to shift
in by the cost of the mandated benefit and the labor supply curve to shift out by an amount equal
to the value of the benefit to employees. While we may not expect nominal wages to fall among
previously employed workers (Kahn 1997), in a competitive market, the real wage is expected to
fall over time through slower wage growth for existing workforce and lower wages for new
employees.

3

The magnitude and timing of the wage change, and the effect of the mandate on
employment, will depend on workers’ valuation of the mandated benefit. If employers choose to
pay into Healthy San Francisco, it provides the workers family with access to a medical home
that coordinates health care delivery in clinics and hospitals in the city. Enrollees with incomes
under 300 percent of the federal poverty level whose employers pay into the program have
heavily subsidized access (with waived program fees), and those with higher incomes may buy
into Healthy San Francisco at rates substantially lower than what they would pay for an
individual policy in the private-insurance market (Healthy San Francisco website 2009). For
workers at the minimum wage, there cannot be any wage pass-through. At the minimum wage,
the joint (employer and employee) surplus from paying into the city option is positive for most
workers due to the subsidies up to 300% of the federal poverty limit. For higher wage workers,
who are more likely to have family income greater than 3 times the poverty limit, the subsidy
(and hence value of program to the employee) is smaller due to increased program fees for those
with income above this level. Therefore, we might expect the largest amount of wage passthrough to occur for jobs paying greater than—but not too much greater than—the minimum
wage.
To the extent that workers do not value the benefit at its cost or if the minimum wage is
binding, the entire cost of the benefit will not be passed through to wages. If a wage adjustment
is not sufficient to offset the cost of the spending mandate, the total compensation of these
workers may rise above their marginal value product, leading to a reduction in the number of
employees (or possibly a reduction in the hours worked among existing employees, but
employee fixed costs may make this less likely). Thus, neoclassical theory predicts some
combination of slower wage growth and decreased employment. To investigate the minimum
wage floor effect, Table 1 indicates that 18% of San Francisco workers earned under $10 per
hour in 2007 (compared to 2008 minimum wage of $9.36). But using the 2008 Bay Area
Employer Health Benefits Survey we further estimate that only 3-5% of workers were both paid
the minimum wage and did not have health benefits in 2007, just prior to implementation of the
Health Care Security Ordinance. Thus the minimum wage could only impose a constraint on
pass-through for a small portion of workers, although it could have a larger effect on some
highly impacted industries (such as restaurants) that have higher proportions of workers at
minimum wage and with low baseline insurance coverage. Finally, to the extent that there may
4

be labor market frictions, we may expect an increase in compensation to reduce vacancies and/or
profits in the short run, rather than observed wages and employment.
An additional potential margin of adjustment is in output product prices. Particularly in
markets where full wage pass-through does not occur, and to the extent that the product market is
at least partly segmented locally as is the case for local service industries, firms may be able to
pass the additional labor costs onto consumers through price increases. The ability of restaurants
to pass through additional input costs to consumers depends partly on the price elasticity of
demand for restaurants. Estimated price elasticities of demand for restaurant food have varied
from inelastic (0.18, Brown 1990) to quite elastic (1.63, Frank and Bernanke 2003 or 2.3,
Anderson 2006). Restaurants have many substitutes, including grocery store food, but many of
their close substitutes in this case (e.g. fast food) would have received the same supply shock,
which could allow pass-through to output prices if the demand elasticities are low enough.
Finally, there could be general equilibrium effects shifting employment between firms. A
majority of San Francisco firms with more than 20 workers offered health benefits to some
workers prior to the mandate going into effect. These firms were already competing profitably
with the non-offering firms prior to the mandate. If there are employment losses in baseline nonoffering firms, some of the baseline offerers may be able to profitably expand to capture their
business, thus mitigating employment losses in the aggregate.

3.

Existing Evidence on Employer Mandates

To date, only a handful of empirical studies have examined the effect of health insurance
mandates on wages and employment. Hawaii and Massachusetts are the only states with a
mandate for employers to provide health insurance, although Massachusetts’ employer mandate
is fairly minimal at $295 per year and thus should not have substantial labor market effects. The
Hawaiian Prepaid Health Care Act of 1974 is an insurance mandate (without any “pay” option)
requiring employers to provide insurance to employees, and is thus more similar in magnitude to
San Francisco’s health spending mandate. Thurston (1997) found that between 1970 and 1990,
the Hawaiian industries most affected by the insurance mandate had slower wage growth than
other Hawaiian industries (but more rapid wage growth than the same industries nationally).
Buchmueller, DiNardo, and Valletta (2009) found that relative wages in Hawaii did fall over a
5

longer time period, but the effect was insignificant and the law did not reduce employment
probabilities. However, they found a greater reliance on exempt workers (such as those working
less than 20 hours per week), suggesting some distortionary labor market effects.
There is a larger set of studies that have analyzed mandates that apply to the benefit
makeup of private insurance packages, rather than mandating the offer of insurance. Benefit
mandate laws vary from state to state, with a few mandated benefits at the federal level. Early
cross-sectional wage studies typically found that the presence of health insurance increased
wages, not supporting the compensating differentials hypothesis (e.g. Monheit et al. 1985).
However, a key omitted variable in the cross-sectional case is worker productivity, which is
difficult to fully control for with observables. The most influential study on the effect of benefit
mandates is Gruber (1994), who used a natural experiment to study the effect of state maternity
mandates on wages. He found that demographically identifiable affected cohorts (single and
married women aged 20 to 40 and married men in the same age range) paid the full cost of the
mandates through reductions in wages.
Effects of workers compensation insurance mandates on wages and employment are also
relevant to the study of benefit mandates. Empirical studies have examined the effects of workers
compensation mandates on wages and found that most (83-100%) of the expected cost was borne
by workers in the form of lower wages, and that the reduction in wages for employees at small
firms could be greater (Gruber and Krueger 1991, Viscusi and Moore 1987). In terms of
employment levels, Gruber and Krueger also found that higher workers compensation insurance
costs had a negative but statistically insignificant effect on employment, with an implied
elasticity of labor demand of about -0.5. Kaestner (1996) examined the effect of unemployment
compensation insurance taxes and workers' compensation insurance mandates on the
employment of youths and young adults and found that increases in labor costs reduced
employment in teenagers, but not young adults.
A parallel body of research is that of effects of minimum wage laws on equilibrium
employment levels. Yelowitz (2004) suggests that a health care spending mandate would lead to
increased unemployment for workers at the minimum wage. However, a body of evidence from
the minimum wage literature suggests that modest increases in labor costs may not lead to
noticeable changes in overall staffing patterns (Brown 1999, Card and Krueger 1994, Card and
6

Krueger 2000). Dube, Naidu and Reich (2007) found no discernable minimum wage impact on
employment in the restaurant sector in San Francisco. Generalizing the border-discontinuity
method, Dube, Lester and Reich (2010) estimated the effect of minimum wage changes across all
cross-border contiguous county pairs over the 1990-2006 period, and found no disemployment
effects in restaurants or other low-wage sectors.
Past research indicates that as health costs rise, firms substitute hours per worker for the
number of workers employed (Cutler and Madrian 1998). However, this effect was not found in
Hawaii and may not be applicable in this case given that the minimum spending requirements are
based on the number of hours the employee works (Thurston 1997).

4.

Data and Research Design

4.1

Data and Sample Construction

In order to investigate the effect on jobs and wages empirically, we use the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW), which is a near census of the working population. We
compare employment and weekly earnings trends in San Francisco to those of neighboring
counties and to other large metropolitan statistical areas in the United States that did not
implement any comparable new employer mandate. Quarterly data on employment and earnings
at county-by-quarter-by-industry level were obtained for the period between first quarter of 1990
and first quarter of 2010 from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The dataset is based on ES202 filings that every establishment is required to submit quarterly for the purpose of calculating
payroll taxes related to unemployment insurance. Since 98 percent of workers are covered by
unemployment insurance, the QCEW constitutes a near-census of employment and earnings. Our
two primary outcome measures are total employment and average earnings. The earnings
measure is the average rate of weekly pay for workers by industry. BLS divides the total payroll
in each industry and county in a given quarter by the total employment level in each industry and
county for that quarter, and then reports the average weekly earnings on a quarterly basis. The
QCEW does not report hours worked. However, we can partly address the possibility of an hour
reduction, such as that claimed by the Golden Gate Restaurant Association (Mandelbaum 2009)
by examining weekly earnings. To reduce influence of outliers, we imputed data for outliers that
were more than four standard deviations away from the mean over the full sample period.
7

We chose to focus our attention on all private sector (NAICS code 10), as well as
industries most affected by the employer mandate for the years 2002-2010: Retail Establishments
(NAICS codes 44-45, 9% of private employment in 2009), Accommodation and Food Services
(72, 14% of private employment), and its major subsector Eating and Drinking Places (722, 10%
of private employment).2 Using data from the 2008 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey,
Colla, Dow, and Dube (2011) estimated the “gap” amount per worker hour that the average firm
in each industry would need to increase health spending from 2007 to 2008 in order to come into
compliance with the minimum spending mandate. The gap reflects a combination of a small
percent of firms who did not offer health benefits at all at baseline, other firms that offered
benefits but not to all classes of employees covered by the mandate, firms with incomplete takeup of insurance offering, and firms whose benefits are not sufficiently generous to meet the per
person spending mandate. On average across all private industries, firms with 20 or more
workers would need to increase hourly spending by $0.29 per worker (Table 1). Those in retail
(Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 23, 53, 54, 56, 59) would have to increase their health
spending by $0.41 per worker-hour, those in Accommodation and Food Services (SIC 20, 54, 58,
70) would have to increase spending by $0.57, while restaurants (SIC 58) in particular would
have to increase their health spending by $0.62 per worker-hour.3 The additional mandated costs
are modest overall, but sizeable in low wage sectors which typically provide limited health
benefits to employees. In Table 1, we also report these additional hourly “gap” expenditures
(calculated from 2008 Bay Area Employer Health Benefit Survey) as a fraction of wages, using
hourly wage by industry in San Francisco from the 2007 American Community Survey (Ruggles
et al. 2008).
Additionally, the industries on which we focus have substantial proportions of minimum
wage workers, for whom possible disemployment effects may be more of a concern since their
wages cannot adjust. According to the 2007 American Community Survey, in San Francisco
approximately 45% of workers in eating and drinking places, 39% in accommodation and food
services, and 26% of workers in San Francisco retail were paid below $10 per hour, which is a
close proxy for the minimum wage (Table 1).
2

We use the terms “eating and drinking establishments” and “restaurants” interchangeably throughout the paper.
The gaps presented in Table 1 are smaller than those reported in Colla, Dow and Dube (2011). This is due to
incorporation of updated information in gap calculations, such as new data on workers who waived the required
spending due to other qualifying coverage.

3

8

We term San Francisco the “center” county and used data on four “periphery” counties
surrounding San Francisco as a local control group (Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, and San
Mateo counties). We similarly constructed center and periphery counties in other comparable
MSAs based on CBSA definitions for the 25 largest MSAs in the U.S. We chose to use the 25
largest MSAs because San Francisco is the 13th largest in the country, producing an equal
number of MSAs in the sample that are larger and smaller than San Francisco. We define a
“center county” to be a county that encompasses the urban center of the MSA. A list of MSAs,
the number of counties by MSA, and definitions of the center counties can be found in Appendix
I.
In this paper, we focus on the 2002 to 2010 period. In years before 2002, some counties
in the dataset did not have data available for the accommodation and food services and eating
and drinking places industries. In addition, during the 2002-2007 pre-period, outcomes in the
surrounding counties tracked San Francisco fairly closely, whereas considering longer preperiods led to greater divergence for some outcomes. In a second set of specifications, we
consider an even narrower pre-period (2006-2007) to reduce the impact of time-varying
heterogeneity. We do show longer trends for our sample counties from 1990 to 2010 in
Appendix II.
In order to account for trends in the housing industry between different areas, we control
for median housing price and housing sales, contemporaneously and lagged one year using data
purchased from Dataquick. Originally, 33% of county-quarter observations were missing data on
sales and 38% were missing median price. We estimated prices using median loan data, and then
used interpolation and extrapolation from neighboring counties to impute missing data elements.
We also use population data from the U.S. Census.
One possible threat to our identification is due to changes in the minimum wage between
treatment and control areas. The minimum wage in San Francisco increased several times during
the years studied, from $8.82 in 2006 to $9.14 in 2007, $9.36 in 2008, and $9.79 in 2009. The
periphery counties surrounding San Francisco were subject to the California state minimum
wage, which increased from $6.75 in 2006 to $7.50 in 2007 to $8.00 in January 2008. The U.S.
minimum wage also increased during 2007-2009. We control for the relevant county level
minimum wage—based on national, state, and local minimum wage data from the Department of
9

Labor. This helps us identify the San Francisco mandate effects separately from minimum wage
changes. Although they are not reported in this paper, our results are nearly identical without
including the minimum wage controls. 4
Data on restaurant surcharges due to the Health Care Security Ordinance in San
Francisco were collected by the authors in early 2009 and early 2010 (details below). In addition,
the authors fielded the 2008 and 2009 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey (details in
Colla, Dow, and Dube 2011). Some calculations describing San Francisco employers are based
on these data.

4.2

Empirical Strategy

The Health Care Security Ordinance offers a quasi-experimental design with distinct control
groups: counties in the periphery areas outside San Francisco, and other U.S. MSAs of a
significant size. Our identification strategy uses the San Francisco policy change as the
exogenous variation, and considers covered firms that are economically affected as the
“treatment group.” We draw control groups from the counties surrounding San Francisco
(Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, and San Mateo) and counties from the other 24 largest MSAs in
the United States. Our main identification strategy uses a spatial discontinuity approach: we
compare San Francisco County to adjacent “periphery” counties within the broader San
Francisco MSA. However, we go beyond a simple discontinuity framework by allowing for the
possibility that “center” and “periphery” counties within MSAs have experienced differential
trends. For this reason, we incorporate “center” and “periphery” counties within the 24 largest
MSAs in the U.S. as additional controls. This approach is similar to previous work of comparing
contiguous counties to assess minimum wage mandates (Dube, Lester and Reich 2010).

4

Based on previous work that found no effect of minimum wages on employment using contiguous counties (Dube,
Lester and Reich 2010, Dube, Naidu and Reich 2007), we do not expect a large bias due to these changes. The
reduction in labor costs (between San Francisco and periphery) due to a reduced minimum wage gap is of a much
smaller magnitude than the mandated increase in health expenditures. The minimum wage rose by 6.6% in San
Francisco between 2006-2007 and 2008-2009 periods. During the same time, it rose by 12.3% in the periphery—
representing a 5.6% reduction in the relative minimum wage in San Francisco. Let us consider restaurants as a
particularly high-minimum wage sector, and take the largest estimate for the average earnings elasticity of minimum
wage in restaurants from Dube, Lester and Reich (2010), 0.23. This suggests a roughly 1.3% relative reduction in
average earnings among San Francisco restaurants from minimum wage policies. However, the additional mandated
expenditure due to the health mandate represents around 4.3% of the average restaurant wage in San Francisco—
suggesting a much larger impact on labor costs than from the minimum wage changes.

10

We begin with plotting the ratio of the outcomes between San Francisco and periphery
counties, as well as the average ratio between centers and peripheries in other MSAs (weighted
by MSA population) by quarter over the 2002-2010 period. We then consider trends in mean
outcomes, simple difference-in-differences of mean outcomes, and a regression specification
with additional controls. In all cases, we show the evidence for employment and average
wages—for the overall private sector, as well as for specific high impact sectors. We calculate a
difference-in-differences estimate for log employment or log earnings using quarterly data
between 2002 and the first quarter of 2010.
, ,

, ,

, ,

(1)

, ,

Mean outcome Y m ,l ,t is indexed by MSA m, where m=1 is San Francisco MSA; location
l which takes on c (“center”) or p (“periphery); and time t, which takes on pre or post. So 1
compares changes over time in San Francisco versus adjacent counties. Subtracting the average
change in the Bay Area counties from the average change in San Francisco County removes
biases in second period comparisons between the two groups that could be the result from
permanent differences or shared trends.
We also calculate a “triple difference” estimate—which further nets out differential
growth between center and periphery counties in other MSAs.
, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

24



m2

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

(2)

The additional term represents the mean employment trends in center versus peripheries in major
MSAs generally over this period, weighted by population. Here, m represents MSA m’s share of
the total population in the 24 MSAs.
Our regression specifications use a similar identification strategy by spatially differencing
all variables, so that for all variables Z, define:

11

The superscript  denotes spatial differencing between the center and periphery outcomes. As
above, periphery outcomes Zmpt are constructed as population weighted means across periphery
counties in MSA m. The regression is specified as:
(3)
The treatment variable dmt takes on unity when m=1 (i.e., the MSA is San Francisco) and
t  post , m is a MSA fixed effect, and t is a time fixed effect. The spatial differencing, along

with the MSA and time fixed effect sweeps out variation across MSAs, and uses only the local
differences to identify the policy effect; secondarily, it accounts for arbitrary center-periphery
trends over this period by using the other 24 MSAs.
Our vector of controls X represents spatially differenced values of the underlying county
level controls as described above. The set of controls always includes log of annual county-level
population, log of minimum wage measured quarterly at the county-level, and housing variables
that are measured quarterly at the county-level. Housing variables include housing sales, housing
prices, and 1-year lagged sales and prices. We also always include MSA-specific quarter
dummies to account for seasonality. In our most saturated specification, we also include MSAspecific linear trends to account for additional long-term trend differences that may not be
captured by other fixed effects and controls.
We estimate equation 3 separately for each industry, for alternative pre-periods (2002 to
2007, and 2006 to 2007), and with and without MSA-specific linear trends. After differencing
center counties from periphery counties, our model has 825 quarter-MSA observations per
industry sector. In addition, we estimate a time series version of equation 3, where we use only
within-San Francisco Bay Area variation:
(4)
We estimate equation (3) using OLS and report standard errors clustered by MSA. For equation
(4) we report Newey-West standard errors.
In addition to reporting traditional cluster-robust standard errors, we also report
confidence intervals using Conley and Taber (2011), henceforth CT. This methodology was
12

developed for circumstances where only a small number of policy changes are observed in the
data and standard large-sample approximations used for inference may not be appropriate. This
approach to inference uses asymptotic approximations that let the number of control units grow
large, while the number of treated units remains small. As CT show, when the number of treated
units is small (in our case it is one), the OLS estimate is inconsistent even with an unboundedly
large number of untreated units. Moreover, inference using the cluster-robust standard errors can
be misleading even if the number of clusters is large. The CT method is related to other recent
papers that use a randomization or permutation type inference approach (e.g., Buchmueller,
Dinardo and Valetta 2009; Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller 2007).
For a given variable Zmt, define Z˜ mt after partialing out time and MSA fixed effects:

Here M is the total number of MSAs, and T is the number of quarters in our sample. Then, we
can define the CT estimator for the distribution of  from equation (3) as follows:
M

=

 1

′

(5)

m2

The key idea behind the CT estimator is that information from other MSAs may be used
to consistently estimate the distribution of the treatment effect. In our case, since we want to use
local comparisons, we first spatially difference all variables, and then use the CT estimator on
these data. We partial out time and MSA fixed effects as indicated by the tilde above the variable
name. We then regress the residuals from this on a center county interaction with the post-period
(2008-2010) for each MSA as indicated in equation (5). Using these 24 point estimates of the
treatment effects, we create a 92% confidence interval for the treatment coefficient in San
Francisco (given the total of 25 MSAs, this is the highest confidence level we can report).
Intuitively, the spatial-differenced version of the CT estimator allows us to answer the following
question: just by chance alone, what are the odds that San Francisco would have seen a certain
13

change in outcome as compared to its neighbors? We can answer this question by comparing the
other 24 MSAs center and periphery counties, and using this information to form confidence
bounds around the San Francisco effect. For all specifications with 25 MSAs, we report the CT
bounds along with the OLS estimate and clustered standard errors.

5.

Findings

5.1

Descriptive Trends

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics over the study period for our outcome and control
variables in San Francisco, Bay Area periphery counties, control MSA center counties, and
control MSA periphery counties. San Francisco County is smaller than comparison counties,
with a higher minimum wage, higher housing prices, and higher wages across study industries. A
larger portion of private industry is composed of accommodation and food services, including
restaurants, than comparison counties, while retail makes up a smaller portion of private
employment.
Figure 1 provides the first set of evidence on the impact of the Health Care Security
Ordinance on employment and earnings trends in San Francisco, displaying weighted averages
of Bay Area periphery counties (our primary control group), the 24 other largest MSA center
counties, and periphery counties of the other 24 MSAs (our additional control groups). We
calculate the simple ratio of outcomes in the center county versus the periphery counties for San
Francisco and the other MSAs in the 2002 to 2010 period and normalize to Q4 2007, the last
period before treatment. For the most part, Figure 1 displays similar trends in San Francisco and
periphery Bay Area counties over the pre-period, especially so in highly impacted sectors.
Moreover, there does not seem to be much of a trend on average between center and periphery
counties in the other 24 MSAs. These two results provide additional support for our research
design. When we consider changes after the implementation of the policy (i.e., after 2007), we
find no visual indication of employment or earnings decline after 2007. (Appendix II shows
these trends during the entire data period available from 1990 to 2010.)
Table 3 builds on the graphical evidence in Figure 1 by calculating the unconditional
double and triple difference estimates. We report the employment and earnings trends in San
14

Francisco, periphery Bay Area counties, center counties in the other 24 MSAs, and periphery
counties in other MSAs using seasonally adjusted data. The first two rows report the average
logged earnings and employment in each of these four groups in the Pre and Post periods. The
third row reports the simple difference between the Pre and Post amounts; since those are logs,
we can interpret the resulting difference in percentage terms. The fourth row reports the
“difference-in-difference” between center and periphery—both for the San Francisco Bay Area
as well as for the other 24 MSAs; finally, the fifth row calculates the “triple difference” by
subtracting the latter from the former. For example, overall private sector employment in San
Francisco was 3.4% higher between January of 2008 and March of 2010 (Post) compared with
2002 to 2007 (Pre), while employment in the SF neighboring counties (Alameda, Contra Costa,
Marin, San Mateo) shrank by 3.0% compared to the pre-period (Table 3).
In other MSA counties, employment patterns were slightly negative over this time period.
Neither the double difference (6.5%) nor the triple difference (7.2%) suggests employment loss.
Indeed, for all four industry groupings, the simple double and triple difference estimates are
either small (at most a 0.5% reduction) or positive, pointing away from employment or wage
loss. Although not shown in the table, all these estimates are all indistinguishable from zero at
the 90% level.

5.2

Regression Results

Table 4a reports the estimated treatment effect (and CT confidence intervals where relevant) for
log employment in the four industry groups; Table 4b reports analogous results for log of
average earnings. The first four columns are for the San Francisco MSA only, as specified in
equation (4). The last four columns are for the 25 MSA sample, with the regressions specified by
equation (3) with the CT bounds specified in equation (5). The specifications also vary by preperiod (beginning in 2002 or 2006) and whether or not an MSA-specific linear time trend is
included. Although we report the Newey-West (columns 1-4) and cluster-robust (columns 5-8)
standard errors for comparison, we put more weight on the CT bounds for statistical inference.
Moreover, we refer to column 8 as our preferred specification, due to its having the richest set of
controls and most immediate pre-period. In the presence of time-varying heterogeneity in county
employment, inclusion of a longer pre-period may be problematic. Because of this we are
concerned that the estimates based on data going back to 2002 may be more sensitive to mis15

specifications, thus we prefer the specifications comparing back only to 2006. This preference is
further supported by the falsification results in Table 5 discussed below, which reveal several
spurious effects in the models comparing to 2002, whereas the models with trends comparing
only to 2006 appropriately pass those falsification tests. Moreover, as noted below, specifications
with linear trends tend to be less noisy than those without.
As shown in Table 4a, after controlling for (spatially differenced) log of population, log
of minimum wage, housing controls, time, MSA, and seasonal fixed effects, we did not find
evidence of a negative employment effect in the four industry groups. Indeed, many of the
significant employment effects were positive in sign, though they varied in magnitude and
precision. For the San Francisco MSA only sample, the estimates ranged between -0.035 and
0.063. For the all MSA sample, the point estimates for employment ranged from -0.024 to 0.065.
The CT lower bound across all specifications was -0.040. For our preferred specification 8, all
the point estimates—including high impact sectors—were close to zero, and the negative lower
bounds were always less than 1%.
We note that in general, when a linear trend is not included, the CT confidence intervals
are much wider than those based on conventional standard errors. The CT intervals were much
smaller (and comparable to conventional ones) when we include an MSA specific linear trend,
which is unsurprising given the variation in center-periphery trends across various MSAs.
When we turn to average earnings (Table 4b), the range of coefficients in the San
Francisco MSA only sample ranged somewhat widely between -0.074 and 0.082. However, once
we account for center-periphery trends using other MSAs, the range narrows to -0.027 to 0.050.
The CT lower bounds are no smaller than -0.041, while for our preferred specification 8,
earnings reductions are bounded below at -0.008 across sectors.
To show the data more clearly, Figure 2 displays the San Francisco coefficients from
specification 8 for the post-mandate period compared to the parallel coefficients estimated for

ˆ (a). All
each of the other 25 MSAs that are obtained as part of the Conley-Taber estimate of 
coefficients are ranked in an ascending order for each bar graph. Loosely speaking, the
coefficient for a given MSA shows the change in center-periphery differential after 2007 in that
MSA conditional on other controls. For the other 24 MSAs, the coefficient can be thought of as
16

the measured effects of “placebo” laws in those MSAs that happened during the same time as in
San Francisco. If San Francisco employment or earnings were adversely affected by the 2008
Ordinance then San Francisco should lie on the left part of the bar graph, since none of the other
MSAs actually enacted a policy. Instead, they are always above the median in terms of
employment. For earnings, they are either the in lower-middle or upper part of the distribution.
Therefore, Figure 2 provides graphical evidence of a lack of employment and earnings effects
from the San Francisco Ordinance.
Overall, our results provide evidence that over the first 27 months of the enactment of the
policy, there has not been any discernable reduction in employment or earnings in San Francisco.
The majority of our regression estimates are positive in sign for both outcomes, as are the
majority of the simple (unconditional) double or triple-difference estimates. These quantitative
results are reinforced by the plots of employment and earnings differences between San
Francisco and neighbors. Using conventional standard errors and other MSAs as controls we
observe no significant negative effects in highly impacted sectors. For some of our specifications
the Conley-Taber confidence intervals are much wider than those based on cluster-robust
standard errors. For our preferred specification, Conley-Taber confidence intervals rule out
losses of employment or earnings reductions of greater than 1% for both overall private sector, as
well as specific high-impact sectors that we consider. Across all the specifications we consider—
including short versus long pre-period, and with and without MSA specific linear trends—the CT
bounds rule out earnings or employment reductions greater than 4.1%.

5.3

Robustness Tests

We conducted a falsification exercise designed to provide additional information about the
validity of our research design generally as well as for particular specifications. In particular, we
change the definition of “treatment” from 2008-2010 to only the year 2007—the last year prior to
the actual intervention; for all other years the treatment is coded as zero. Also, for all non-San
Francisco MSAs, the treatment continues to be coded as zero.
What should we expect from this exercise? If the regression is specified correctly, and the
null hypothesis is maintained, then the coefficient should be zero. However, if the true effect is
negative but there is a positive and spurious “pre-trend,” then the coefficient should be positive.
Conversely, if the true effect is negative, but there is an unusually low value in 2007, then the
17

measured effect should be negative. There are other possibilities, but these three are the most
relevant ones given our measured effects close to zero in Tables 4a and 4b. We perform this
exercise for all the four all-MSA specifications and for the same industries.
Table 5 shows several patterns. First, we note that none of the employment coefficients
are statistically significant based on the CT confidence bounds. This is very reassuring for our
research design. Moreover, the point estimates for our preferred specification (the fourth column
here, column 8 in Table 4) are very close to zero, which again provides additional validation for
our choice.
Second, for earnings, 6 of the 16 specifications are significant using the CT bounds at the
92% level. All six of these coefficients are for all private and retail, suggesting specification
errors may be a concern. Reassuringly, however, for the preferred specification 8, none of the
coefficients are statistically significant—including retail and all private—and the point estimates
are generally small in magnitude.
In addition, we performed a number of further tests (not shown in tables) to check the
robustness of our results to various changes in specification. After viewing the plots of
employment and earnings in Figure 1 and Appendix II, we looked into the dip in the ratio of San
Francisco County earnings to surrounding Bay Area counties in quarter 1 of 2009. After
examining the data more carefully and speaking with the Bureau of Labor Statistics, we
identified this dip to be the result of a large spike in weekly earnings in San Mateo County in the
manufacturing sector. We attribute this spike to the buyout of Genentech Inc. by the Roche
Group (Genentech 2009). We changed our outlier threshold to be 2.5 standard deviations from
the mean, imputing this observation and found no difference in our results (the coefficient on all
private earnings in specification 8 changes from -0.003 to 0.008, both insignificant). We also
dropped this observation from analysis and saw no change in results, indicating that our results
are not particularly sensitive to extreme circumstances in a single county or time period.
Additionally, we estimated regressions including Santa Clara County (another county
neighboring San Francisco, but which is classified as San Jose CBSA, the 29th largest CBSA in
the U.S.) as a control, and the results were for the most part similar in magnitude and direction

18

(results not shown). The negative earnings effects for all private and retail industries in some
specifications changed to insignificant or positive.
A possible threat to the validity of our research design is the beginning of the 2008-2009
recession during the implementation of the Health Care Security Ordinance. If San Francisco
tended to weather a recession better than control counties, and this relationship differed from
center-periphery recession effects in other MSAs, it would cause us to estimate a spuriously
small disemployment effect of the Ordinance. However, an examination of the figures in
Appendix II shows that in the 1990-1991 and 2001 recessions, San Francisco County had big
relative drop in employment compared to its neighbors, casting doubt on this alternative
explanation.

5.4

Evidence from Product Markets

When firms competing locally are all subject to the same mandate, they can also pass on some of
the costs to consumers via increased output product prices, as discussed in Section 2. This is
particularly the case for restaurants, who primarily serve a local market, and in this case all
restaurants in San Francisco with 20 or more employees received the same input price shock so
we might expect to see some rise in output prices. (Approximately a quarter of eating and
drinking establishments in San Francisco have 20 or more employees and 68% of workers in San
Francisco restaurants work in restaurants with 20 or more employees, based on our calculations
from Dun and Bradstreet and American Community Survey data). Indeed, there is widespread
anecdotal evidence that some San Francisco establishments have instituted a specific surcharge
to help defray the added costs of the mandate.
To assess the extent of restaurant price surcharges we interviewed a sample of restaurants
by telephone in 2009 and 2010 to quantify the prevalence and magnitude of health-specific
surcharges. Our sample of 340 restaurants was drawn randomly from a Dun and Bradstreet
database provided by Survey Sampling Incorporated in 2007, consisting of establishments in San
Francisco with 20 or more employees, and classified as “Eating and Drinking Places.” Of the
340 restaurants which we attempted to contact, we successfully interviewed 217 (64%) at least

19

once.5 We found that 25% of restaurants in our completed 2009 sample (standard error of 3.7%)
and 27% of restaurants in our completed 2010 sample (standard error of 4.2%) had instituted a
surcharge on their bills specifically attributed to health benefit costs (these results are not
displayed in the tables). Although the extent and form of the surcharge varied, most firms
reported a charge of 4% on the bill, which was the mean, median and the mode for firms using
proportional charges in 2009 (the majority). Larger firms were more likely to institute a
surcharge. This could reflect imperfect substitutability between products by firm size; smaller
firms subject to the mandate are less likely to have products that are differentiated from exempt
restaurants (with fewer than 20 employees). As a result, smaller restaurants that are subject to the
mandate are less likely to be able to pass the cost onto consumers.
We investigated the surcharges because they are the most easily measured form of passthrough to consumers. Firms that did not impose a line item surcharge may have still adjusted
their menu prices upwards; we have not investigated this type of response. We have, however,
been able to use data from the 2008 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey to calculate that
68% of the restaurants who have instituted these surcharges already offered health benefits in
2007, prior to the implementation of the Health Care Security Ordinance. Thus it could be that
some firms who wanted to increase prices for other reasons did so as a surcharge under the guise
of the health mandate, believing that demand elasticity responses to health-linked surcharges
might be smaller than unexplained menu price increases. However, Colla, Dow, and Dube
(2011) have calculated that even among firms offering health insurance at baseline, most were
required to expand health spending to meet the mandated spending levels, thus it is not surprising
that many restaurants opted to raise product prices.

5.5

Who Bears the Cost of the Mandate?

5

We interviewed 142 restaurants in 2009 and 162 in 2010, including 89 interviewed twice in successive years.
Firms who did not respond in either year did not differ significantly from responders by either number of employees
or restaurant type (full service, food stand, fast food, lunchroom/cafeteria, caterer, bar/club). Among firms who were
interviewed in 2009 that we attempted to re-contact in 2010, non-responders in 2010 (25% of whom reported
surcharges in 2009) did not differ from those interviewed again in 2010 (26% of whom had reported surcharges in
2009). Thus although the overall response rate is somewhat low, there is no evidence that non-response is
systematic. Among restaurants interviewed in both years, 85% had concordant surcharge reports across the two
surveys, suggesting high stability.

20

In this section we assess the magnitude of estimated earnings and consumer price increases
relative to the estimated spending increase (“gap”) necessary for firms to come into compliance.
Regarding earnings, we first note that the QCEW data consist of employment and earnings
across all firms, including small firms not subject to the mandate, thus reported effects in Table
4b are averages across all firm sizes. For example, according to County Business Patterns data
(Table 1), 68% of restaurant workers are in firms with more than 20 employees. Given these
parameters and the magnitude of changes necessary in these high impact sectors described above
(on average restaurants need to increase health spending by $0.62 per worker hour,
accommodation and food services by $0.57 and retail by $0.41 per worker hour), we can rule out
complete pass-through of these benefit increases to earnings in these high impact sectors. For
example, our preferred estimate (Table 4b column 8) suggests a 0.4% earnings drop among
restaurant workers. This would account for just $0.05 per hour (using mean restaurant wage of
$13.34 in Table 1), and even when attributing the entire drop to the 68% of restaurant workers in
firms of size 20 and above, this would pay for just $0.08 of the $0.62 gap, or 12% pass-through.
(Based on the lower bound of the confidence interval of the earnings effect in this preferred
specification, we can statistically rule out more than a 26% earnings pass-through in restaurants.)
The comparable figures for the retail industry and accommodation and food services industry are
both positive, indicating no pass-through. When considering the private sector overall, the gap is
lower ($0.29 per hour) and the corresponding pass-through is $0.11 per hour (38% of the gap) at
our preferred point estimate (though at the lower bound of our 92% confidence interval we
cannot rule out 100% pass-through).
The lower earnings pass-through in the restaurant industry likely reflects both the greater
difficulty in lowering wages in an industry with a large proportion of minimum wage workers,
but also the greater ability of firms in this sector to pass on costs to consumers. As discussed in
the previous section, the evidence suggests at least some of the cost of the mandate is absorbed
as higher costs to consumers. The precise extent of pass-through to consumers depends on the
joint distribution of surcharges and restaurant revenue per worker, which we do not fully know,
but we can approximate the order of magnitude. According to the Economic Census in 2007, in
San Francisco, the total sales for restaurants were $2.85 billion, while there were 46,873
workers, indicating that the annual sales/worker was around $60,780. If we divide this by 1,924
hours per year and multiply by 4%, we calculate surcharge revenue of approximately $1.26 per
21

hour.6 This is almost exactly the 2008 mandated spending amount of $1.17 per hour for firms
with 20-99 employees (but lower than the $1.76 mandate for firms with 100 or more employees),
indicating that the average restaurant could fully fund health benefits with this surcharge. To
calculate overall pass-through, we must take into account that only 25% of restaurants reported
surcharges, yielding an estimate that surcharges could account for $0.32 of the $0.62 spending
gap reported in Table 1 for the restaurant sector as a whole. This would represent a pass-through
to prices of 51% of the gap. This is likely an underestimate, however, since surcharges are more
common in full service restaurants (and it ignores menu prices increases not labeled as
surcharges), suggesting substantial pass-through of costs to consumers at least in this one local
service industry.
Each employer’s behavior in passing through costs to employees and consumers will vary
depending on the extent of that firm’s gap, as well as elasticities of labor supply by their workers
and demand elasticities for their products and services. Just as consumer pass-through is reported
by only 25% of firms, it may be that labor market effects are concentrated in a small subset of
firms as well. To further quantify the proportion of employers making earnings and employment
adjustments, Table 6 presents self-reported behavioral responses by San Francisco for-profit
firms in the 2009 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey who had 20 or more employees
and thus were subject to the mandate. Firms reporting wage pass-through (reduced pay raises or
bonuses) account for a relatively small proportion of workers subject to the mandate (6%), which
is consistent with the QCEW findings of relatively small pass-through. Interestingly though,
firms report paying for the expanded health spending in part by reducing spending for other nonmandated benefits (including dependent health care) for 14% of workers, which would not be
captured in the QCEW earnings data.
Table 6 also indicates that firms who reported that complying with the spending mandate
had some negative employment implications (reduced hours and/or number of employees)
employed 11% of workers. Such data must be interpreted cautiously, as it would be quite
difficult for employers to distinguish the effects of the spending mandate separately from other
labor market forces, including the deepening recession occurring simultaneously. It is also
possible that respondents’ own political views could have led to systematic mis-reporting.
6

In 2007, according to the ACS, the average usual weekly hours for restaurant workers in San Francisco was 37.

22

Furthermore, the survey did not capture the magnitude of employment effects within each firm,
nor did it capture general equilibrium effects that could have occurred if some firms expanded
employment to compensate for shrinking by other firms. Nevertheless, the proportion of firms
subject to the mandate who reported negative employment effects represented a relatively small
number of workers, and provides further evidence consistent with our QCEW estimates that any
negative employment effects were minor overall.

6.

Discussion and Conclusion

Although we should be cautious about inference from a single policy change, the evidence thus
far suggests that San Francisco employers did not decrease employment or wages appreciably in
response to the health benefit mandate in the first few years of implementation. Adding
information from a larger number of control cases in the QCEW analysis allows for more robust
inference, and indeed rules out all but small negative effects. Under our preferred specification,
we can rule out reductions in earnings and employment of more than 1% across all subsectors we
consider. When we consider a longer pre-period, we find negative employment effects up to 2.4% in the accommodation and food services industry (though not in all private employment),
and a 3% drop in all private earnings.
At our preferred point estimates, tour findings indicate a $0.11 per hour earnings decrease
in the private sector overall among firms subject to the mandate, which is about 38% of the
required health spending increase. In the restaurant sector the pass-through lowered earnings by
an estimated $0.08, which represents just 12% pass-through, but we estimate another 51% of
restaurant costs were passed through to consumers in the form of health-specific menu
surcharges. Additional pass-through to total compensation occurred in the form of reductions in
other non-mandated benefits, and further consumer pass-through may also have occurred in the
form of non-specific price increases, but we are not able to quantify their magnitudes.
While this evidence conflicts with some earlier research indicating that the full incidence
of benefit mandates was shifted to wages (Gruber 1994), these findings are consistent with a
recent study of Hawaii’s pay-or-play mandate, which also did not find negative effects on overall
employment (Buchmueller et al. 2009). However, Hawaiian employers may have substituted
toward part-time workers (under 20 hours per week) who were not covered by the insurance
23

mandate, which is an unlikely behavioral response in San Francisco where workers with 8 or
more hours per week are covered by the mandate. Given that average weekly earnings in San
Francisco were estimated to be largely unaffected by the mandate, it appears that firms were not
reducing the number of hours worked per employee as a response to the mandate. The lack of
employment effects is also consistent with the literature suggesting that employer cost increases
due to related minimum wage increases often do not have detectable negative employment
effects. In fact, San Francisco’s institution of a city-wide minimum wage in 2005 similarly had
no appreciable impact on employment growth in affected sectors (Dube, Naidu and Reich 2007).
Given the apparently incomplete pass-through of costs to employee wages, further
research on output product price effects would be particularly helpful. It also remains to be seen
whether the restaurant surcharges we observed will be a lasting feature in San Francisco, or
whether the surcharge will simply be folded into menu prices. The latter is more likely if the
surcharge reflects costs of adjusting nominal prices sharply due to rigidities. At the same time, if
restaurants are utilizing surcharges because they are less salient than menu price increases, then
this might be an enduring feature of restaurant pricing in the city. For example, Chetty, Looney
and Kroft (2009) show that shoppers in the supermarket largely ignore sales taxes in making
purchasing decisions. Since a surcharge may appear as a form of tax (as opposed to a higher
menu price), it could have reduced the impact on consumer behavior. However, if inattention
declines over time as consumers learn, the efficacy of the strategy will diminish. Finally, at least
some restaurants have publicized the surcharge as allowing them to provide health care to their
employees. If consumers are willing to pay somewhat more for “fairness” reasons (like
purchasing “fair-trade” coffee, or “no sweat” apparel), this could also explain why some
restaurants have adopted a surcharge. Either way, we interpret the evidence to suggest that some
firms partly reacted to the health mandate by passing on costs to consumers. Future research
could analyze menu prices using our longitudinal spatial discontinuity approach.
While such price increases may be possible in service industries that only compete
locally such as restaurants, other San Francisco firms competing with firms in markets elsewhere
may not have latitude for such price increases. Indeed, the health-specific surcharges in San
Francisco appear to be largely contained to the restaurant industry, as only 2% of other firms
report them in the 2009 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey. In the long run, with the
24

exception of minimum wage workers, neoclassical economic theory predicts that the costs of
expanded benefits will be eventually passed on to workers in the form of smaller wage increases.
This will be of interest to continue to evaluate over a longer time horizon, to the extent possible.
Healthy San Francisco has succeeded in providing health services to nearly all previously
uninsured residents in the first four years of implementation (San Francisco Department of
Public Health 2010),7 in part by collecting fees (totaling $34 million in fiscal year 2009-10) from
employers using the “pay” option under the employer mandate (Healthy San Francisco Program
Statistics 2011). Little is known still about the extent to which these enrollees were drawn from
the uninsured versus crowded out of private plans (enrollees must have been uninsured for 90
days to become eligible), but it is likely that the number of uninsured in San Francisco without
access to affordable health care has been substantially reduced in the first four years of Healthy
San Francisco implementation. Colla, Dow, and Dube (2011) found no evidence of crowd-out
from firms dropping insurance offering in the first year following implementation, based on data
from the 2008 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey.
This evidence indicates that together with private benefit expansions, San Francisco is
closer to achieving universal access to health care than it was prior to 2008. While neoclassical
theory indicates that in the long run workers pay for these additional benefits either through real
wage reductions or lay-offs for low-wage workers, these effects have been muted in San
Francisco in the first two years into implementation of the employer health spending mandate.
San Francisco has many unique characteristics that make conclusions difficult to generalize (for
example geographic location and demographic makeup of population), but thus far the Health
Care Security Ordinance has expanded coverage with little negative impact on the labor market.

References
Anderson, D. (2006). “Economics by Example.” MacMillan p. 29.
Brown, C. (1999). “Minimum Wages, Employment, and the Distribution of Income.” Handbook
of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier Science.

7

Estimates prior to the introduction of Healthy San Francisco indicated that about 60,000 San Francisco residents
were uninsured in 2007 and Healthy San Francisco has enrolled 54,312 residents to date (Healthy San Francisco
Program Statistics 2011, San Francisco Department of Public Health 2010).

25

Brown, D. (1990). “The Restaurant and Fast Food Race: Who's Winning?” Southern Economic
Journal, 56(4):984-995.
Buchmueller, T.C., DiNardo, J., and R.G. Valletta (2009). “The Effect of an Employer Health
Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for Labor: Evidence
from Hawaii.” FRBSF Working Paper.
California Department of Finance, E-4 Population Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State.
http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/reports/estimates/e-4/19912000/documents/E-4_90-00_Rpt.XLS and
http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/reports/estimates/e-4/2001-09/. Accessed
January 11, 2010.
Card, D. and A.B. Krueger (1994). “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” The American Economic Review,
84(4):772-93.
Card, D. and A.B. Krueger (2000). “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply.” The American Economic
Review, 90(5):1397-1420.
Chetty, R., Looney, A., and K. Kroft (2009). "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence."
American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145–77.
City and County of San Francisco (2011). “Analysis of the Health Care Security Ordinance:
2010 Annual Reporting Forms.” Office of Labor Standards Enforcement. June 6, 2011.
Colla, C.H., Dow, W.H., and A. Dube (2011). “How do employers react to a pay-or-play
mandate? Early Evidence from San Francisco.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy,
14(2), article 4.
Conley T.G. and C.R. Taber (2011). “Inference with “Difference in Differences” with a Small
Number of Policy Changes.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1): 113-125.
County Business Patterns (U.S. Census). http://censtats.census.gov/cgi-bin/cbpnaic/cbpsect.pl.
Accessed August 21, 2009.
Cutler, D.M. and B.C. Madrian (1998). "Labor Market Responses to Rising Health Insurance
Costs: Evidence on Hours Worked," RAND Journal of Economics, The RAND
Corporation, 29(3): 509-530.
Donald, S.G. and K. Lang (2007). “Inference with Difference-in-Differences and Other Panel
Data.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 221-233.

26

Dube, A., Lester, T.W., and M. Reich (2010). “Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders:
Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 945–
964.
Dube, A., Naidu, S., and M. Reich (2007). “The Economic Effects of a Citywide Minimum
Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60(4): 522-543.
Frank, R.H. and B. Bernanke (2003). “Principles of Microeconomics.” McGraw-Hill/Irwin, page
95.
Genentech Inc. “Roche Completes Acquisition of Genentech.” Thursday, Mar 26, 2009.
http://www.gene.com/gene/news/press-releases/display.do?method=detail&id=12007.
Gruber, J. (1994), “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits.” American Economic
Review, 84:622-41.
Gruber, J. and A.B. Krueger (1991). “The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided Health
Insurance: Lessons from Workers’ Compensation Insurance.” In Tax Policy and the
Economy, ed. D. Bradford, 111-44. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Healthy San Francisco. http://www.healthysanfrancisco.org/visitors/Who_Qualifies.aspx.
Accessed August 21, 2009.
Healthy San Francisco. Annual Report to the San Francisco Health Commission. Fiscal year
2009-2010. http://www.healthysanfrancisco.org/files/PDF/200910_HSF_Annual_Report.pdf
Healthy San Francisco Program Statistics.
http://www.healthysanfrancisco.org/files/Charts/index.html?DataDate=08082009&PCou
nt=45131. Accessed June 24, 2011.
Kaestner, R. (1996). “The Effect of Government-Mandated Benefits on Youth Employment,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 50(1): 122-142.
Kahn, S. (1997). “Evidence of Nominal Wage Stickiness from Microdata.” The American
Economic Review, 87(5): 993-1008.
Mandelbaum, R. (September 18, 2009). “Is the Employer Mandate a Job Killer? Not in San
Francisco.” New York Times. http://boss.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/09/18/is-theemployer-mandate-a-job-killer-not-in-san-francisco/.
Monheit, A.C., Hagan, M.M., Berk, M.L., and P.J. Farley (1985). “The Employed Uninsured and
the Role of Public Policy.” Inquiry, 22(4): 348-64.
Pear, R. “Political Focus on Jobs in Health Fight.” New York Times, January 16, 2011: A19.
27

Reich, M. and A. Laitinen (2003). “Raising Low Pay in a High Income City: The Economics of a
San Francisco Minimum Wage.” Working Paper No. 99, Institute of Industrial Relations,
University of California, Berkeley.
Ruggles, S., Sobek, M., Alexander, T., Fitch, C.A., Goeken, R., Hall, P.K., King, M., and C.
Ronnander (2008). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 4.0. Minneapolis,
MN: Minnesota Population Center.
San Francisco Department of Public Health (July 2009). “Status Report on the Implementation of
the San Francisco Health Care Security Ordinance.” Accessed August 21, 2009.
http://www.healthysanfrancisco.org/files/PDF/July_2009_BoS_Report.pdf
San Francisco Department of Public Health (June 2010). “Status Report on the Implementation
of the San Francisco Health Care Security Ordinance.” Accessed February 22, 2011.
http://healthysanfrancisco.org/files/PDF/June_2010_BoS_Report.pdf.
San Francisco Office of Labor Standards Enforcement, Health Care Security Ordinance.
http://www.sfgov.org/site/olse_index.asp?id=45168. Accessed August 21, 2009.
Summers, L.H. (1989). “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits.” The American
Economic Review, 79(2): 177-183.
Thurston, N.K. (1997). “Labor Market Effects of Hawaii’s Mandatory Employer-Provided
Health Insurance.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51(1): 117-135.
Viscusi, W.K., and M.J. Moore (1987). “Workers’ Compensation: Wage Effects, Benefit
Inadequacies, and the Value of Health Losses.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
69(2): 249-61.
Yelowitz, A. (2004). “The Economic Impact of Proposition 72 on California Employers.”
Employment Policies Institute, September 2004.

28

FIGURE 1
RATIO OF CENTER COUNTY EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TO PERIPHERY COUNTIES
SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY, SAN FRANCISCO PERIPHERY COUNTIES, MSA CENTER COUNTIES,
MSA PERIPHERY COUNTIES: 2002-2010

Notes. Figures are normalized to Q4 2007, the last period before treatment. Quarterly earnings and employment data from the
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

FIGURE 2
COEFFICIENTS ON CENTER COUNTY TREATMENT PERIOD VARIABLES FOR ALL 25 MSAS:
LOG OF EMPLOYMENT AND EARNINGS REGRESSIONS

Notes. Bars indicate coefficients on the treatment period (2008-2010) in center counties in the 25 largest U.S. MSAs, compared
to periphery counties using the Conley-Taber estimator. All outcomes and controls are spatially differenced (center minus
periphery). The pre-period is 2006 to 2007. These regressions adjust for county population, county minimum wage, housing
controls, time fixed effects, a linear time trend and seasonal controls.

30

TABLE 1
SAN FRANCISCO HOURLY WAGE AND GAP IN SPENDING BY INDUSTRY

Median Hourly Wage
Mean Hourly Wage
Proportion Earning ≤ $10/Hour
Gap in Baseline Health Benefit
Spending and Coverage
Gap/Median Wage
Gap/Mean Wage
Estimated Proportion of Employees in
Firms with ≥ 20 Employees

All Private
Industry
$21.63
$32.42
17.59%
$0.29

Retail
$16.83
$23.38
26.02%
$0.41

1.36%
0.91%
75.71%

2.45%
1.76%
64.98%

Accommodation
and Food
Services
Restaurants
$12.02
$11.08
$14.89
$13.34
39.06%
45.11%
$0.57
$0.62
4.78%
3.86%
75.48%

5.62%
4.66%
68.30%

Notes. Wage data are from the 2007 American Community Survey for all firm sizes (Ruggles et al. 2008). Gap data are
from the 2008 Bay Area Employer Health Benefit Survey. Preliminary gap calculations are described in Colla, Dow, Dube
2011. These calculations have been augmented as additional information became available. The proportion of employees
in firms with ≥ 20 employees is estimated from the 2008 County Business Patterns.

31

TABLE 2
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Mean Population
Mean Minimum Wage
Mean Housing Price
Mean Housing Sales
All Private
Total Employment
Mean Weekly Earnings
Retail
% Of Private Employment Q1 2010
Total Employment
Mean Weekly Earnings
Accommodation & Food Services
% Of Private Employment Q1 2010
Total Employment
Mean Weekly Earnings
Restaurants
% Of Private Employment Q1 2010
Total Employment
Mean Weekly Earnings

2002 to Q1 2010
SF Center
SF Periphery
790,262
3,409,626
$8.51
$7.18
$671,151
$562,511
1,840
3,608

MSA Centers
1,997,529
$6.33
$234,796
8,448

MSA Periphery
2,944,249
$6.24
$211,436
2,820

450,705
$1,380

1,251,662
$1,143

902,167
$1,011

1,001,598
$834

9%
43,179
$761

13%
160,534
$662

11%
99,506
$563

14%
142,752
$524

14%
62,045
$498

9%
106,900
$367

10%
81,465
$365

9%
88,369
$297

10%
43,805
$413

8%
93,469
$345

8%
68,500
$331

8%
78,583
$281

Notes. MSAs include the largest 25 MSAs in the United States with the exception of San Francisco. MSA center is defined as
the county that encompasses the urban center of the MSA (see Appendix I). Quarterly earnings and employment data from
the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics. State and federal minimum wage data from the
Department of Labor. Annual county-level population data are from the U.S. Census. Housing data are from Dataquick.

32

TABLE 3
EMPLOYMENT TRENDS IN THE BAY AREA AND LARGE MSAS
Log of Employment
SF

All Private
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers Periphery

Post
Pre

13.04
13.01

12.77
12.80

14.00
14.02

Diff
Diff-in-Diff
Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff

3.4%

-3.0%
6.5%

-2.2%

12.22
12.23

-1.5%
-0.8%
7.2%
Accommodation & Food Services
SF
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers
Periphery

SF

Retail
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers Periphery

10.65
10.68

10.70
10.76

11.81
11.84

10.27
10.29

-2.6%

-6.2%
3.7%

-3.4%

-2.3%
-1.1%
4.7%

SF

Restaurants
SF
MSA
Periphery Centers

MSA
Periphery

Post
Pre

11.09
11.02

10.37
10.31

11.64
11.60

9.84
9.79

10.75
10.66

10.24
10.18

11.48
11.44

9.75
9.69

Diff
Diff-in-Diff
Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff

7.2%

5.5%
1.7%

4.0%

5.3%
-1.2%
2.9%

9.1%

6.6%
2.5%

4.8%

5.9%
-1.0%
3.6%

Log of Earnings
SF

All Private
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers Periphery

Post
Pre

7.24
7.22

7.03
7.02

6.88
6.87

Diff
Diff-in-Diff
Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff

2.2%

1.1%
1.0%

1.1%

6.74
6.74

-0.4%
1.5%
-0.5%
Accommodation & Food Services
SF
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers
Periphery

SF

Retail
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers Periphery

6.61
6.64

6.42
6.51

6.29
6.35

6.23
6.30

-3.2%

-8.8%
5.6%

-6.5%

-6.8%
0.2%
5.4%

SF

Restaurants
SF
MSA
MSA
Periphery Centers Periphery

Post
Pre

6.23
6.21

5.88
5.89

5.88
5.88

5.73
5.74

6.03
6.02

5.83
5.84

5.79
5.79

5.68
5.69

Diff
Diff-in-Diff
Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff

1.9%

-1.1%
3.0%

-0.5%

-1.2%
0.7%
2.2%

1.2%

-0.3%
1.5%

-0.4%

-0.5%
0.1%
1.4%

Notes. Post is January 2008 to March 2010. Pre is January 2002 to December 2007. Diff refers to the difference (Post – Pre) in
each of the four geographic groups. Diff-in-Diff is Diff of center minus Diff of periphery, in SF and other MSAs. Diff-in-Diff-inDiff is Diff-in-Diff of SF minus Diff-in-Diff of Other MSAs. Multi-county estimates are weighted by county population.
Earnings refer to average weekly earnings. All series are seasonally adjusted. Original quarterly data is from the Quarterly
Census of Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

33

TABLE 4A
THE EFFECT OF SAN FRANCISCO HEALTH CARE SECURITY ORDINANCE ON EMPLOYMENT
(1)
All Private
Employment Effect
0.063
Conventional SE
(0.003)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Retail
Employment Effect
0.033
Conventional SE
(0.009)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
.
92% CT Upper Bound
Accommodation & Food Services
Employment Effect
0.021
Conventional SE
(0.003)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Restaurants
Employment Effect
0.022
Conventional SE
(0.002)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Controls:
San Francisco MSA Only
Y
Pre-period 2002-2007
Y
Pre-period 2006-2007
Linear Time Trend

(2)

(3)
(4)
Log of Employment

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.051
0.060
0.025
0.065
0.048
0.019
0.003
(0.006) (0.014) (0.002) (0.009) (0.013) (0.016) (0.007)
.
.
.
0.029
0.019
0.007 -0.001
.
.
.
0.130
0.111
0.045
0.008
0.050 -0.005 0.016
0.031
0.022 -0.003 0.002
(0.015) (0.008) (0.004) (0.012) (0.021) (0.019) (0.008)
.
.
.
-0.028 -0.017 -0.019 -0.003
.
.
.
0.138
0.070
0.027
0.014
0.003
0.009 -0.035 0.004 -0.005 -0.024 0.007
(0.006) (0.005) (0.013) (0.009) (0.009) (0.020) (0.009)
.
.
.
-0.039 -0.026 -0.040 0.001
.
.
.
0.088
0.026 -0.005 0.015
0.002
0.018
0.002
0.008
0.003 -0.001 0.003
(0.006) (0.004) (0.005) (0.010) (0.013) (0.009) (0.009)
.
.
.
-0.036 -0.015 -0.015 -0.002
.
.
.
0.108
0.044
0.019
0.010
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Notes. Employment effects are the regression coefficients α associated with the treatment dummy, and outcomes and controls in
all regressions are spatially differenced (center minus periphery). All regressions include MSA fixed effects, quarter fixed effects,
minimum wage controls, population controls, seasonal controls, and housing controls including sales and price variables and one
year lags. Confidence intervals are calculated using the Conley-Taber estimator. Conventional standard errors are reported in
parentheses. In specifications 1-4 conventional standard errors are heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation robust (7 quarter lag
structure). In specifications 5-8 conventional standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Quarterly employment and earnings
data is from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics. County population estimates from the
U.S. Census. Housing data is from Dataquick.

34

TABLE 4B
THE EFFECT OF SAN FRANCISCO HEALTH CARE SECURITY ORDINANCE ON EARNINGS
(1)
All Private
Earnings Effect
0.006
Conventional SE
(0.005)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Retail
Earnings Effect
0.031
Conventional SE
(0.008)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Accommodation & Food Services
Earnings Effect
0.033
Conventional SE
(0.003)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Restaurants
Earnings Effect
0.012
Conventional SE
(0.004)
92% CT Lower Bound
.
92% CT Upper Bound
.
Controls
San Francisco MSA Only
Y
Pre-period 2002-2007
Y
Pre-period 2006-2007
Linear Time Trend

(2)

(3)
(4)
Log of Earnings

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.040 0.059
0.004 -0.014 -0.012 -0.027 -0.003
(0.020) (0.020) (0.017) (0.007) (0.010) (0.009) (0.005)
.
.
.
-0.039 -0.034 -0.038 -0.007
.
.
.
0.023
0.015 -0.005 0.004
-0.053 -0.005 -0.074 0.037
0.050
0.036
0.015
(0.012) (0.010) (0.009) (0.008) (0.008) (0.010) (0.009)
.
.
.
0.011
0.026
0.020
0.008
.
.
.
0.077
0.100
0.058
0.028
0.056
0.019
0.082
0.019
0.023
0.016
0.021
(0.007) (0.005) (0.010) (0.008) (0.008) (0.013) (0.007)
.
.
.
-0.018 -0.013 0.000
0.016
.
.
.
0.077
0.052
0.029
0.029
-0.026 -0.008 -0.024 0.007 -0.004 -0.016 -0.004
(0.004) (0.005) (0.003) (0.008) (0.007) (0.012) (0.007)
.
.
.
-0.041 -0.029 -0.029 -0.008
.
.
.
0.087
0.030 -0.001 0.009
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Notes. Earnings effects are the regression coefficients α associated with the treatment dummy, and outcomes and controls in all
regressions are spatially differenced (center minus periphery). All regressions include MSA fixed effects, quarter fixed effects,
minimum wage controls, population controls, seasonal controls, and housing controls including sales and price variables and one
year lags. Confidence intervals are calculated using the Conley-Taber estimator. Conventional standard errors are reported in
parentheses. In specifications 1-4 conventional standard errors are heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation robust (7 quarter lag
structure). In specifications 5-8 conventional standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Quarterly employment and earnings
data are from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics. County population estimates from the
U.S. Census. Housing data are from Dataquick.

35

TABLE 5
FALSIFICATION EXERCISE – “TREATMENT PERIOD” OF 2007
(1)

(2)
(3)
Log of Employment

All Private
"Treatment" Effect
0.018 -0.013
(0.008) (0.007)
Conventional SE
92% CT Lower Bound -0.003 -0.038
92% CT Upper Bound 0.076
0.007
.
.
Retail
"Treatment" Effect
0.019
0.000
(0.011) (0.010)
Conventional SE
92% CT Lower Bound -0.013 -0.017
92% CT Upper Bound 0.084
0.036
Accommodation & Food Services
"Treatment" Effect
-0.002 -0.007
(0.009) (0.006)
Conventional SE
92% CT Lower Bound -0.029 -0.020
92% CT Upper Bound 0.060
0.017
.
.
Restaurants
"Treatment" Effect
-0.006 -0.013
(0.008) (0.007)
Conventional SE
92% CT Lower Bound -0.034 -0.030
92% CT Upper Bound 0.066
0.013
Controls
Pre-period 2002-2007
Y
Pre-period 2006-2007
Y
Linear Time Trend

(4)

(5)

(6)
(7)
Log of Earnings

(8)

-0.001 0.001
(0.006) (0.006)
-0.020 -0.011
0.026
0.028
.
.
0.005
0.006
(0.007) (0.006)
-0.020 -0.010
0.032
0.049

0.026
0.012
0.023 -0.002
(0.004) (0.008) (0.005) (0.009)
0.006
0.000
0.007 -0.010
0.049
0.037
0.042
0.011
.
.
.
.
-0.031 -0.050 -0.045 -0.030
(0.005) (0.007) (0.005) (0.007)
-0.059 -0.070 -0.068 -0.054
-0.001 -0.008 -0.018 0.004

0.002 -0.001
(0.007) (0.008)
-0.013 -0.012
0.033
0.031
.
.
-0.002 -0.003
(0.006) (0.009)
-0.018 -0.019
0.027
0.031

-0.013 -0.030 -0.020 -0.014
(0.008) (0.006) (0.006) (0.004)
-0.043 -0.048 -0.039 -0.024
0.021
0.003
0.012
0.003
.
.
.
.
-0.005 -0.019 -0.006 -0.007
(0.008) (0.006) (0.005) (0.005)
-0.025 -0.034 -0.022 -0.023
0.023
0.010
0.020
0.012

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Notes. Employment effects are the regression coefficients associated with a SF*2007 indicator, and outcomes and controls in all
regressions are spatially differenced (Center minus Periphery). All regressions include MSA fixed effects, quarter fixed effects,
minimum wage controls, population controls, seasonal controls, and housing controls including sales and price variables and one
year lags. Confidence intervals are calculated using the Conley-Taber estimator. Heteroscedasticy robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered at the MSA level. Quarterly employment and earnings data are from the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics. County population estimates from the U.S. Census. Housing data are from
Dataquick.

36

TABLE 6
EMPLOYER SELF-REPORTED EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION RESPONSES TO
THE HEALTH CARE SECURITY ORDINANCE
Reduced employee pay raises or bonuses
Reduced health benefits for some employees
Reduced employer contribution health benefits for dependents
Reduced other employee benefit spending
Reduced any of the above four dimensions of compensation

6.0%
3.4%
6.0%
4.6%
14.0%

Reduced number of employees
Reduced hours worked for some employees
Reduced employees or hours

8.8%
8.1%
10.9%

Any of the above changes in compensation or employment

19.8%

Notes: Reported percentages are weighted by firm size to reflect the proportion of employees affected
by each employer response. The data are from 2009 Bay Area Employer Health Benefits Survey.

37

Appendix I: MSA Definitions
MSA
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA
Baltimore-Towson, MD
Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH
Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL-IN-WI
Cincinnati-Middletown, OH-KY-IN
Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH
Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX
Denver-Aurora-Broomfield, CO
Detroit-Warren-Livonia, MI
Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown, TX
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana,
CA
Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano
Beach, FL
Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington,
MN-WI
New York-Northern New Jersey-Long
Island, NY-NJ-PA
Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,
PA-NJ-DE-MD
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ
Pittsburgh, PA
Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton, ORWA
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario,
CA
Sacramento--Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont, CA
Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA
St. Louis, MO-IL
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,
DC-VA-MD-WV

Number
of
Counties
28
7
7
14
15
5
12
11
6
10
2

Rank
by
Size
8
19
10
3
23
25
4
20
11
6
2

3

7

13

16

23

Center
City
Atlanta
Baltimore
Boston
Chicago
Cincinnati
Cleveland
Dallas
Denver
Detroit
Houston
Los
Angeles
Miami

Center
County
Fulton
Baltimore
Suffolk
Cook
Hamilton
Cuyahoga
Dallas
Denver
Wayne
Harris
Los Angeles

Minneapolis

Hennepin

1

New York

New York

11

5

Philadelphia

Philadelphia

2
7
7

12
21
22

Phoenix
Pittsburgh
Portland

Maricopa
Allegheny
Multnomah

2

14

Riverside

Riverside

4

24

Sacramento

Sacramento

5
3
17
4
22

13
15
17
18
9

San Francisco
Seattle
St. Louis
Tampa
Washington

38

Miami-Dade

San Francisco
King
St. Louis
Hillsborough
District of
Columbia

Appendix II: Trends in Employment and Wages in San Francisco County, San Francisco
Periphery Counties, MSA Center Counties, MSA Periphery Counties: 19902010
All Private Employment

Retail Employment

120%

120%

110%

110%

100%

100%

90%

90%

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

Food & Accommodation Employment

2010

Restaurant Employment

110%

110%

100%

100%

90%

90%

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

All Private Earnings

2010

Retail Earnings

120%

120%

110%

110%

100%

100%

90%

90%

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

Food & Accommodation Earnings

2010

Restaurant Earnings

120%

130%

110%

120%
110%

100%

100%
90%
90%
80%
80%
70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

1990

2010

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Peripheral Counties

24 Largest U.S. MSAs ‐ Center Counties

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

San Francisco ‐ Peripheral Counties

San Francisco County

Note: Figures are normalized to Q4 2007, the last period before treatment.

39

2010

