                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                       DEFINED BENEFIT VERSUS
                DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION PLANS:
                    WHAT ARE THE REAL TRADEOFFS?




                              Zvi   Bodie
                           Alan J. Marcus

                          Robert C. Merton



                       Working Paper No. 1719




               NATIONAL BUREAu OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                            October 1985




Tn-is paper as presentet March 23, 1985, at an NBER Conference on
Pensions, held iri Bait-rnjr, Maryland. The research reported here
 is part of the NBER's research program ir Financial Markets and
Monetary ELonom-ics and rro•iec -in Pens-ions. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author-s and no those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1719
                                                    October 1985



                               Defined Benefit Versus
                        Defined Contribution Pension Plans:
                            What are the Real Tradeoffs?



                                    ABSTRACT




     Defined Benefit and Defined Contribution plans have significantly different
characteristics with respect to the risks faced by employers and employees, the
sensitivity of benefits to inflation, the flexibility of funding, and the impor-
tance of governmental supervision. In this paper, we examine some of the main
tradeoffs involved in the choice between 08 and DC plans. Our most general
conclusion is that neither plan type can be said to wholly dominate the other from
the perspective of employee welfare.
     The major advantage of DB plans is the potential they offer to provide a
stable replacement rate of final income to workers. If the replacement rate is
the relevant variable for worker retirement utility, then DB plans offer some
degree of insurance against real wage risk. Of course, protection offered to
workers is risk borne by the firm. As real wages change, funding rates must
correspondingly adjust. However, to the extent that real wage risk is largely
diversifiable to employers, and nondiversifiable to employees, the replacement
rate stability should be viewed as an advantage of DB plans.
     The advantages of DC plans are most apparent during periods of inflation
uncertainty. These are: the predictability of the value of pension wealth, the
3bility to invest in inflation-hedged portfolios rather than nominal OB annuities,
and the fully-funded nature of the DC plan. Finally, the DC plan has the advan-
tage that workers can more easily determine the true present value of the pension
benefit they earn in any year, although they may have more incertainty about
future pension-benefit flows at retirement. Measuring the present value of
accruing defined benefits is difficult at best and imposes severe informational
requirements on workers. Such difficulties could lead workers to misvalue their
total compensation, and result in misinformed behavior.



Zvi Bodie                  Alan J. Marcus             Robert C. Merton
School of Management       School of Management       Sloan School of Management
Boston University          Boston University          Massachusetts Institute of
704 Commonwealth Ave.      704 Commonwealth Ave.        Technology
Boston, MA 02215           Boston, MA 02215           Cambridge, MA 02139
I. INTRODUCTION

    Although employer   pension programs vary in design they are usually

classified into two broad types: defined contribution and defined benefit.

These two categories are distinguished in the law under ERISA. Under a

defined contribution (DC) plan each employee has an account into which the

employer and, if it is a contributory plan, the employee make regular

contributions. Benefit levels depend on the total contributions and

investment earnings of the accumulation in the account. Often the employee

has some choice regarding the type of assets in which his accumulation is

invested and can easily find out what its value is at any point in his working

career. Defined contribution plans are in effect tax—deferred savings

accounts in trust for the employees, and are by definition fully funded. They

are therefore not of much concern to government regulators and are not     covered

by Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBCG) insurance.
    In a defined benefit (DB) plan the employee's pension benefit entitlement

is determined by a formula which takes into account years of service for the

employer and, in most cases, wage or salary. Many defined benefit formulas

also take Into account the Social Security benefits to which an employee is

entitled. These are the so—called "integrated" plans. See Merton, Bodie and

Marcus (1984) for a discussion of integration.

    DB and DC plans have significantly different characteristics with respect

to the risks faced by employers and employees, the sensitivity of benefits to

inflation, the flexibility of funding, and the importance of governmental

supervision. Our objective in this paper is to examine the tradeoffs involved

in the choice between DB and DC plans.
    In the next section, we briefly review the mechanics governing the

determination and valuation of the benefit streams under DB and DC pension

plans. Section 3 contains an informal discussion of the relative advantages

of each type of plan. In section 4 we develop a formal model to examine the

tradeoffs between the two types of plans in the face of both wage and interest

rate uncertainty. Our conclusion there is that neither plan can be said to

wholly dominate the other from the perspective of employee welfare. The final

section summarizes our results and concludes the paper.



II. PLAN CHARACTERISTICS AND VALUATION

    A. DC Plans

    The DC arrangement is the conceptually simpler retirement plan. The

employer, and sometimes also the employee, make regular contributions Into the

employee's retirement account. The contributions are usually specified as a

predetermined fraction of salary, although that fraction need not be constant

over the course of a career.'

    Contributions from both parties are tax—deductible,2 and investment

income accrues tax—free. Often the employee is given a choice as to how his

account is to be invested. In principle, contributions may be Invested in any

security, although In practice most plans limit investment options to various

bond, stock and money—market funds. At retirement, the employee either

receives a lump sum or an annuity, the size of which depends upon the

accumulated value of the funds in the retirement account. The employee thus

bears all of the investment risk; the retirement account is by definition

fully funded, and the firm has no obligation beyond making its periodic

contribution.




                                     —2—
      Valuation of the DC plan is straightforward:    simply measure the market

 value of the assets held in the retirement account.     However, as a guide for

 personal financial planning, the DC plan sponsor often provides workers with

 the indicated size of a life annuity starting at retirement age that could be

 purchased now with the accumulation in their account under different

 scenarios. The actual size of the retirement annuity will, of course, depend

 upon the realized investment performance of the retirement fund, the interest

 rate at retirement, and the ultimate wage path of the employee.



     B. DB Plans

     Whereas the DC framework focuses on the value of the assets currently

 endowing a retirement account, the DB plan focuses on the flow of benefits

 which the individual will receive upon retirement.

     A typical DB plan determines the employee's benefit as a function of both

years of service and wage history. As a representative plan, consider one in

which the employee receives 1 percent of average salary (during the last 5

years of service) times the number of years of service. Normal retirement
                                                                                 age
is 65, there are no early retirement options, death or disability benefits and

no Social Security offset provisions. The actuarially expected life span at

retirement is 80 years.

    Assuming the worker is fully vested, at any point in time his claim is a

deferred nominal life annuity, insured up to certain limits by the Pension

Benefit Guarantee Corporation. It is a deferred annuity because the employee

cannot start receiving benefits until he reaches age 65. It is nominal

because the retirement benefit, which the employer is contractually bound to

pay the   employee, is fixed in dollar amount at any point   in time up to and

including   retirement age.

                                       —3—
    Many people think that under final average pay plans of the sort described

here, retirement benefits are implicitly indexed to inflation at least during

the employee's active years with the firm and therefore should not be viewed

as a purely nominal asset by the employee and a purely nominal liability by

the firm. We examine this issue in detail in Section III. For now we focus

on the value of the explicit claim only.

    Given an Interest rate and a wage profile, it Is straightforward to

compute    the present value of accrued benefits under our prototype DB plan.
Table 1    presents   such values for   workers at different ages assuming a constant

real annual wage of l5,OO0. The present value of accrued liabilities can

increase from continued service because of 3 factors: (1) as years of service

increase, so does the defined benefit, (2) if the wage increases, so will the

retirement benefit and (3) as time passes, less time remains until the

retirement benefits begin, so that their present value increases at the rate

of interest.

    To illustrate the separate contributions of each of these factors to the

cumulative results reported in Table 1, consider the case in which the benefit

formula calls for 1% of final year's salary times years of service and that

the worker lives for 15 years after retiring at age 65. The worker is 35

years old, has worked for the firm 10 years and his current salary is

fl5,000. The nominal interest rate equals a real rate of 3% per year plus the

expected   rate of inflation.
    Under the 7%      inflation scenario, the sources of the change in the value of

the pen8ion benefit from the passage of an additional year are as follows.

Prior to this year, the worker had accrued a life annuity of $1,500 per year

(1% x 10 years x $15,000) beginning at age 65. With a nominal interest rate




                                            —4—
                                     TABLE 1

                         Present Value of Accrued Benefits and
                  Marginal Change in Benefits for Hypothetical Worker
                                  No Early Retirement




                                                        Marginal Change in
                                                         Present Value of
                         Present Value of              Accrued Benefits from
                         Accrued Benefits                 an Additional
                        in Constant Dollars                Year's Work

                    0% Inflation   7% Inflation   0% Inflation      7% Inflation
                    3% Discount    10% Discount   3% Discount       10% Discount
Starting Age 25        Rate           Rate           Rate               Rate
 Current Age                                      Constant    % of Constant      % of
                                                  Dollars    Salary Dollars     Salary

    30                *2,274           *144         *455     3.03                    .27
    35                *5,271           *463         *527     3.51        *82         .55
    40                *9,167         *1,120         *611     4.07                   1.05
    45               *14,169         *2,404         *708     4.72                   1.98
    50               *20,532         *4,840         *821     5.47       *546        3.64
    55               *28,563         *9,354         *952     6.35       *938        6.25
    60               *38,631        *17,575       *1,104              *1,768       11.79
    65               *51,181        *32,329                  8.28
                                                  *1,242*             *2,794*      18.63


Assumes: Worker currently paid *15,000 per year with no real wage growth.
         Worker will retire at age 65.
         Pension plan pays 1% of average salary in last five years time years
         of service.
         Pension plan contains no early retirement provisions or makes correct
         actuarial adjustment for early retirees.
         Benefits are vested after 5 years.
         Real interest rate is 3%, nominal rate increases one for one with
         Inflation.

Notes:   *Indicates value calculated for age 64 rather than age 65.

Source: Adapted from David T. Eliwood (1985).




                                      —5—
of 10% per year, the present value (1W) of this deferred annuity at age 35 is

 654. The increase in pension benefits as a result of working an additional

year can be broken into three parts:

Factor (1):   One additional year of service at a salary of $16,050 (l5000x

              1.07) entitles him to an additional deferred annuity of $160.50

              per year, and

Factor (2):   The salary increase of $1,050 entitles him to an additional

              deferred annuity of $105 per year (1% x 10 years x $1,050).

The PV of these additional accrued benefits from factors (1) and (2) at the

end of the year is $127. This represents the nominal value of the newly

earned pension benefits, which is an annuity of $265.50 per year starting at

retirement.

Factor (3):   The PV of his previously accrued benefits Increases by 10% from

              $654 to $719.40 because the date of their eventual receipt has

              drawn one year closer. As a result of all three factors the

              nominal value of his pension wealth increases from $654 to $846

              and its real value to $791.

    Now let us refer to Table 1 to see how these factors manifest themselves

in the time pattern of benefit accrual in the no—inflation and in the 7%

inflation scenarios. The right—hand panel shows the constant dollar present

value of benefits attributable to continued work with the same employer; these

benefits are represented by factors (1) and (2) only. In the no—inflation

case, there is no salary growth and hence only factor (1) is at work. For

each additional year of service an additional deferred annuity of $150 per

year is earned. Note, however, that the value of the incremental benefits

earned at each age increases with age, from $455 (3.03% of salary) at age 30




                                       —6--
 to $1,242 (8.28% of salary) at age 64. This is a reflection of the fact that

 the additional $150 per year deferred life annuity has a higher PV the closer

 the employee is to age 65. The accrual of benefits under a DB plan is thus

 inherently "backloaded."

     This   backloading   effect is much more pronounced in the 7% inflation

 scenario, because of the impact of inflation on the nominal interest rate,

holding the real interest rate fixed. In this case the constant—dollar value

of additional pension benefits earned increases from $41 (.27% of salary) at

age 30 to $2,794 (18.63% of salary) at age 64. In contrast, backloading or

frontloading in DC plans is Independent of inflation as well as interest

rates.3 This is because employers can achieve any backloading pattern by

simply choosing an appropriate pattern of contribution rates over the course

of the employee's career. The left—hand panel of Table 1 illustrates the

effect of Inflation on the PV of total accumulated pension benefits under the

DE plan assuming no real salary growth.



    C.      Funding

    As mentioned before, DC plans are by their nature fully—funded, i.e., the

market value of the plan's assets equals the liability of the sponsor to the

plan's beneficiaries. In sharp contrast, the calculation of the funding

status of DB plans is complex and controversial. If invested in traded

securities, the market value of the plan's assets Is relatively easy to

ascertain. The source of difficulty is In measuring the sponsor's liability.

    From a strictly legal point of view the sponsor's liability is the present

value of the accrued vested benefits which would be payable If the plan were

immediately terminated. But many pension experts contend that sponsors have




                                         —7—
an implicit semi—contractual obligation which makes it more appropriate to

take account of projected future salary growth in the computation of the

firm's pension liability. The contention of a further obligation beyond the

legal one makes it unclear whether a real or nominal interest rate should be

used in discounting future benefits (either with or without salary growth

projections) to compute their present value. To evaluate the strict

obligation of the sponsor, the DB liabilities could be determined by deriving

the cost of an immunized or dedicated bond portfolio using current market

prices. While clearly superior to a simple interest rate assumption, this

valuation procedure is itself only an approximation because the payment dates

of pension liabilities typically extend far beyond the maturity range that is

rich enough to extract pure discount bond prices from traded coupon bonds.

Hence, an exact bond—dedication scheme is not feasible. Immunization

techniques that rely on duration measures are not wholly reliable because

duration measures are sensitive to the specification of term structure

dynamics. (See Bierwag (1977), Bierwag and Kaufman (1977), and Cox, Ingersoll

and Ross (1979).) Beyond the term structure, the default risk associated with

partially funded pension obligations adds the further problem of choosing

equivalent—risk bonds from the securities market.

    For the past several years the Financial Accounting Standard Board (FASB)

has been grappling with these issues, trying to establish a uniform set of

valuation standards for firms to use in their financial statements.

    The government guarantees, up to a limit, employer pension benefits

through the PBGC. The valuation of guaranteed benefits therefore should

utilize the riskless—in—terms—of—default interest rate. However, in practice,

only 80 percent of accrued benefits is vested while only 90—95 percent of




                                     —8—
 vested benefits is guaranteed so that roughly one—quarter of accrued benefits

 is not guaranteed (Ainoroso, 1982). Thus, the funding status of a plan is

 important to employees as well as to the PBCG. In effect, adequate funding

 protects accrued—but—not—yet—vested benefits. See Marcus (1984) for an

analysis of PBGC insurance and corporate funding policy.



III. TRADEOFFS

    Our original belief was that defined contribution plans would necessarily

dominate defined benefit plans because of the flexibility of DC plan design.

We would have guessed that anything that could be accomplished with a DB plan

could be replicated in a cleverly constructed DC plan. However, this belief

is not borne out. DB plans create implicit securities that can   be   welfare

improving and which are not now available in capital markets, and which might

not be expected to be created in capital markets. Some examples of these

"securities" are factor—share claims, price—indexed claims, and perhaps

deferred life annuities at fair interest rates.

    Moreover, some of the "real—world" complications in plan design such as

incentive effects tend to favor DB over DC plans. Thus, the optimal plan

design is likely to be firm specific. At this point, all we can do is

enumerate the relative advantages of each plan type, and describe the

circumstances in which one plan might dominate.



    A. Investment Performance and Choice

    The most obvious source of risk to an employee in the DC plan is the

investment performance of the fund. However, this source of uncertainty can

be controlled. For example, the periodic contributions of the DC plan could,




                                     —9—
in principle, be used to purchase deferred annuities which would generate

retirement income streams similar to those provided by DB plans.

Alternatively, it is feasible for the plan to select an investment strategy

with low variance rates of real returns. Bodie (1980) has shown that

commodity futures can be added to portfolios to successfully provide an

effective hedge against inflation. Therefore, in either nominal or real

terms, DC plans do not necessarily impose substantial risk on participants,

given the availability of low—variance investment strategies.

    There are, however, no strong a priori reasons to believe that most

individuals would choose to invest accumulated DC funds in the lowest risk

asset. DC plans typically offer sufficient flexibility to select a

risk—return strategy suited to the employee's individual preferences and

circumstances. In contrast, DB plans force individuals to accumulate the

pension portion of retirement savings in the form of deferred life annuities,

and thus limit the risk—return choice.



    B.   Accrual Patterns

    As noted and illustrated in Table 1, DB plans are inherently backloaded.

DC plans can be backloaded too by choosing a contribution rate that   rises   with

a worker's age and tenure.4 Therefore, the salient inherent difference in

accrual patterns between the two plan designs is that DB backloading is

stochastic in the sense that real benefit accruals depend upon the rate of

wage inflation. This seems to us an avoidable source of uncertainty which

both parties (employer and employee) might benefit by shedding. On this

score, DC plans would appear to be superior, although implicit contracting to

provide employees with a protective "wage floor" [cf. Diamond and Mirrlees

(1985)] can be implemented more effectively with DB—type plans.


                                     —10—
     C.    Termination and Portability

     It is commonly asserted that considerations of portability favor DC

 plans. The typical justification is that the worker in a DB plan who leaves

 his job for reasons beyond his control forfeits future indexation of benefits

 already accrued. It is further asserted that there are implicit contracts

 between employees and firms which require larger total compensation (wage plus

 pension accrual) for more highly tenured workers. Hence, termination of

employment causes a forfeiture of the ability to work for advantageous total

compensation rates (and, in particular, indexation of total pension

accruals). Under this line of reasoning, DC plans are more portable.

    It should be realized, however, that the portability issue is intimately

tied to the accrual pattern. For DC plans with contribution rates tied to

tenure as well as age, the penalty to early termination can be as great as for

any DB plan. In practice, however, contribution rates for DC plans are rarely

tied to tenure, and are usually not as heavily backloaded as DR plans.

Therefore, in practice it would appear that portability considerations favor

DC plans over DB plans.



    D.    Incentives

    Pension benefits in DC plans depend upon the wage trajectory over the

worker's entire career. In contrast, benefits in most DB plans depend on

final average salary. For this reason, workers in DB plans should have a

greater incentive to sustain a high level of effort over the entire career in

order to achieve a high career—end salary. Final salary has greater leverage

in DB plans because of its greater effect on pension benefits.




                                     —11--
    In conclusion, it seems that there is a tradeoff between the goals of

portability and incentives. Portability dictates low backloading, while

incentives require high backloading. While DC plans opt in practice for lower

backloading than DB plans, this pattern is not an inherent property of the two

plans.



    E.   Informational Economies in Plan Design and Implementation

    Retirement income planning is one of the most complex areas of personal

finance. Many employees would consider it a service to have their employer

define and provide an adequate level of savings for them. Since

retirement—income goals are typically defined as percentage replacement rates

of salary, the benefits of DB plans which are defined in exactly those terms

are easier to interpret.

    One could in principle achieve the goal of a specific replacement rate

with a DC plan of the so—called "target benefit" type. Under these plans, the

contribution rate is adjusted periodically to achieve the target replacement

rate taking into account the discrepency between actual and assumed investment

return. However, such plans are rare.



    F.   Wage—Path Risk

    The pegging of benefits in DB pians to final average wage would appear to

provide employees with a type of Income—maintenance Insurance not available in

DC plans. This observation has been used to support the selection of these

plans over DC plans. This conclusion is, however, not robust. If wage paths

are unpredictable at the start of a career, then individuals may view It as

very risky to have their retirement benefits depend so heavily on final




                                    —12—
salary. Indeed, employees might prefer a retirement benefit tied to

(inflation—adjusted) career—average earnings so as to eliminate excessive

dependence on the realized wage in the final years of employment. This

time—averaging feature is achieved by a DC plan because benefits will depend

on the contribution in each year of service, rather than on a final wage

formula. Although inflation—adjusted career—average DB plans would achieve

the same goal, in practice these plans are quite rare. In fact, the only

major DB plan that pays a benefit computed in such a fashion is the Social

Security system. We pursue this issue further in the analysis in Section IV.



    G.   Interest—Rate Risk

    As noted earlier, one major source of uncertainty in DC plans concerns the

terms under which the stock of retirement wealth can be transformed into a

flow of retirement income. DB plans, by offering life annuities, effectively

guarantee the Interest rate at retirement. It should be noted, however, that

without indexation of benefits, this is a guarantee of the nominal rather than

the real interest rate. The value to the employee of a nominal—rate guarantee

is questionable when inflation over a 10 or 20 year period can be highly

unpredictable.

    In principle, DC plans can offer at retirement the same nominal interest

rate guarantee through the purchase of deferred life annuities as a DB plan.

However, in practice, with the notable exception of the Teacher's Insurance

and Annuity Association (TIAA), the capitalization rates used to compute

benefits in the private annuity market are far below the interest rates

available in competitive financial markets. This discrepancy is often

attributed to an adverse selection problem, and discourages participation in




                                    —13--
 the annuity market by unhealthy individuals.5 The adverse selection issue

 is largely avoided in DB plans because workers are precorumitted to

 participation regardless of health status.



 IV.    A MODEL OF WAGE AND INTEREST RATE UNCERTAINTY

        In this section we develop a model to focus on the twin issues of wage and
 interest—rate   uncertainty using stylized versions of DB and DC plans. We find
 that   the putative replacement rate advantages of DB plans are not supported by
our    model, and that the interest rate guarantee is only partially supported:
specifically,    DB plans do offer welfare—improving opportunities with respect

to post—retirement interest—rate uncertainty, but not with respect to

preretirement uncertainty.

       For the most part, we will concentrate on individual welfare in a model in

which all wage uncertainty is employee—specific, and, from the firm's

perspective, is perfectly diversifiable. This framework is at a polar extreme

from Merton's (1982) model of social security, in which all uncertainty

regarding marginal product derives from uncertainty in the aggregate

production    function, with no individual—specific effects. In Merton's
framework, labor—income uncertainty is     perfectly correlated across

individuals,    and in such an environment, DB plans may offer   superior

risk—sharing properties that    are   not captured in our model. Although our

model focuses exclusively on uncertainty at the individual worker's level and

interest—rate risk, we will discuss further the implications of Merton's model

for our results. As indicated earlier, interest—rate uncertainty emerges as a

central determinant of the relative advantages of DB versus DC plans.




                                         —14—
A. Pension Plan Design

    We consider a 3—period model in which the individual works in periods 0

and 1 and is retired in period 2. Current wage, W0 is known, while period 1

wage, W1, is uncertain until t =       1.    For simplicity, we will assume that the

time 0 expectation of W1 is W0. Trends in wage paths could easily be

incorporated into the analysis, and would simpiy clutter the algebra; hence we

ignore such trends. Wages are measured in real dollars as of time 0.

    Consumption occurs at three points: t               0, 1, 2. A pension benefit, P,
Is paid at t   2. The real interest rate prevailing between t =              (0,   1) is

denoted r0, and is known at time 0. The real rate between t              (1,2) is r1
and is not known until time 1. Finally, we assume that individuals have

Initial non—human wealth of A0. The timing assumptions of the model are

presented in figure 1.




                          Figure 1: Timing Assumptions



                         0             1           2            Time

                         X——--————-—X----———---X


                         W0
                                                   P           Income
                                       W1

                         C0            C1          C2          Consumption

                         A0            A           A2          Financial Wealth

                              ——r0——          ——r1——
                                                               Interest Rate




                                            —15—
 If financial markets were complete, then, of course, the choice of pension

 plan would be irrelevant because the employee could trade to an optimal

 position. There are two important deviations from complete markets that make

 pension design crucial from the employee's perspective. First, there are

neither markets in which wage uncertainty can be insured, nor ones in which

 claims to future wages can be sold. This feature of our model precludes

employee—initiated risk pooling. Second, because of adverse selection

problems, the market for deferred life annuities is assumed to be closed.

Although such markets do in fact exist, as discussed, the rates of return

typically offered are so low as to discourage widespread participation. In

our model, the absence of such annuities will be captured by not allowing

individuals to invest at t0 in two—period bonds which pay specified returns

during the retirement period, t=2.

    The goal of the firm is to offer a pension plan that maximizes the utility

of a "typical" worker, subject to the constraint that all pension plans

considered have equal present value of costs to the firm. Subject to the

firm's Indifference condition, we compare the utility value of DB versus DC

plans.

    In DB plans, firms typically promise workers a prespecified fraction of

career—end wages, possibly averaged over the last several years of working

life, and this is the type of plan we model. We will assume that the pension

benefit at t = 2 equals W1, 80 that expected income in each period of life

is equal. We assume further that pension benefits are explicitly linked to

the price level. While this practice is uncommon in the private sector in the

U.S., it is true of Social Security and it serves as a useful base case from

which to analyze the potential efficacy of competing pension designs.




                                     —16—
      The present value at t = 0 of the firm's time—2 pension obligations is



             PVDB =
                      E(W1)B(0,2)                                                (1)




where B(0,2) is the present value at t0 of a claim to an expected payoff of

ft   at   t2, with uncertainty equivalent to that of the wage distribution. If

wage uncertainty were completely diversifiable, then B(0,2) would equal the

present value of a certain dollar to be received in two periods; B(t,T) would

be the discount function at t for payments at T. However, for the moment, we

will not restrict the nature of wage uncertainty.

     In contrast to DB plans, DC plans require firms to contribute a

prespecified fraction of wages into the worker's retirement—savings account

each period. For simplicity we will assume that explicit wages paid in each

period are the same for each type of pension plan provided. Hence, the

Indifference condition for the firm is that the present value of periodic

contributions into the DC plan equals the present value of the DB commitment.

The prespecified (at t =      0) DC contribution schedule is set at time 0 and
therefore can depend only on observed variables at t0. While the

contribution rates may depend on expectations of future interest rates, they

cannot be updated ex post to reflect realizations of interest rates or any

other factor.

     There is an Infinite number of DC contribution schedules, which have the

same PV. Among these, we will select the one which has the same timing

pattern as the PV of accruing benefits under the DB plan.

     The contribution schedule, kt, as a fraction of wages is given by:




                                         —17—
            _lf
            — -BkO,2)\         ,
                                                          t=
                                                                                (2)
         k1 =    -B(O,2)IB(O,l)          ;                t1

The present value at t0 of the DC plan contributions equals



         PVDC =            +
                    k0W0       k1E0(W1)B(O,l)
                =                  +
                    W0B(O,2)           E0(W1)B(O,2)


Since E0(W1) =          the present values of the firm's contributions in the
                  W0,
DB and DC plans are equal.

    Notice that since B(O,l) is less than one, the DC plan as specified above

embodies some backloading. In fact, any degree of prespecified backloading

may be built into the DC plan simply by changing the coefficients in (2) from

their values of ..      Any coefficient pair for k1 and k2 that sums to

one will ensure that the present value of the DC plan equals the present value

of the DB plan.

    The pension benefit in the DC plan will accumulate at t=2 to a value that

depends on the investment experience of the plan. Call the rate of return on

the pension portfolio in each period              and let Z =   Then the

pension benefit paid at t=2 in the DC plan will be




         DC B(O,2)W0Z0Z1 + [B(O,2)/B(O,l)]w1z1                                  (3)




whereas in the DB plan,



         DB =    l                                                              (4)


                                              —18—
Notice that there is no assurance, or even likelihood, that the expected

pension benefits will be equal across the two plans, despite the fact that the

ex ante present values are equal.



    B.     Welfare Analysis

    Pension benefits are subject to uncertainty from both stochastic wage

paths and stochastic investment returns. Rather than consider these effects

jointly, we will examine polar cases in which one or the other source of

uncertainty dominates.



    1.     Wage Uncertainty

    Consider first the case in which all investment returns can be made

certain by investing pension assets in risk—free bonds. Therefore both
                                                                                     r0
and r1 are known at t0. Moreover, suppose for the moment, that all wage

uncertainty is perfectly diversifiable to the firm, so that B(t,T) is simply

the discount function for riskiess future cash flows. Under these hypotheses,



           Z0 = 1   + r =        and Z1 =            =
                            R0              (1+r1)


Further,   with no uncertainty regarding the evolution of future interest rates,

B(O,l) =         and B(O,2) =               Thus, (3) reduces to
           hR0                   l/R0R1.


           P
            DC =1(w-4-w)
                 2 0 1                                                                    (3')

In this simple case, it is clear that the DC plan must dominate the DR plan

for any risk averse utility function. With E0(W1) =                both pians have
                                                            W0,




                                             —19—
 equal expected benefits, while the DC plan imposes less uncertainty on

 participants because of the "wage averaging" embodied in (3'). Essentially

 the only uncertainty in this case derives from W1. The DC plan allows for

 limited risk pooling of wage uncertainty through the firm (and ultimately the

 stock market) while the DB plan allows for none. This advantage of DC plans

 may be thought of as a pure efficiency gain.

     The advantage of DC plans in the wage—uncertainty—only scenario does not

 hinge solely on the diversifiability of wage risk. Suppose that final wage is

 highly correlated with some marketable security such as the value of the stock

 of the firm, or the value of a broad market index. In this case, the DB plan

 implicitly forces the participant to invest a large fraction of wealth in this

 asset, since the pension benefit essentially duplicates the payoff to the

asset. In contrast, the DC plan allows the participant to take the pension

contribution each period and invest it in any security. In essence, the DC

plan allows participants to get their money out of the (over)investment in

   and achieve superior portfolio diversification. This advantage of DC

plans is incremental to the pure efficiency gain from the risk pooling

opportunity that was noted above.



    2.   Interest—Rate Uncertainty

    In this section, we will assume that wage paths are either given or

uncorrelated with the interest rate, and that the only investment vehicles are

bonds. However the future path of interest rates is not known at the time the

pension contract is established. Because wages pose no systematic risk,

B(t,T) is simply the riskiess discount function, and B(O,l)
                                                              hR0.
    As in Merton (1982), we will assume that the lifetime utility function for

the individual at time 0 is


                                     —20—
         U0 =    log(C0)    + E0[log(C1) + log(C2)]                               (5)

At time 1, all uncertainty is resolved since both W1 and          (and hence P)

are known. Lifetime utility at t = 1 is thus

         U1 =    log(C1)    + log(C2)

and at t = 2 is

         U2 =    log(C2).
    Upon arriving at t =       2, the individual will consume all of his financial
wealth, plus all pension benefits:

         C2 = (A1 + w1 —       + P                                                (6)
                         C1)R1
Thus, at t =   1,   the optimization problem is

         max[log(C1) + log(C2)]
which results in the first order condition

         C1 — C2/R1 = 0                                                           (7)

Using (6), equation (7) can be solved to yield

         c1* = (A1 +         + P/R1)/2

         C2* =   RC1*                                                             (8)

Using the expressions for P from (3) and (4), we find that

         c =          +                                                           (8—DB)
                          W1 + W11R1)/2
while

         C = [A       +      + (l/2)(w0 + w1Th(O,2)R0]/2                          (8—Dc)



    As expected, the difference between equations (8—Dc) and (8—DB) reflect

the wage diversification" attribute of DC plans, in that consumption depends

upon a weighted sum of earnings over the entire career. A perhaps surprising

feature of equations (8) is that consumption for individuals in DC plans is

not a function of the realized interest rate, R1, although it is for




                                          —21—
 individuals in DB plans. This is true despite the fact that retirement wealth

 Is subject to Interest rate risk for DC plans, but not for DB plans.

     This feature of the model turns out to be an artifact of the log utility

 function, but nevertheless highlights an important feature of DB versus DC

 plan design. Recall the first order condition (7) for optimal consumption

 allocation across times 1 and 2, which requires that time—2 consumption be

    times time—i consumption. For an individual in a DC plan, all wealth

 already is held and can    be   invested at rate R1 at t =       1.   Thus,   the simple
 rule is to consume one half of wealth at t =          1,   invest the remainder, and thus

 consume R1 times one    half   of wealth at t =2. Consumption at t = 1 is thus

 Independent of R1. In contrast, in a DB plan, the pension benefit to be

received at t =2 already is fixed at t = 1.            Thus, a large value of

requires a decrease in t = 1 consumption in order to satisfy the first order

condition for an optimum. Another way of seeing this is to note that, for the

log utility function, consumption at t          1 depends only on wealth, not on the

interest rate. For DC plans, wealth at t = 1 Is independent of R1, since

all assets are already in hand. For DB plans, pension benefits are still

deferred at t =   1,   and wealth depends on
                                                R,1.

    For more general utility functions, consuniption at t = 1 depends on both

wealth and R1. However, DC plans still offer a type of consumption

smoothing that is not offered by DB plans. Specifically, the generalized

first order condition at t =1 requires that the ratio of the marginal utility

of consumption at t      1 to that at t = 2 equals R1. A larger R1 thus

induces more time—2 consumption. This can be attained with less (or no)

sacrifice of current consumption when assets are already in hand since assets

currently invested can earn the higher rate of interest. In DB plans in




                                         —22—
contrast, there is no offset between income and substitution effects. A

larger R1 decreases pension wealth, and simultaneously requires a

reallocation of consumption to the retirement period, t=2. Thus, the

consumption stream in DC plans is less sensitive to the interest rate during

the accumulation phase, and indeed, in the log utility case, is actually

independent of the realization of the interest rate.

    Using equations (8), we may now compute the derived or indirect utility

function at t 1.

    JDB(A,Wl,tl)       log(C1*) + log(C2*)

                       2 log[l/2(A1 + W1 + W1/R1)] + log(R1)                     (9—DB)




    JDc(,Wl,t) =       2
                            log[l/2(A.1 + W1 + W'B(O,2)R0] + log(R1)
                                                                                 (9—DC)



where W' =
             (W0 + W1)/2, i.e., career—average earnings.
   As a base case to compare (9—DB) and (9—DC), consider the situation in

which the expectations hypothesis for the term structure of interest rates

holds. Then B(O,2) =                           In this instance, with E0(W') =
                           (l/R0)E0(l/R1).
   and W1 uncorrelated with R1, the expectations of the arguments of

the log terms in (9) are equal. However, the argument of the log term in

(9—DC) is subject to less uncertainty (as of t'O) than in (9—DB). This is due

to both the wage diversification embodied in the DC plan, and the interest

rate risk that appears only in the DB plan.

   Using equations (9), we may obtain the derived utility function at t0.

                                                                                 (10)
   J(A0, W0, t0) max[log(C0) + E0 (J(A1, W1, tl))]
From (10), it is easy to show that time—0 utility is higher in the DC plan

(still assuming that the expectations hypothesis holds). Consider the




                                             —23—
optimizing value of time—O consumption under the DB plan. This consumption

choice is also feasible in the DC plan, and will result in an identical value

 for A1. However, for any given A1, E0[J(A,1,W1,t1)] is greater in

the DC plan. This last point follows from the equal expected values of the

arguments of the log function in (9), the greater dispersion of the argument

in the DB plan, and the concavity of the log function. Because DC plans offer

greater welfare than DB plans at consumption levels that are optimal for DB

plans, they must do so a fortiori when C0 is chosen to be optimal for the DC

environment.

    For the DB plan to dominate the DC plan, it would be necessary for it to

offer a greater expected pension benefit at t=2. This would require that

B(0,2) be less than E0(l/R0R1), that is, that there be a positive

liquidity or risk premium for investing in long—term bonds rather than rolling

over shorts.

     At this point, it is worth reconsidering the assumptions of our model.

It should be apparent that the zero expected growth rate of real wages is not

essential to the argument. Our analysis would have been similar even with a

positive trend in real wages. The only major modification would involve an

adjustment for the fact that a DB plan with a 100 percent replacement rate of

final salary would promise retirement—period income greater than

career—average wages. The per period contributions to the retirement fund in

the equal present value DC plan would thus need to be correspondingly

increased. In the nomenclature of equation (2), the sum of k1 and k2

would need to exceed 1.0. However, aside from this adjustment, the analysis

would be similar.

    The issue of interest rate uncertainty during the retirement period is

more difficult and poses issues not easily treated in the above model. In our


                                     —24--
 3—period model, the individual simply consumes total retirement wealth in the

 last period. If, however, retirement itself is viewed as a many—period

 Interval, then real retirement income and not wealth may be the significant

determinant of welfare. Given a stock of wealth at retirement, the real

 consumption stream that Is feasible for the retiree depends upon the real

long—term interest rate at the time of retirement, when the purchase of a

 (real) life annuity is contemplated. Even if retirement wealth can be

predicted fairly precisely with a low—investment—risk DC retirement fund, the

real income stream that can be generated by that wealth is subject to

considerable uncertainty.6 In contrast, by guaranteeing a specified income

(and hence, consumption) stream upon retirement, the (price—level indexed) DB

plan eliminates the risk associated with the conversion, at retirement, of a

stock of retirement wealth into a flow of equivalent—present—value

consumption. DC plans cannot offer a guaranteed capitalization rate at

retirement because of our assumption that life annuities and bonds of

long—enough maturity do not exist.

    In order to examine some potential effects of uncertainty in the interest

rate at retirement, we will consider a simple adjustment to our model.

Suppose that at t=2, the financial assets of individuals are multiplied by

some increasing function of R2, f(R2), where R2 equals one plus the

post—retirement rate of interest. The multiplication by f(R2) reflects the

increased retirement—income stream that is available to DC participants when

interest rates at retirement turn out to be high. In contrast, for DB plans,

the retirement—income stream is guaranteed by the firm so that Interest—rate

risk is not borne by plan participants.

   Reconsider now the optimal consumption program for DC plan participants.




                                     —25—
 At t=2,

                        + w1 —
            C2 =   [A            C1) R1 + PDcJf(R2)                                          (10)

 which now is stochastic at tl because of the dependence on R2. Thus, at

 t1, the maximization problem becomes

            max
                  log(C1)   + E1[log(C2)]



 which has first order condition

                         — E                     = 0
                        1
                               [.
                                 2
                                     R1f(R2)]                                                (11)



     But examination of (10) and (11) shows that f(R2) drops out of the first

 order conditions so that (11) results in exactly the same consumption level at
 t = 1 as in the nonstochastic
                                         model. Lifetime utility, however, may
 change. For example, for an actuarially fair f(R2) adjustment, such as

 f(R2) =
           R2/E1(R2),7 consumption at t =         1 is unchanged, while

consumption at t = 2 has the same expected value as in the previous model, but

greater uncertainty. In this case, expected time—2 utility falls. If time—2

interest rate uncertainty is sufficiently great relative to wage and time—l

interest    rate uncertainty, DC      plans could become inferior to DB plans from the

viewpoint   of plan participants.        Thus, retirement—period interest           rate
uncertainty emerges as a potential advantage of DB relative                   to DC plans.



C.   Factor—Share     Uncertainty
     Mertori (1982)   has   examined a model in        which   labor—income
uncertainty   derives   entirely from an aggregate production           function in which
income   shares accruing to capital       and    labor are stochastically determined. In
contrast to   the model above in which          labor income uncertainty is




                                                —26—
diversifiable, in Merton's model, labor income is perfectly correlated across

individuals. Given the nontradeability of human capital, economic

inefficiencies arise in this economy, since early in life, individuals hold

too much of their wealth in human capital relative to physical capital, while

at retirement all wealth is invested in physical capital. These portfolio

imbalances preclude optimal sharing of factor—share risk. Merton suggests

that a Social Security system which pays retirees a share of current wage

income implicitly provides diversification across factor shares, and can

increase welfare by improving the efficiency of risk—bearing in the economy.

    A similar argument can be made with regard to DB versus DC plans. In a DC

plan, the income of a retired individual depends solely on investment

performance, and is independent of retirement—period uncertainty in factor

shares. Retirees thus have no stake in labor income during their retirement

period. In a DB plan, retirement income is also determined upon retirement.

However,    if factor share uncertainty is primarily attributable to
unforeseeable long—term secular trends (rather than to transitory business
cycle   effects) then a final—salary DB plan may   provide risk—sharing benefits
similar    to Merton's Social Security scheme. Such secular uncertainty could

arise, for example, from unanticipated changes in labor—augmenting technical

progress.

    Since the pension benefit under the DB plan is tied to final salary,

individuals participating in such a scheme are invested in an implicit

security that is tied to the wage share in the neighborhood of the retirement

period. To the extent that firms offer ad hoc increases in pension benefits

when wages of current employees increase, the retiree's stake in aggregate

labor income is further enhanced. Of course DC plan benefits also depend to




                                       —27—
 some extent on end—of—career earnings. However, the career averaging

 properties of DC plans greatly reduce the magnitude of this dependence. Thus,

 if labor—income uncertainty is predominantly dependent on economy—wide

 factors, then this source of risk will favor DB over DC plans.



     D.   Inflation

     In the preceding model, we assumed that wages and pension benefits were

all contracted in real terms. It is clear that   the   vast majority of DB plans

as currently implemented are not contractually indexed during the retirement

period. This weakens the case for viewing DB plans as offering

income—maintenance or interest—rate insurance.

    Moreover, there is controversy surrounding the degree of indexation during

the worker's active life. Bulow (1982) has argued that wages in firms

administering DB plans should not be expected to keep pace with the price

level. His argument is based on the notion that labor markets clear as spot

markets (with respect to pension issues) and that any implicit contracts

between firms and workers are independent of pension issues. In this case,

the market clearing employee compensation will determine the sum of wages plus

accruing pension benefits. The level of either wages or pension accruals

alone, however, is indeterminate.

    To illustrate Bulow's point consider the effects of an unanticipated

increase in the price level. The increase imposes a real loss on workers,

since their pension benefits are defined in nominal terms. Of course, the

worker's loss is the firm's gain. If, however, the employees were to receive

a pay raise in the subsequent period which would keep their real wage

constant, then the earnings base upon which pension benefits are calculated




                                     —28—
 also would rise at the inflation rate, and the worker's pension loss would be

 eliminated. Real compensation in the second period would in effect be higher

 than in the first: real wages are constant, but pension transfers have

 increased in order to compensate for the effects of the unanticipated

 Inflation. The firm has, in effect, issued insurance against the effect of

 inflation on the value of pension benefits.

     Bulow argues that firms should not be expected to and do not behave in

this way. His competing model holds total real compensation exogenous.

Because pension benefits in DB plans Increase with the wage level, the wage

component of compensation will not rise at the Inflation rate in the

subsequent period. Instead, the sum of the partially indexed wage increase

and partially indexed recovery of real pension benefits together will provide

an Increase in nominal compensation which matches the inflation rate.

However, the Initial loss of pension value due to the inflation is borne

entirely by the worker.

    Under the Bulow model, DB plans pose significant risk to participants.

The nominal nature of the pension contract is to be taken quite seriously;

workers bear the entire brunt of inflation risk. Thus, while DB plans provide

a less variable final—salary replacement rate to workers than do DC plans, the

final real salary itself becomes more sensitive to inflation. Whether DB or

DC plans are riskier in a utility sense is therefore an open question.

    Bulow's model is far from universally accepted. Several observers (e.g.

Cohn and Modigllani [1983]) believe that    firms   do in fact offer implicit

indexation to workers. In this view, the wage decision is made separately

from the pension decIsion, and the effects of wage increases on pension

benefits are ignored in the determination of worker compensation.




                                     —29—
 V. CONCLUDING COMMENTS: IS THERE A BETTER WAY?

     The major advantage of DB plans is the potential they offer to provide a

 stable replacement rate of final income to workers. If the replacement rate

 is the relevant variable for worker retirement utility, then DB plans offer

 some degree of insurance against real wage risk. Of course, protection

 offered to workers is risk borne by the firm. As real wages change, funding

 rates must correspondingly adjust. However, to the extent that real wage risk

 is largely diversiflable to employers, and nondiversifiable to employees, the

 replacement rate stability should be viewed as an advantage of DB plans.

     The advantages of DC plans are most apparent during periods of inflation

 uncertainty. These are: the predictability of the value of pension wealth,

 the ability to invest in inflation—hedged portfolios rather than nominal DB

 annuities, and the fully—funded nature of the DC plan. Finally, the DC plan

has the advantage that workers can more easily determine the true present

value of the pension benefit they earn in any year, although they may have

more uncertainty about future pension benefit flows at retirement.   Measuring
the present value of accruing defined benefits is difficult at best and

imposes severe informational requirements on workers. Such difficulties could

lead workers to misvalue their total compensation, and result in misinformed
          8
behavior.

    Of interest for future research is the possibility of pension plan designs

that combine the best attributes of DB and DC plans. Many firms already offer

DB plans supplemented by DC plans. An interesting alternative is the

so—called floor plan, which is in essence a DC plan together with a guarantee

of a minimum retirement income based on a DB—type formula.9 Enployers and

employees can trade off the level of guaranteed floor against the size of the




                                    —30—
expected DC benefit. These plans offer the downside protection of DB plans,

yet still allow employees to take positions in high expected return assets.

Floor plans already are offered by some firms and allow for a great deal of

flexibility and creativity.




                                    —31—
                                          Footnotes



1.     It is important to distinguish here between several subcategories of DC

      plans: money purchase, profit sharing and thrift plans. For money

      purchase plans like TIAA—cREF, contributions are usually based on the

      employee's compensation as stated in the text. But in profit sharing

      plans employer contributions are based on the sponsor's profitability, and

      in   thrift plans   contribution   levels are usually determined voluntarily by
      employees, with employer matching contributions at some prespecified
      rate. Thrift plans are usually       offered as a supplement to a DB or other
      DC   plan.
2.    Until the late l970s, employee contributions to many DC plans were not

      tax—deductible, the main exception being employees of certain non—profit

      organizations   (403(b) plans). But recently the government has expanded

      tax—deductibility of employee contributions to the private for—profit

     sector through 401(k) plans.

3. There is a separate question of whether the difference in backloadirig

     patterns is   of importance to workers. Consider a scenario in     which the
     inflation rate is fixed and only the interest rate varies. In this case,

     the impact of interest rates on accrual patterns would be irrelevant to

     workers from a welfare standpoint. The real stream of benefits to be paid

     starting at retirement is independent of the trajectory of the present

     value of accrued benefits. When inflation rates
                                                           are stochastic, however,

     backloading patterns can have important effects on welfare. The real

     benefit stream during retirement moves inversely with the stochastic price

     level.




                                           —32—
4. The contribution pattern for a DC plan required to match the accrual

    pattern of a DB plan could run   into   IRS limits on annual contributions at

    older ages, particularly for higher paid employees.

5. An alternative explanation is that insurance companies view their

    annuitants as members of a captive market and try to recoup past losses by

    offering them below—market rates.

6. As always, it is impossible to tell from first principles of welfare

    analysis whether an individual would necessarily choose to convert wealth

    into a riskiess stream of retirement benefits.

7. This is an actuarially fair adjustment in the sense that the expected

    value of period—3 income would be unaffected.

8. While workers are more likely to be informationally disadvantaged than

   employers, the level of complication is such that employers also may make

   significant mistakes. All   of   this is perhaps an issue in evaluating the

   Bulow argument since that argument turns on accurate perceptions of the

    "true" pension benefits and   costs.
9. Among the companies offering floor plans are Xerox, Hewlett—Packard, and

   Georgia—Pacific.




                                      —33—
                                      References

 Amoroso, Vincent, 1983. "Termination Insurance for Single—Employer Pension

     Plans: Costs and Benefits," Transactions, Society of Actuaries, 35, 71—83.

 Bulow, Jeremy I., 1982. "What Are Corporate Pension Liabi1ities,'
                                                                      Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 435—452.

 Bierwag, G.O., 1977. "Immunization, Duration and the Term Structure of

     Interest Rates," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, December,

     725—42.


 Bierwag, G.O. and Kaufman, George G., 1977. "Coping with the Risk of Interest

     Rate Fluctuations," Journal of Business, July, 364—70.

Bodie, Zvi, 1980. "An Innovation for Stable Real Retirement Income," Journal

    of Portfolio Management, Fall, 5—13.

Cohn, Richard A. and Modigliani, Franco, 1983. "Inflation and Corporate

    Financial Management," Mimeo.

Cox, John C.; Ingersoll, Jonathan E.; and Ross, Stephan A., 1979. "Duration

    and the Measurement of Basis Risk," Journal of Business, 52, January,

    51—61.

Diamond, Peter and James Mlrrlees, 1985. "Insurance Aspects of Pensions,"

    in Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, edited by David Wise, Chicago:

    University of CHicago Press.

Ellwood, David T. "Pensions and the Labor Market: A Starting Point,"

    in Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, ed. David Wise, 1985.

Marcus, Alan J., 1985.   Corporate Pension Policy and the Value of PBGC

    Insurance." in The Economics of the U.S. Pension System, edited by Zvi

   Bodje, John Shoven and David Wise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                       —34—
Merton, Robert C, 1983. "On the Role of Social Security as a Means for

    Efficient Risk Sharing in an Economy Where Human Capital is Not

    Tradeable," Chapter 12 in Bodie and Shoven, eds., Financial Aspects of the

    U.S. Pension System, University of Chicago Press.

Merton, Robert C., Zvi Bodie and Alan J. Marcus, 1984. "Pension Plan

    Integration as Insurance Against Social Security Risk," National Bureau of

   Economic Research Working Paper No. 1370.




                                    —35—
