NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN IS CAPITAL ENOUGH TO GET FEMALE MICROENTERPRISES GROWING?
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT IN GHANA
Marcel Fafchamps
David McKenzie
Simon R. Quinn
Christopher Woodruff
Working Paper 17207
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17207

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

We are grateful to Markus Mobius and conference and seminar participants at Auvergne, Bristol, the
IPA Microfinance conference, Madrid, Michigan, Oxford, Paris, Stern (NYU), Tilburg, Leuven, the
World Bank, and Microsoft Research, Cambridge for useful comments. The authors thank Caroline
Kouassiaman for outstanding work as project coordinator, and Innovations for Poverty Action for
their support on the ground. Financial support from the World Bank’ Gender Action Plan and Research
Budget is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Marcel Fafchamps, David McKenzie, Simon R. Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When is capital enough to get female microenterprises growing? Evidence from a randomized
experiment in Ghana
Marcel Fafchamps, David McKenzie, Simon R. Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 17207
July 2011
JEL No. O12,O16
ABSTRACT
Standard models of investment predict that credit-constrained firms should grow rapidly when given
additional capital, and that how this capital is provided should not affect decisions to invest in the
business or consume the capital. We randomly gave cash and in-kind grants to male- and female-owned
microenterprises in urban Ghana. Our findings cast doubt on the ability of capital alone to stimulate
the growth of female microenterprises. First, while the average treatment effects of the in-kind grants
are large and positive for both males and females, the gain in profits is almost zero for women with
initial profits below the median, suggesting that capital alone is not enough to grow subsistence enterprises
owned by women. Second, for women we strongly reject equality of the cash and in-kind grants; only
in-kind grants lead to growth in business profits. The results for men also suggest a lower impact of
cash, but differences between cash and in-kind grants are less robust. The difference in the effects
of cash and in-kind grants is associated more with a lack of self-control than with external pressure.
As a result, the manner in which funding is provided affects microenterprise growth.
Marcel Fafchamps
Oxford University
marcel.fafchamps@economics.ox.ac.uk

Simon R. Quinn
Oxford University
simon.quinn@economics.ox.ac.uk

David McKenzie
The World Bank, MSN MC3-307
1818 H Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
dmckenzie@worldbank.org

Christopher Woodruff
Graduate School of IR/PS
UC, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
cwoodruff@ucsd.edu

1

Introduction

Despite the emphasis placed by microfinance organizations on lending to female business owners,
evidence from three recent randomized controlled trials has cast doubt on the ability of capital
alone to grow female-operated microenterprises (de Mel et al 2008, Banerjee et al 2010, and
Karlan and Zinman 2010).1 The three experiments were all run in South and Southeast Asian
countries: Sri Lanka, India and the Philippines. In Sri Lanka, the capital was provided as
grants, while in India and the Philippines, capital was provided by increasing the availability of
microloans. In Sri Lanka and the Philippines, the lack of returns in female-owned enterprises
contrasted with evidence of positive returns in male-owned enterprises.
One possible interpretation is that female-owned microenterprises in these countries are already operating at their eﬃcient level of capital, which just happens to be very low for most firms.
Emran et al. (2007), for instance, argue that many of the women drawn into self-employment
have low eﬃcient scale and are only self-employed because of labor market imperfections. Labor
market imperfections for women may be particularly strong in societies like those in South Asia,
as evidenced by low labor force participation rates among women. This raises the question of
whether capital might be more successful in growing female-owned microenterprises in other
areas of the world.2 In much of Africa, for example, female labor force participation rates are
higher than in Asia, and women are more integral to household income generation. It is therefore
possible that the scope for female firm growth from more capital is higher in Africa.
An alternative explanation is that the small scale of many female-owned firms is in fact not
eﬃcient, but instead arises from a lack of separation between household and business decisionmaking and from ineﬃciencies in the way people allocate assets between them. One form of
ineﬃciency can arise from self-control problems, leading individuals to not undertake productive
investments today that have large payoﬀs in the future (Banerjee and Mullainathan, 2010; Duflo
et al, 2010). A second form of ineﬃciency can come from ineﬃcient intra-household allocation
of resources (Udry, 1996; Somville, 2011) or pressure to share with others in ones social network
(Charlier, 1999; Platteau, 2000; di Falco and Bulte, 2009). Either of these cases can cause a
1

Bjorvatn et al. (2011) also find no eﬀect of capital grants on either male of female small businesses in Tanzania,

but their sample is restricted to non-credit constrained entrepreneurs so it is unclear how relevant these findings
are for microenterpreneurs in general.
2
This is related to the more general issue of external validity, a common refrain in recent debates about what
the profession is learning from randomized experiments (e.g. Banerjee and Duflo, 2009; Ravallion, 2009; Deaton
2010).

2

lack of asset integration, so that it is not only how much capital, but the form that this capital
comes in, which determines the extent to which it helps grow the business.
This paper uses a randomized experiment in Ghana to test between competing models of
microenterprise investment and growth and thereby better understand the conditions under
which capital alone is enough for enterprise growth. The intervention itself is closely modeled
on the design used by de Mel et al. (2008, 2009a) in Sri Lanka. A sample of both female and
male microenterprise owners who had no paid employees at the time of the baseline survey were
randomly allocated into treatment and control groups. The treatment group received grants of
150 Ghanaian cedis (approximately $120 at the time of the baseline). As in Sri Lanka, half the
grants were provided in cash and half in kind. A key diﬀerence is that the Ghanaian sample
contains more than twice as many firms as in the Sri Lankan study, providing more power to
distinguish the eﬀects of providing capital in diﬀerent forms.
The experiment confirms some of the findings from the Asian experiments, but adds considerable nuance to our understanding of the role of access to additional capital in determining
the growth of female-owned enterprises. A one-time in-kind grant of 150 cedis is estimated to
increase monthly profits by 37-39 cedis for both males and females, a large average return on
this grant. However, among females, in-kind grants only lead to profit increases for the top 40
percent of businesses in terms of initial size. Women running smaller subsistence businesses, i.e.,
those earning $1 per day on average, saw no gains from access to additional capital. In contrast
the returns for males occur for both smaller and larger firms.3 As in Sri Lanka, capital alone
does not appear to be enough to grow subsistence businesses run by women.
We find that cash grants of the same size had a significantly smaller eﬀect, increasing profits
by only 10-14 cedis on average. When the sample is split between women and men, we find that
the diﬀerent in treatment eﬀect between in-kind and cash grants is significant among women
but not among men. In some specifications, but not all, men show significant increases in profits
following the cash grants. This result is not significant when we condition on our baseline data,
however. We find that the cash grants tend to be spent on household consumption or transferred
3

The high marginal returns to the capital shocks for males are consistent with non-experimental work in Ghana

which has found evidence of high returns to capital for male-owned informal enterprises. Bigsten et al. (2000) find
much higher returns to physical capital than human capital in African small and medium scale manufacturing
firms, Udry and Anagol (2006) find returns to be at least 60 percent per year among purchasers of used auto
parts in Accra, and Schündeln (2006) finds strong evidence of financing constraints among small Ghanaian firms
using a structural modeling approach.

3

out of the house, especially when given to women whose businesses were small to begin with.
The experiment allows us to test between three competing models of microenterprise investment and growth. The results are not consistent with either a standard Ramsey model or with
a variation of this model that incorporates time-inconsistent preferences. To explain a large
diﬀerence in outcomes between cash and in-kind grants, we need a model with a lack of asset
integration where the form in which capital comes aﬀects the extent to which it is invested in
the business. We examine two possible causes of the diﬀerence between in-kind and cash grants:
self-control issues caused by time-inconsistent preferences, high discount rates, or lack of ability
to save; and external pressure from others to share additional resources. We find that the eﬀect
of the cash treatment is significantly more positive for individuals with the most self-control,
whereas there is no evidence of treatment heterogeneity with respect to external pressure. This
is consistent with the recent evidence in Spears (2009) who suggests that present-bias is a key
constraint on microentrepreneurs expanding their businesses. But it contradicts results from
Anderson and Baland (2002) for Kenya and Somville (2011) for Benin, whose evidence suggests
that women seek to save outside the household in order to avoid contributing to household expenses, and findings by Brune et al. (2011) in Malawi, who argue that the reason for the success
of a saving commitment product is the desire to escape external pressure.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present the conceptual
framework and testing strategy. Section 3 describes the experimental design and characteristics
of our sample. Section 4 gives the basic experimental results, and explores heterogeneity by
gender, treatment type, and randomization strata. Section 5 then asks what happens to the
cash grants and what distinguishes the profitable from less profitable female businesses. Section
6 examines why the cash and in-kind treatments diﬀer, and Section 7 concludes.

2

Conceptual framework and testing strategy

In this section we present a conceptual framework that guides our empirical analysis. The model
is organized around two key assumptions which characterize the population of microenterprises
we study: entrepreneurs cannot borrow and have to self finance (only 10 percent of our sample
has ever had a formal loan); and they have diﬀerent abilities and ability is a complement to
capital. We first present a model of capital accumulation without time inconsistency and derive
testable predictions regarding the eﬀect of a capital grant. We then introduce time consistency

4

and self-control issues and discuss how experimental predictions are aﬀected. Next we discuss
asset integration and intra-household issues. The testing strategy is presented at the end.

2.1

The Ramsey model

Consider an entrepreneur facing a standard accumulation problem of the form:
max

 0 ≥0 ≥0

∞
X

  ( ) subject to

=0

 = (  ) +  − (+1 −  ) − (+1 −  )

(1)

where  is capital invested in a business with total return to capital ( ), variable  is individual specific talent,  is the discount factor, and  is a financial asset with return .4 We assume
 ≥ 0 (positive or zero returns to capital) but  2 2  0 (decreasing returns to scale).
Decreasing returns to scale may be due to the presence of fixed factors, such as entrepreneur
time and family labor. We also assume that  2   0: more talented entrepreneurs have
higher marginal returns to capital.5
There are two possible treatments: a cash transfer  and an in-kind transfer  at an
arbitrary time . Both can be turned into more capital  but it takes time to liquidate grant
 that comes in the form of equipment or inventories. In contrast,  is liquid and perfectly
fungible with  or  or . We derive model predictions about  and .
We first note that, by asset arbitrage,  = 0 if  0 ( )  . In this case, the first order
conditions are as follows:
  0 = 
 (1 +  0 ) = −1
where  0 denotes the marginal return to capital and  is the Lagrange multiplier associated
with the constraint. From the above we get a standard Euler equation of the form:
1 +  0 ( ) =
4

1 0−1
·
 0

Variable ( ) measures value added, that is, return to capital and family labor net of intermediate input

costs and other recurrent costs. Given the nature of the studied firms, this corresponds to an accounting notion
of profit, but not to an economic notion of profit/return to capital since we have not imputed the cost of the
entrepreneur’s labor.
5
It is conceivable that a minimum level of capital is needed to initiate a business. Since all households in our
sample by construction have a business, we ignore this here.

5

If we ignore savings  , there exists a steady state level of capital ∗ such that profit  and
consumption  are constant and:
 0 ( ∗  ) = 
where  ≡

1−
 .

The proof follows from the fact that, without savings  , the above is a standard

Ramsey model. Given that  2 2  0 it follows that  ∗   0 — more patient entrepreneurs
have larger  ∗ .
If   , the entrepreneur stops investing in the firm once the marginal return to capital
falls below , and invests in  instead. The optimal firm size is then given by:
 0 (∗∗  ) = 
with ∗∗   ∗ . Given our assumption that,  2   0 comparative statics imply that both
∗   0 and  ∗∗   0 — more talented entrepreneurs have larger steady state capital and
firm size. Only patient agents – that is, those with    – ever hold non-zero savings,   0.
If   min{∗  ∗∗ }, the cash and in-kind treatments are predicted to increase capital and
profits by the same amount.6 Their long term eﬀect is to shorten the time necessary to reach the
steady state firm size. In contrast, when a entrepreneur has reached  ∗ or  ∗∗ , the eﬀect of the
two treatments is diﬀerent. If  = ∗∗ , a cash transfer has no eﬀect on capital and + 
= 0 for any  ≥ 0; it raises consumption  and savings  instead. In this case we should observe
no cash treatment eﬀect on profits  + ( ): the cash treatment  should not be invested in
firms that have already reached their optimal size; it should be saved instead. If the in-kind
treatment  cannot be liquidated immediately, however, we expect a temporary positive eﬀect
on profit: ( +  )  ( ) since, by assumption,  ≥ 0. But this eﬀect should be
short-lived: the firm should return to its steady state capital level as soon as  can be divested.
If  =  ∗ with   , then instead of saving in asset  in order to smooth consumption of the
capital grant, it is optimal for the entrepreneur to use a temporary investment in the firm as
buﬀer to smooth consumption. In this case,  and  have a similar short-run eﬀect on capital
and profits.
In all cases the model predicts that the cash and in-kind treatments will result in higher
consumption. In the steady state case with   , the household is impatient and the treatment
will be consumed rapidly before consumption returns to its steady state level. In the case where
6

In the interest of space, we do not discuss the case where  +   min{∗  ∗∗ }   . This case is eﬀectively

a weighted average of the two cases we describe.

6

  , there will be more smoothing, that is, part of the treatment will be saved and consumed
later. In the case where  is below its steady state, we expect an increase in consumption out
of higher profits.

2.2

Time-inconsistent preferences

We now introduce quasi-hyperbolic preferences as in Laibson (1997). At time  the household
sets  so as to solve:
max

{   }

( ) + 

∞
X

  ( ) subject to (1)

where   1. But once at time  + 1, the household sets +1 according to:
∞
X
max
(+1 ) + 
  ( ) subject to (1)
{+1 +1 +1 }

(2)

=+1

(3)

=+2

This means that at time  + 1 the household wants to revisit decisions taken at time  and set

paths for {+1  +2  +1  +2   +1  +2  } that diﬀer from those set in period .
In Appendix 1 we show that the entrepreneur stops investing after reaching a steady state
level of capital  (for a sophisticate) or   (for a myopic decision maker) which are, in general,
smaller than ∗ . Model predictions regarding the eﬀect of a capital grant are similar to the
Ramsey model. If the firm has already reached its steady state   or   , the cash transfer 
will be rapidly consumed while the in-kind grant  will be divested as quickly as is feasible.
If    or  , then the additional cash  or inventories  will remain in the business and
increase future profits.
To summarize, the standard and time inconsistent models both predict that the long-term
eﬀect of the cash and in-kind transfers on capital and profit are nil for firms that have already
reached their steady state capital level. The short-term eﬀect of the cash transfer on capital
and profit is also nil. For the in-kind treatment there is a short-term increase in capital and
profit until the household is able to divest, which is expected to happen as soon as is feasible. In
contrast, for firms that are below steady state, both cash and in-kind transfers are predicted to
be entirely invested and the eﬀect of the grant is to reduce the time taken to reach the optimal
firm size.

2.3

Asset non-integration and family pressure

In the experiment most in-kind grants are used to purchase inventories and raw materials rather
than machinery (and firm owners could chose which of these it was). It should therefore be
7

relatively easy to de-capitalize these grants (by selling and not replacing stock) and take them
out of the business. This diﬀers from the conditionality on school attendance or vaccination in
traditional conditional cash transfers, which are not reversible. We should therefore think of the
diﬀerence between cash and in-kind treatments as earmarking the grant for a specific purpose
and reducing its liquidity. Given that inventory turnover is quite rapid in the kind of enterprises
covered by this study — e.g., one week — the reduction in liquidity is minimal. Based on the
models discussed so far, we should therefore expect little diﬀerence between cash and in-kind
treatments.
Until now we have assumed that people make decisions regarding asset accumulation in an
integrated manner, i.e., that consumption , profits , capital  and savings  are regarded as
fungible. Yet experimental evidence suggests that asset integration often fails. For instance,
it is common for experimental participants to exhibit considerable risk aversion even though
the stakes are very small stakes relative to their wealth (Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom 2007;
Andersen, Harrison, Lau and Rutstrom 2008). Similarly, Camerer, Babcock, Loewenstein and
Thaler (1997) find that cab drivers make labor supply decisions based on single-day earnings.
In other words, they fail to integrate earnings over a longer time period of a week or a month
when making enterprise decisions.
Self-control issues arising from dynamic inconsistencies in preferences are one reason people
may not undertake productive activities today that have large payoﬀs in the future. For example,
Duflo et al. (2010) find farmers in Kenya fail to undertake profitable investments in fertilizer
due to present-bias, but that oﬀering small time-limited discounts can induce them to do so.
Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010) show that these time-inconsistency issues can be particularly
important for the poor. Given this, in-kind grants may then act as a “nudge” to get firm owners
to invest in their business, and once the money is in inventories and equipment, limited illiquidity
may help the firm owner avoid impulse purchases.
Asset integration may also fail for reasons external to the individual, such as disagreement
over the allocation of resources between household or family members. If intra-household bargaining is eﬃcient, asset integration should hold. But if binding commitment is not possible, for
instance because of lack of trust, intra-household allocation of resources can be ineﬃcient. Udry
(1996), for instance, shows that organic fertilizer is not allocated eﬃciently between male and
female fields in Burkina Faso. Anderson and Baland (2002) similarly show that women in urban Kenya join rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs) to shelter money away from

8

their spouse. A similar result is reported by Somville (2011) for Benin. de Mel et al. (2009a)
suggest women may ineﬃciently over-invest in less liquid forms of business assets in order to
resist spousal pressure.
Pressure to redistribute resources can also be exerted from outside the household. Platteau
(2000) introduces the idea of sharing norms to economics from anthropology. He notes that
in many developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, individuals often live in large
households and have strong links to extended family and kinship networks. Social sharing
norms can make it hard for individuals to save and invest, as they are forced to share additional
resources with others. These sharing norms can vary according to the source of income and how
it is stored. For example, Duflo and Udry (2004) find evidence that the proceeds of diﬀerent
crops are used for diﬀerent purposes in Côte d’Ivoire, and note that income from some crops
is expected to be shared within the household and income from others is not. Charlier (1999),
based on work in Côte d’Ivoire, notes that as a result of sharing norms, individuals may develop
an illiquidity preference in order to be able to resist social claims without appearing selfish.
Suggestive evidence supporting this view comes from di Falco and Bulte (2009), who show in
South Africa that households with more kinship links spend less of their income on liquid and
sharable assets, and from Baland, Guirkinger and Mali (2007), who find individuals in Cameroon
taking loans even though they have high savings balances, which their interviews reveal to be a
way of resisting demands for financial assistance by others. Jakiela and Ozier (2011) find in a
lab experiment in rural Kenya that women invest less when the income they earn is observable
to relatives, even when this reduces their expected total earnings. However, Grimm et al. (2010)
oﬀer a more mixed picture, finding in seven West-African countries that local social networks
within the city actually have a positive association with business performance, whereas there
is a negative association between business performance and a smaller distance to the village of
origin.
In our context the existence of a “social solidarity tax”, either from other household members
or from extended family members, may lead to less of the cash grant being invested in the
business than is the case with the in-kind grant. This could arise either due to the diﬀerence
in liquidity (it takes some time to decapitalize inventories and raw materials and this time is
suﬃcient to resist pressure for on-the-spot transfers) or to the diﬀerence in form and function
(there could be an expectation to share cash coming into the household, but not to share the
value of additional materials going into the business).

9

To capture these ideas, let us rewrite the law of motion of entrepreneurial capital as:

+1 =  + (  ) − 

(4)

where  ≡  + +1 − (1 + ) represents what is taken out of the enterprise either to be
consumed or to be invested in other assets. In the Ramsey and time inconsistent models —
hereafter RTI models — the optimal choices of consumption  and savings +1 depend on total
cash-in-hand  + (  ) + (1 + ) . Unless  is illiquid, increasing  or   has the same
eﬀect on cash-in-hand and thus on  , +1 and  +1 . In the more general case,  = (    )
and asset integration requires that (    ) = (  +  ). If households regard  and   as
not fungible, they are imperfect substitutes in (    ) and (    ) 6= (  +  ). This simple
observation forms the basis for our testing strategy.
As discussed earlier, asset integration may fail because assets  are less susceptible to internal
pressure than profits   . Turning working capital into inventories or equipment may serve as
self-commitment device against the temptation of impulse purchases. This is akin to consumers
putting money on a low-yield savings account that is less conveniently accessible. In the same
vein, Fafchamps, Udry, and Czukas (1998) present evidence suggesting that, in times of duress,
farming households prefer to reduce consumption than sell animals because the latter would
translate into lower income in the future.
The other possibility is that pressure from household members and other relatives works as
a tax on the business with









≥ 0. Money tied up in inventories or equipment is less

liquid and thus partly insulated from external pressure. If successful, this tactic would yield a
marginal tax rate on cash flow




that is higher than the marginal tax on capital


 .

If asset

non-integration signals an eﬀort to escape taxation of this kind, it is more likely to be observed
among enterprises operated by more subordinate household members, such as married women.
When asset integration fails, cash and in-kind treatments can have systematically diﬀerent
eﬀects: the in-kind transfer may be treated as adding to the firm’s capital, while the cash
treatment is regarded as part of the firm’s cash flow, or as never having entered the firm in the
first place. To illustrate, consider the simple case where

10




= 0 but




 0. A steady state firm

size   is defined as a capital stock that satisfies:7
(  ) = ((  ))
To fix ideas, suppose that  =   +  with 0    1. The law of motion of capital becomes:
+1 =  + (1 − )(  ) − 

(5)

which resembles a Solow model with a negative drift term . Provided that the marginal return
to capital is high enough at low values of ,8 diﬀerence equation (5) has two equilibria: a high,

stable equilibrium 
similar to the steady state of a Solow model; and an low, unstable



equilibrium 
below which the firm closes down. For  such that 
   
, the firm
 , the firm is unstable and eventually disappears — and is thus unlikely
is growing. For   

to be part of our sample.
We now introduce cash and in-kind grants. Equation (5) is rewritten:

+1 =  +  + (1 − )((  ) +  ) − 


   
, the in-kind treatment 
which implies that for initial values of  such that 

has a one-for-one eﬀect on capital stock +1 but the cash treatment only has a 1 −  eﬀect on
+1 :
∆
∆
=11−=


where the notation ∆ denotes +1 −  . In other words the cash treatment is predicted to
have a lower eﬀect on future capital — and hence profits — than the in-kind treatment as long as
  0, that is, as long as




 0.


Turning to long-term predictions, if the firm was below its equilibrium size 
, the in-kind

treatment speeds up convergence to the steady state 
. Future additional profits generated

by  +  are subject to taxation and raise future consumption. If the firm was at — or above

, then decreasing returns in capital imply (  ) −   0 and the firm
— equilibrium size 

should slowly decapitalize the in-kind treatment  . In the special case where () =  and

initial capital   
but  +  + (1 − )(  ) −    , the in-kind treatment pushes
7

For some functions (), the steady state is not stable. For instance, if () =  with  a positive constant,

the steady state  is given by (  ) = , but the firm eventually closes down if    while it expands forever
for    . In contrast, if () = , the law of motion of capital becomes +1 =  and any capital level  is an
equilibrium.
8
A standard Inada condition.

11

the firm above the minimal threshold size and ensures its long term survival.9 In the special
case where () = , the in-kind treatment pushes the firm to a new equilibrium level of capital
 +  : future profits increase but there is no further addition or subtraction to capital after
 + 1.
The above example can be generalized to allow  to depend on both   and  . For instance,
let  =   +  +  with and 0    1. The no-closure stable steady state  is the (highest)
value of  that solves:10
(1 − )(  ) −  =  
It follows that equilibrium firm size is a decreasing function of both  and . The in-kind
treatment has a 1 −  eﬀect on +1 while the cash treatment has a 1 − , also less-than-onefor-one, eﬀect on +1 . Asset integration requires that  = . If investing in inventories and
equipment is successful as protecting the capital of the enterprise, we should observe   .
This forms the basis of our testing strategy.

2.4

Testing strategy

We estimate models of the form:
 + =  1  +  2  + +

(6)

+ = 1  + 2  + +

(7)

where  is the time of treatment,  + is the profit of entrepreneur  at time + after treatment,
+ is the capital stock, and + and + are error terms. Coeﬃcients ’s and ’s are the
average eﬀects of each of the two treatments on capital stock and profits, respectively, across
the population of firms in our sample.
The RTI models predict 1 = 2  0 and  1 =  2  0 if the firm was below its steady state
at the time of the treatment. They also predict 1 =  1 = 0 if the firm had already reached
its equilibrium size at time  such that  = ∗∗   , or  . Because the in-kind treatment is
not immediately fungible, these models also predict 2  0 and  2  0 for a small time from
9
10

In this case, the treatment eliminates a poverty trap.
If  = 0, this is a Solow model in disguise. If we set ( ) =   , the steady state is the usual:
 =



1− 





1
1−

where 1 −  is the savings rate and  plays the role of depreciation.

12

treatment , but eventually 2 =  2 = 0 for  large enough, as  returns to its steady state
from above. A similar result obtains if  = ∗ and firm capital is used as buﬀer to smooth
consumption.
In contrast, the model without asset integration makes predictions that do not in general

depend on whether the firm is above or below steady state 
. Predictions however depends

on the form taken by the external pressure function (). If  is a constant lumpsum  with
 =  = 0, then both treatments  and  increase capital one for one, that is, 1 = 2 = 1 at
time  =  + 1, that is, one period after treatment. If, in contrast,  =   and  is regarded
as part of the firm’s cash flow   but  is not, then 1 = 0 and 2 = 1 at all  ≥  + 1.
For the intermediate case where  =   +  with   1, the model predicts that  has a
one-for-one eﬀect on capital stock +1 , that is, that 2 = 1 but  only has a 1− eﬀect on +1 ,
i.e., 0  1 = 1 −   1. The larger  is, the closer 1 is to 0. Finally, when  =   +  + ,
that is, when external pressure also puts a tax on capital, then 0  2 = 1 −   1 while we still
have 0  1 = 1 −   1. Asset integration requires that 1 = 2 and hence that  1 =  2 .
We have discussed two main reasons why household asset integration may fail: internal
pressure driven by self-commitment problems; and external pressure from household and family
members. If external pressure comes primarily from husbands, unmarried women should show
a lower  and  and thus a stronger response to treatment. If pressure comes from children
or the extended family, a stronger response to treatment will be observed for entrepreneurs
without children or with a smaller extended family. To implement this idea, let  = 0 + 1 
and  =  0 +  1  with  a vector of proxies for diﬀerent kinds of external pressure. We estimate
a model of the form:
 + = (1 − ) + (1 − ) + +
= (1 − 0 ) − 1   + (1 −  0 ) −  1   + +

(8)

If a specific element of  is associated with a higher implicit tax rate on cash flow, then the
coeﬃcient of   should be negative and significant. Similarly, if it is associated with higher
taxation of capital, the coeﬃcient of   should be negative and significant.
We test internal pressure using a similar approach. In this case, pressure comes from the
non-business minded self, that is, the self susceptible to immediate gratification. In this context,
keeping excess liquidity in less fungible inventories and equipment can be seen as a way to
insulate working capital from temptation. If this strategy is successful, we should observe that
13

 1  1 for individuals with more self-commitment problems proxied by  .

3

The Experiment

3.1

The Sample

We purposively chose urban Ghana as the setting for this study. The choice of Ghana was
motivated by the desire to provide evidence in an African context, in a country known for a
history of involvement of women in business which provides a setting that is conducive to female
business success. Women in Ghana have similar labor force participation rates to men, and
are more likely to be self-employed. Evidence of this is seen in data from the 2000 Ghanaian
Census: the labor-force participation rates for 15-60 year olds are 69.6 percent for females and
73.9 percent for males, and in urban areas 45 percent of females are non-agricultural own-account
workers, compared to 33 percent of males. This contrasts sharply with Sri Lanka, the setting
for the experiment in de Mel et al. (2009a), where only 7.8 percent of prime age females are
self-employed, compared to 29.7 percent of prime age males.
Within Ghana we chose Accra, the capital and largest city, and the nearby industrial city
of Tema. A sample of microenterprises (which we term the Ghana Microenterprise Survey)
was then constructed as follows. First, enumeration areas (EAs) were selected with probability
proportional to the number of households in these EAs according to the 2000 census. We
randomly selected 70 EAs in Accra and 30 in Tema. Then, to reduce the costs of listing, we
subdivided EAs into equal areas, such that each area would contain approximately 70 to 80
households. This typically required dividing an EA into half or thirds. One of these areas was
then randomly selected from each EA. Enumerators went door to door in this area to carry
out a screening survey of each household. Households were screened to identify those with an
individual age 20 to 55 who was self-employed and working 30 or more hours per week in a
business with no paid employees and no motorized vehicle. These criteria were used to select
full-time microenterprise owners who were not so large that the grants in our experiment would
have little eﬀect.
The gender and business sector of all individuals passing this screen were then recorded. This
resulted in screening 7,567 households to identify 3,907 individuals who passed the screen. Only
19.4 percent of these individuals were male, confirming the predominance of women among
small enterprise owners in urban Ghana. Based on the gender mix of self-employed in these

14

industries in the 2000 Census, we classified business sectors into male-dominated industries,
identified as construction, repair services, manufacturing, and shoe making and repair; femaledominated industries, identified as hair and beauty care, and food and restaurant sales; and
mixed industries, identified as trade and retail, and sewing and tailoring. These industries cover
the vast majority of the industries in which the self-employed work in Ghana. The 4.6 percent
of those screened who worked in other industries such as communication services, pharmacy,
photography, fishing, and agriculture were not included in the sample.
Our aim was then to arrive at a sample of roughly 900 baseline firms stratified by gender
and sector. In order to minimize the spillovers from the treatments to be carried out, we limited
the sample from each EA to no more than 5 males in male-dominated and 5 males in mixed
industries, and no more than 3 females in female-dominated and 3 females in mixed industries.
We also ensured that only one individual was chosen from any given household. This resulted
in an initial sample of 907 firms, consisting of 538 females and 369 males. A baseline survey
of these firms was conducted in October and November 2008. The firm owners were asked for
details of both their firm and their household.
A second pre-treatment survey of these firms was conducted in February 2009. The purpose
of a second pre-treatment round was to eliminate firms most likely to attrit. In particular, 55 of
the initial 907 firms could not be found on at least three attempts, 15 firm owners refused this
second round, 24 firm owners were no longer operating a business, and 20 firms that did not
provide details on their firm profits, expenses and sales were eliminated. This left a final sample
for the experiment of 793 firms, comprising 479 females (248 in female-dominated industries and
231 in mixed industries) and 314 males (146 in male-dominated industries and 168 in mixed
industries).

3.2

Experimental design

The design of the experiment closely followed that used in Sri Lanka by de Mel et al. (2008,
2009a). Firms which completed the first two survey rounds were randomly allocated into three
groups: a control group of 396 firms, a treatment group of 198 firms which would receive 150
Ghanaian cedis (approximately US$120 at the time of the baseline) in cash which they could use
for any purpose, and a treatment group of 198 firms which would receive 150 cedis in equipment,
materials, or inventories for their business. In the case of the in-kind treatment, the equipment
or materials were selected by the firm owner and purchased directly by our research assistants

15

with the owner.
The majority of this was in the form of inventories to sell (e.g. beauty care products,
electronic goods, alcohol, food) and raw materials (e.g. wood, sandpaper, cloth, oil and other
cooking ingredients, shampoos and supplies for beauty salon use). Only 24 percent of those
receiving the in-kind treatment elected to buy physical equipment, with the most common
equipment purchased being sewing and knitting machines by tailors, hair dryers by owners of
beauty salons, and drills and other carpentry equipment by firms in woodwork. Males were more
likely to get some equipment with this treatment than females (33 percent versus 19 percent).
With the cash treatments, firm owners were notified by phone, or in-person, and then received
the cash through money transfer at a local bank or in-person.
We also randomly selected when firms would receive their grant, staggering the timing of the
grants, so that 198 firms were assigned to receive the grants after the second round, a further
181 firms assigned to receive the grants after the third round, and 18 firms were assigned to
receive the grants after the fourth round. This staggering was done both for the purpose of
managing the logistics of making these grants, and to provide incentives for firms to remain in
the study for multiple rounds since they were told more grants would be given out after rounds
3 and 4. These grants were framed to firms as prizes to thank firms for participating in the
survey. Participants in the survey were told that we were undertaking a study of small firms in
Ghana, and that some of the firms would be randomly chosen to receive prizes as a token of our
appreciation for their participation in the survey. Firms which were selected in either treatment
group were not told they had been selected for a prize until the time their prize was being given
out.
Randomization was done via computer after the second round of data was collected. Firms
were first stratified into 16 strata on the basis of gender and sector (males in male dominated
industries, males in mixed industries, females in female-dominated industries, and females in
mixed industries); baseline capital stock (above or below the raw baseline median of 181 cedis in
capital stock); and on a binary variable called “high capture”. In the second survey round, firm
owners were asked on a 5 point Likert scale (ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly
agree) to assess how strongly they agreed or disagreed with the statements “Whenever I have
money on hand, my spouse or other family members always end up requesting some of it”, and
“People who do well in their business here are likely to receive additional requests from family
and friends for money to help out with some expense or another”. We summed the responses

16

to these two questions, and classified as “high capture” firm owners with scores of the median
of 8 or above — that is if on average they agree with both statements.
Then within each strata, we ranked firms according to January 2009 reported profits (collected in the second round survey), and formed matched quadruplets of firms. We used wave 2
rather than baseline profits for the match since 9 percent of the firms did not report round 1
profits. Within the quadruplet one firm was then randomly chosen to receive the cash treatment,
one to receive the in-kind treatment, and two to be control firms. We then randomly selected
which quadruplets would receive their treatments after each round. In the end this resulted in
the 793 firms being matched into 195 groups, of which 4 groups ranged in size from 5 to 8 firms
and the remainder were quadruplets.
This randomization design was based on the analysis in Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) who
showed the potential for significant increases in power and baseline balance from matched pairs
(with a single treatment group) and stratification compared to simple randomization. The
variables used for stratification were motivated by the results in de Mel et al. (2009a). In
particular, we stratified by gender and industry since the ex post heterogeneity analysis in
that paper found strong diﬀerences by gender, and some suggestion of diﬀerences according
to whether women were working in female-dominated versus mixed industries. The choice of
“high capture” as a stratifying variable is motivated by the literature referenced earlier that
has suggested that many individuals who succeed in raising their incomes face large demands to
share it from others. In addition, there was some evidence in Sri Lanka that a reason for the low
returns to women is pressure from household members to redistribute resources. Stratification
on baseline capital stock was done both because this was believed to be a variable which would
be correlated with future profits, and to allow for testing potential heterogeneity in treatment
eﬀects for smaller and larger microenterprises. Matching of quadruplets on profits was done to
achieve greater balance on the pre-treatment value of the main outcome of interest as well as to
investigate treatment heterogeneity in this dimension. It also enables us to eliminate quadruplets
with outlier values of pre-treatment profits and still be assured of balance and random allocation
to treatments and control among the remaining sample.

3.3

Data collection and description of firms

The two pre-treatment survey rounds were followed up by four additional survey waves in May
2009, August 2009, November 2009, and February 2010. Of the 793 firms which completed the

17

first two rounds, 730 answered the final wave survey. Appendix 1 details wave by wave attrition
rates and shows the robustness of our main treatment eﬀects to corrections for attrition.
Each follow-up round collected data on changes over the quarter in fixed capital from purchases, sales or repair; the current value of inventories and raw materials, and the value of the
last month’s expenses, sales, and profits. The most important firm outcome variable measured
is firm profits. Profits were elicited via a direct question, following the recommendations of de
Mel et al. (2009b). Firm owners were asked: “After paying all expenses, what was the income
of the business (the profits) during January 2009? (Consider all expenses, including wages of
employees but not including any income you paid yourself as an expense)”. This definition
of profit thus includes the return to the entrepreneur’s labor and managerial talent. Nominal
profits were converted to October 2008 real profits using the Greater Accra region Consumer
Price Index collected by the Ghana Statistical Service.
An innovation in this experiment was the use of computerized cross-sectional and panel
consistency checks. Data was collected using PDAs, and a consistency check was triggered
whenever reported profits exceeded reported sales in the cross-section, whenever a firm reported
sales but not profits, and whenever the change in profits from one quarter to the next was less
than -33.3 percent or greater than +50 percent (provided the absolute change in profits was at
least 20 cedis). We discuss these consistency checks in more detail in Fafchamps et al. (2010),
where we show that they lead to some improvements in data quality. We therefore use the profits
which incorporate the consistency checks in this paper. Nonetheless, our results are similar when
we use the raw profit data.
Table 1 summarizes the basic characteristics of firms and their owners in our experimental
sample, and compares the pre-treatment characteristics of firms in the control group to those
assigned to either treatment group. The top of the table shows balance for the characteristics
used for stratification or matching, while the remaining rows compare the characteristics of other
variables of interest. Mean (median) monthly profits in January 2009 were 130 (68) cedis, and
mean (median) capital stock at the same point in time was 452 (172) cedis. The grants of 150
cedis were therefore approximately equivalent to two months’ profits and almost equal to the
size of existing capital stock for the median firm. However, since we did not explicitly cap profits
or capital stock when selecting firms into the experimental sample, there are a small number of
firms with much higher levels — the maximum profit reported in our pre-treatment waves is over
5000 cedis per month. The inclusion of these few larger firms does not have much eﬀect our

18

basic results, but has a larger eﬀect on our analysis of treatment heterogeneity. As discussed
below, we therefore focus most of our analysis involving heterogeneity of treatment response
on the firms in quadruplets which have baseline profits of 1500 cedis per month or less. Since
randomization occurred within quadruplets, balance on baseline characteristics is achieved for
this subsample also.
Table 1 shows that overall the two treatment groups look similar to the control group in
terms of pre-treatment characteristics. The exceptions are October/November 2008 profits and
January 2009 sales, which show significant diﬀerences across treatment groups in the trimmed
sample, and diﬀerences in magnitude, if not statistical significance, in the full sample. Recall
the matched randomization used the wave 2 profits. However, the correlation between wave 1
and wave 2 profits is only 0.19, compared to a correlation of 0.58 between wave 2 and wave 3
profits, and of 0.72 for the control group between waves 5 and 6 (which is the same seasonality
as between waves 1 and 2). This diﬀerence in baseline profits is due to pure chance, and is in a
variable which the data suggests involves considerable noise and perhaps learning on the part of
survey respondents as well. Imbalance on this baseline profit measure is thus unlikely to imply
imbalance on follow-up profits, particularly given the pre-treatment balance on wave 2 profits
(Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009). Nevertheless, we will show our results are largely robust to the
use of firm fixed eﬀects which account for any baseline imbalances, the main diﬀerence being in
the cash-treatment for males, which we discuss in detail later.
As seen in Table 1, the mean owner in our sample is 36 years old, has almost 9 years of
schooling, and has been running the firm for 7 years. The mean number of digits recalled in
a Digitspan recall test is 5.1, which is almost one digit lower than the 5.9 average among Sri
Lankan microenterprise owners (de Mel et al, 2008). The majority of firms are run out of the
home, with 83 percent of women and 69 percent of men operating a business from their dwelling.
Most firms are informal, with only 14 percent registered for taxes, and only 10 percent have ever
had a loan from a bank or microfinance institution. Half of the firm owners use a susu collector,
with this more common among women (58 percent) than men (34 percent). A susu collector is
an informal mobile banker, who typically collects a savings deposit daily from individuals and
returns them at the end of the month after subtracting one day’s deposit as a fee. That is,
saving is at negative interest rates in exchange for safekeeping. Besley (1995, p. 2150) states
that “a frequently heard rationale for the existence of this institution is that there are diﬃculties
for those who have a stock of liquid assets in resisting the claims of their friends and relatives

19

(or even spouses)”.

4

Testing the predictive power of the models

Before investigating the eﬀect of the randomized capital grants on sample firms, we briefly
examine the baseline data for evidence consistent with predictions made by the models presented
in Section 2. The evidence we oﬀer is non-experimental, but since we are not trying to draw
causal inference, observational data remains useful.
The Ramsey model predicts, other things being equal, that more patient entrepreneurs have
a higher steady state capital stock. More talented entrepreneurs should also have larger firms
and thus larger capital stock. The time inconsistency model further predicts that entrepreneurs
that are more hyperbolic in their discounting should also have a lower steady state capital stock.
We investigate these predictions using the baseline capital stock of all respondents. The
results are shown on Table 2. Consistent with the predictions of the model, we find some
evidence that more able entrepreneurs have larger capital stocks. The regression in column 1
shows that years of schooling, results from a Raven test of non-verbal reasoning, and results
from a forward digitspan test all have positive measured eﬀects, though only the digitspan score
is statistically significant.
The column 1 regression also includes measures of the owner’s short-term discount rate and
an indication of hyperbolic attitudes. Hyperbolicity is proxied by answers to questions asked in
the baseline survey involving discount rates over the two diﬀerent time horizons, and patience
is measured by whether a respondent has a discount rate above or below the sample median.
Firm owners were asked hypothetical questions to elicit the amounts that would leave them
indiﬀerent between an amount today, and 100 cedis in one month; and between an amount in
five months and 100 cedis in six months. From this we construct two proxies: an indicator
variable of whether the respondent has a discount rate above the median for the one month
versus today comparison (the median person would take 90 today instead of 100 in one month);
and an indicator of being a hyperbolic discounter based on comparison of discount rates over
the two horizons (28 percent of the sample are classified as hyperbolic). We find that hyperbolic
discounters have significantly smaller businesses, consistent with the theory. Those with below
median one month discount rates have insignificantly larger businesses.
Our surveys include two additional measures which each measures of self-control and the

20

ability to save cash, both of which were measured pre-treatment. These refer to actual saving
behavior as reported by respondents before treatment. The first is whether the respondent used a
susu collector; the second, whether the respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the statement
“I save regularly” (which two-thirds of respondents do). We use the principal component of
these and the two discount rate measures to create an index measuring a lack of self-control.
The regression in column 2 uses the index of self control in place of the discount rate measures.
Those with less self control have lower baseline capital stocks.
The models also predict that individuals who are more patient and less hyperbolic should
save more and grow their business faster as long as they are they below their optimal size.
Conditional on the log of baseline capital, we do find that the growth in capital stock between
wave 1 and 2 (i.e., before treatment) is faster for respondents who are more patient and are not
hyperbolic. All these results tally with the predictions of the RTI models.
Finally, in column 3 we include a dummy for high pressure to share within the household.
This variable plays in principle no role in the RTI models, but we find that this is also associated
with significantly smaller capital stock at baseline. This is consistent with the idea to pressure
to share aﬀects firm size, and suggests that factors other than those in the basic RTI framework
may have important eﬀects on firm size.
All three regressions include controls for the age of the owner, and the education level of
the owner’s mother and father. The models also predict that, other things being equal, older
entrepreneurs are likely to have larger firms because they have had more time to accumulate and
learn, and thus reach their long-term steady state. The data support this. Parental education is
added as a control variable for initial household wealth and socioeconomic status. The regressions
also include an indicator that the owners is female. We find that female-owned businesses are
significantly smaller in terms of baseline capital stock.
In sum, the regressions on Table 2 suggest that baseline capital stocks are consistent with
several of the predictions made by the RTI model. The significance of pressure to share with
others in the household suggests that factors outside the RTI framework may also be important.
We now turn to the experimental data to investigate whether exogenous shocks to household
capital are invested in ways which are consistent with model predictions.

21

5

Estimation of Experimental Treatment Eﬀects

Only 9 firm owners assigned to receive a grant (2% of those assigned to treatment) did not
receive one. One of these firm owners had died, three women refused the grant saying their
husbands would not let them accept it, and the other five firms had attrited from the survey
and could not be located to give them the grant. Given this, we focus on intent-to-treat eﬀects,
which show the impact of being randomly assigned to receive the grant — in practice there is little
diﬀerence between the intent-to-treat eﬀect and the treatment on the treated eﬀect of actually
receiving the grant given that compliance is almost 100%.

5.1

Impact on Profits by Grant Type and Gender

Figures 1 and 2 graphically show the main results of the experiment by displaying the empirical
cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of real profits by gender and treatment group for
the final two rounds of the survey. For males, Figure 1 shows that both the in-kind and cash
treatments have distributions to the right of the control distribution, with separation over most
of the range of profits. The in-kind and cash treatments have similar distributions up to about
the 80th percentile, and then separate with the distribution of profits for the in-kind treatment
lying to the right of the cash treatment profits distribution. In contrast, the distribution of
real profits by treatment group for females shows two noticeable diﬀerences from that of males.
First, the distribution of the cash treatment group lies right on top of that of the control group,
suggesting no impact of the cash treatment on profits. Second, while the in-kind distribution
lies to the right of the other two groups, this separation only occurs at about the 50th or 60th
percentile. That is, for women, the in-kind treatment seems to have had an eﬀect only for the
top half of the distribution.
We then estimate the average impact of the cash and in-kind grants on firm profits. We
begin by pooling together male and female business owners, and running an OLS regression of
the form:
 + =  1  +  2  +

X


   +


X

   + +

(9)

=1

where  and  are dummy variables indicating whether firm  has been assigned to receive
either the cash or in-kind treatment by time . The error term  has been decomposed into
wave fixed eﬀects  , quadruplet fixed eﬀects  , and a residual  . The  quadruplets are
the strata used in the randomization of the two treatments across entrepreneurs (see Section
22

3.2) and are included following the recommendation of Bruhn and McKenzie (2009).
We test whether either treatment is significantly diﬀerent from zero. We also test the equality
of eﬀects of the two treatments  1 =  2 . We estimate equation (9) for the full sample, and then
for the sub-sample which trims out matched quadruplets which have a firm with pre-treatment
profits above 1500 cedis.11 In addition to OLS estimation conditional on group dummies, we
also estimate equation (1) via individual fixed eﬀects. The inclusion of fixed eﬀects controls for
any time invariant small-sample diﬀerences between treatment groups, such as the diﬀerence in
baseline profits seen in Table 1. We cluster errors at the firm level in all specifications.
The first four columns of Table 3 show the treatment eﬀects for the pooled sample. All four
specifications show a large positive impact of the in-kind treatment on firm profits. Monthly
firm profits are estimated to be 31-43 cedis higher as a result of the 150 cedis in-kind treatment.
The cash treatment is significant at the 10 percent level in the untrimmed OLS specification,
but becomes insignificant when trimming or using fixed eﬀects. The coeﬃcients are always much
smaller than for the in-kind treatment, and we can reject equality of cash and in-kind grants at
the 5 percent significant level for three out of four specifications and at the 10 percent level for
the other. That is, cash grants have less impact on business profits than in-kind grants.
These initial results pool together all waves of the survey, thereby giving the average impact
of the treatments over the observed time period and improving power (McKenzie, 2011). We
observe firms at quarterly intervals, up to 12 months after treatment. Appendix 2 tests robustness to allowing the impact of the grants to vary with the time since treatment, and tests for
equality of treatment eﬀects. There is some suggestion that the impact of the in-kind treatments
are greater 9-12 months after treatment than immediately afterwards, but we reject equality of
treatment eﬀects over time at the 10% level only for the in-kind treatment for females, and then
only with a fixed eﬀects specification. Given the sample sizes we have and lack of strong evidence
to reject pooling, we therefore continue to pool all waves for the remainder of the paper.
In the remainder of Table 3 we allow the impact of the grants to vary by gender. Recall the
randomization was stratified by gender. We modify equation (9) to allow both the treatment
11

Only 7 firms have pre-treatment profits above this level, but this trimming involves dropping 28 firms (1%

of the sample) since we need to drop other firms in the matched quadruplet. Doing this ensures that balanced
randomization occurred within the trimmed sample, and prevents a few firms with scale well above the rest of
the sample exerting undue influence on the results.

23

and wave eﬀects to vary by gender:
 + =  1   +  2   +  3 (1 −  ) +  4 (1 −  )
+

X


   +

X

   



+


X

   + +

(10)

=1

where  = 1 if entrepreneur  is female, and 0 otherwise. Recall the randomization was stratified
by gender.
Columns 5 and 6 estimate equation (10) by OLS with quadruplet dummies, and columns 7
and 8 with individual fixed eﬀects. Finally, columns (9) and (10) restrict the OLS estimation to
the last two waves of data. This corresponds to the data in Figures 1 and 2.12
For women, the estimated treatment eﬀect of the cash grant is always small (5 cedis or less)
and statistically insignificant, whereas the treatment eﬀect of the in-kind grant is large (35-50
cedis) and statistically significant. In all specifications we can reject equality of the cash and
in-kind treatment eﬀects. This confirms what is seen visually in Figure 2, that only the in-kind
grants have a significant eﬀect for women. For males, the in-kind treatment eﬀect is also large,
although more sensitive to specification, ranging in size from 28 to 60 cedis, and statistically
significant in all but one specification. After trimming, the magnitude of the in-kind treatment
eﬀect for males is very similar to that for females, and we cannot reject equality of in-kind
treatment eﬀects by gender in any specification. In contrast to females, we can never reject
equality of cash and in-kind treatment eﬀects for males. This is consistent with a failure of asset
integration for females but not for males.
The cash treatment eﬀect for males is statistically significant and large when we restrict
analysis to waves 5 and 6, which is consistent with the eﬀects seen in Figure 1. However,
using all waves of the data, the estimated impact varies between 5 and 29 cedis depending on
specification, with large standard errors. The impact of cash is larger using OLS than fixed
eﬀects because of an imbalance in baseline profits for males. The group assigned to the cash
grant has higher wave 1 profits (despite the same wave 2 pre-treatment profits) than either the
control group or the group assigned to the in-kind treatment. Because we balanced on wave 2
profits in the randomization, the imbalance is due to chance. It is therefore not clear whether or
12

Readers may be concerned that profits are artificially high in the quarter immediately after the equipment

treatment if firms receiving inventories to sell count this as pure profit. But Appendix 2 shows that, if anything,
the treatment eﬀect is rising with time since treatment. Furthermore, the treatment eﬀects are still present when
focusing on these final rounds which are six months or more removed from almost all the treatments.

24

not one should control for this pre-treatment diﬀerence. If we are prepared to treat this chance
imbalance as noise and not condition on it, then there is some evidence for a significant cash
eﬀect, at least in the last two rounds. But the confidence interval for the male cash treatment
eﬀect when we do control for it with fixed eﬀects is (-26.5, +36.7), indicating that the data
really have no information about the cash treatment eﬀect for males when we condition on this
diﬀerence. In contrast, the in-kind treatment eﬀect for males and the cash and in-kind treatment
eﬀects for females are much more robust to the choice of specification, giving us more confidence
in the results for these groups.
These findings contrast with earlier experiments which failed to reject the equality of cash
and in-kind treatment eﬀects in grants to microenterprises in Sri Lanka and Mexico (de Mel et
al, 2008; McKenzie and Woodruﬀ, 2008). Why?
We first note that the sample sizes used in the experiments in Sri Lanka and Mexico ultimately resulted in low power to distinguish between cash and in-kind grants. In Sri Lanka the
sample size for analysis in de Mel et al. (2008) is 385 firms. They find an ITT return of 4.17
percent for the in-kind treatment, and of 6.70 percent for the cash treatment. However, the
standard errors on these estimates are 2.6-2.8 percent, and one cannot reject at the 10 percent
level that the in-kind treatment has twice the eﬀect of the cash treatment (=0.102). The sample size in Mexico for the analysis by McKenzie and Woodruﬀ (2008) is even smaller, with 113
firms after trimming. The ITT returns are 34.4 percent for cash and 16.1 percent for in-kind,
but with standard errors of 23-24 percent. Thus it may be that Ghana is not diﬀerent, but
rather that the prior studies did not have suﬃcient sample to detect diﬀerences between cash
and in-kind grants. We return to this issue below.

5.2

Treatment Heterogeneity by Randomization Strata

Next we examine treatment eﬀect heterogeneity according to the other variables used for stratification and matching. We do this separately by gender, given the diﬀerences observed above.
Let  and  denote the two categories of a binary variable used for stratification (e.g.  = 1 if
 works in a single-sex dominated industry, and  = 1 if  works in a mixed-gender industry).

25

Then we estimate separately for each gender:
 + = 1   +  2   +  3   +  4  
+

6
X

   +

=2

6
X

    +

=2


X

   + + 

=1

The results are shown in Table 4. The top two rows of the table show the categories  and 
which define strata. Columns (1) and (2) show the OLS and fixed eﬀects estimates of treatment
heterogeneity by the gender mix of the industry firms work in. De Mel et al. (2009a) found
some evidence in Sri Lanka that the impact of grants was less for women in female-dominated
industries than those in mixed industries. In Ghana, panel A of column (2) shows that with fixed
eﬀects, the cash treatment has a -6.9 cedis eﬀect in female-dominated industries versus a 1.8 cedis
eﬀect in mixed industries, and the in-kind treatment has a 25.4 cedis eﬀect in female-dominated
industries compared to a 39.8 cedis eﬀect in mixed industries. The point estimates are therefore
consistent with the idea that the grants may have more eﬀect on the businesses of women who
operate in mixed industries. However, the diﬀerences in treatment eﬀects by industry category
are not statistically significant. Likewise panel B shows no significant heterogeneity by industry
category for men.
Columns (3) and (4) examine heterogeneity according to the baseline measure of capture.
Recall that individuals in the “high capture” category state that whenever they have money
on hand their family members are likely to request some of it, and that people who do well in
business get requests from others for help. We do not obtain significant heterogeneity according
to this variable for either men or women, with large standard errors and the point estimates
varying quite a lot between the OLS and fixed eﬀects specifications. Later in the paper we
examine alternative measures of capture to see whether this lack of significance is due to the
particular choice of measure being used.
Finally we look at heterogeneity according to the initial size of the firm. Columns (5) and
(6) consider this in terms of the initial capital stock of the firm, as firms were stratified as being
above or below median baseline capital stock, while columns (7) and (8) define initial size in
terms of initial profits. Since wave 2 profits was matched to form quadruplets, we first calculate
the maximum wave 2 profit within a quadruplet or group, and then define firms as being in a
low profits group if the maximum wave 2 profits for the group is less than 138 cedis (the median
of profits over the whole sample). This classifies 62 percent of females and 45 percent of males
as being in the low profits group. The results confirm the visual impression in Figures 1 and 2.
26

In particular, we see that the cash grants have no significant impact for any size female firm,
while the in-kind grants only have an impact for the 40 percent or so of firms with higher initial
profits or higher initial capital stock. The impact of the in-kind grants is extremely large for
these female firms — monthly profits increase by 77 to 96 cedis per month for the female firms
in high initial profits quadruplets, compared to an insignificant 2 to 5 cedis per month for the
low profits female firms. This diﬀerence is statistically significant. In contrast, there is no such
pattern for male-owned firms — the point estimates for the lower profits firms are typically just
as large as those for the higher profits firms, and the diﬀerence is not statistically significant.
Taking these results together, it appears that cash grants are not increasing profits for
female-owned firms, and the in-kind grants only increase profits for female-owned firms which
were larger in size to begin with. The in-kind treatments also increased profits for male-owned
firms, and the eﬀect of the cash grants is inconclusive for males. There does not appear to be
the same heterogeneity by initial firm size in terms of male responsiveness to the grants. This
suggests that female-owned firms are better able to resist internal or external pressure when the
treatment comes in the form of inventories or equipment, while the diﬀerence in treatment is
less relevant for male-owned businesses. We now scrutinize this interpretation more in detail.

6

Interpretation of the results

6.1

Where do the grants go?

Table 5 examines the extent to which the grants are being used to increase the capital stock of
the firm, to make transfers to non-household members, and for household spending. In panel A
we show the results of estimating equation (2) with diﬀerent outcomes, while in panel B we show
the results of estimating equation (3) for the female sample and the categorization of low and
high initial profits groups, since this is where we found large diﬀerences in treatment eﬀects. For
reasons of space we report the fixed eﬀects estimates only (with the exception of transfers out
which were not measured pre-treatment), but note when the OLS results show large diﬀerences.
We begin by looking at the impact of the grants on the capital stock of the firms. Column (1)
shows this for total capital stock. In order to reduce the influence of large outliers, column (2)
truncates capital stock at the 99.5th percentile, which is 6130 cedis. Both specifications suggest
that capital stock is increasing by more for the in-kind treatments than for the cash treatments,
both for men and women. However, the capital stock data is noisy and the standard errors

27

are large, meaning we cannot reject equality of the eﬀect of cash and in-kind grants on capital
stock. Panel B shows stark diﬀerences between the women whose profits were initially low and
those who had higher initial profits — there are large increases in capital stock for the high initial
profits group, and no increase in capital stock for the low initial profits group that received the
cash treatment. After truncating outliers, we can reject equality in treatment eﬀects for the low
and high initial profits groups for both cash and in-kind grants.
Figures 3 and 4 show the empirical CDFs of the post-treatment capital stock distribution
by treatment group and gender for the final two waves of the survey. For males, Figure 3 shows
a similar pattern to that of profits — namely that the distribution of the in-kind treatment
group is shifted to the right compared to that of the control group across the distribution. The
cash distribution is in between, although right at the top of the distribution crosses the control
distribution curve several times, which explains the sensitivity of the cash treatment eﬀect to
where we truncate the data. For females, Figure 4 shows that both treatment groups overlap
with the control group for the bottom 60 percent of the distribution, a pattern similar to that
seen for profits. The in-kind grant distribution then separates from the control above this,
with women in the in-kind treatment group having higher 70, 80, and 90th percentiles of their
capital stock distributions than the control group. The cash treatment group lies in between,
and, unlike in the case of profits, does separate somewhat from the control group at the top
of the distribution, suggesting some increases in capital for some firms as a result of the cash
treatment.
Next we examine where the grants are going if not into the business. Beginning in wave 4,
firm owners were asked “During the past three months, did you make any payments in cash or
goods to people living outside your household?” and if so, the value of such transfers. Columns
3 and 4 show that women who received the cash grant were more likely to have made such a
transfer, and to have given more. On average they are estimated to have given 8 cedis more
a quarter over the last 3 quarters of the survey. This does not account for any transfers out
made in the first quarter after treatment by firms treated after wave 2, since the wave 3 survey
did not collect transfers data. However, restricting the analysis to the control group and firms
treated after wave 3 only marginally increases the coeﬃcient on the cash treatment, raising it
to 8.9 cedis.
The remaining columns report the estimated impacts on household expenditure, which was

28

collected each wave.13 Point estimates suggest higher positive impacts on expenditure for those
receiving the cash treatments than those getting the in-kind treatment or the control group,
especially for women with low initial profits. We see a large and highly significant eﬀect of
the cash treatment on total quarterly spending for women as a whole, and for the subgroup of
women with low initial profits. The coeﬃcients are huge: women who were given a 150 cedis cash
grant are estimated to be spending 120 cedis more a quarter after the grant. The magnitude of
this coeﬃcient appears to be driven by a few firm owners reporting very large spending levels
— truncating at the 99th percentile of total expenditure lowers this coeﬃcient to 95, and at the
95th percentile lowers it to 76 cedis (which is still significant at the 5% level). For males receiving
the cash treatment, the point estimates also suggest large increases in total quarterly spending
(with a coeﬃcient of 50 to 73 cedis depending on the level of truncation), but the standard error
is so large that we can never reject equality with zero.
These results therefore oﬀer an explanation at a basic level for the profits results. More of the
in-kind grants ended up in the business than the cash grants. Women, especially those with lower
initial profits, appear to have spent most, if not all, of the grants on household expenditure and
transfers to non-household members. As a result, we see more impact of in-kind grants than cash
grants on business profits. Note however that for women with high initial profit who received the
cash treatment, Table 5 shows an increase in capital stock and no significant change in spending,
despite the lack of a significant increase in profits for this group. There are only 44 women who
are in the high initial profits group who received the cash treatment, so small sample noise is a
potential explanation. Indeed, the 95% confidence interval for the eﬀect on profits of the cash
treatment for the initial high profit group is (-26, +40). So despite the small and insignificant
13

Households were asked to recall the last week’s expenditure on food, last month’s expenditure on 9 categories

(housing, fuel and light, non-durable households goods, communication, recreation, transport, household services,
personal care services, and contributions to associations) and last three month’s expenditure on a further 9
categories (clothing, footwear, ceremonies such as funerals and weddings, electronic goods, household furnishings,
household appliances, vehicles, health expenses, and education expenses). We aggregate several categories to
report estimates of impact on several categories of interest, as well as impacts on total quarterly spending (which
adds 13 times weekly food, and 3 times the last month’s expenses to the three month expenses). Unlike profits,
panel consistency checks were not programmed for these expenditure items, and the data are quite noisy. In order
to ensure extreme outliers are not driving the reported results, we report results using expenditures truncated at
the 99.5th percentile. Results using the untruncated expenditures are qualitatively similar with larger standard
errors, and slightly larger point estimates. The impacts on specific household expenditure categories are not
well-identified due to this noise.

29

point estimate, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that the high initial profit women
receiving the cash treatment are also investing it in the business and benefit through higher
profits.

6.2

How do the low and high initial profit women diﬀer?

We have seen that the impact of the grants diﬀers greatly between women with low initial
profits and women with high initial profits. It is therefore worth examining in more detail the
composition of these two subsamples. The first point to note is that these groups don’t diﬀer
greatly in the industry or type of business, just in the scale. The low initial profit group is
made up of 31 percent food sales, 18 percent beauty and hair, 9 percent sewing, and 42 percent
trade, compared to 37 percent food sales, 9 percent beauty and hair, 6 percent sewing and 47
percent trade for the high initial profit group. Even when we look more finely within these broad
sectors, we see a similar broad range of types of firms in both subgroups: kenkey and banku
(both traditional prepared foods) sellers, dressmakers, beauty salons, used clothes sellers, and
retail trade.
In contrast, the scale of the firms diﬀers substantially. Table 6 compares the pre-treatment
characteristics of these two subgroups of female firms to each other and to the male-owned
firms. The final column also oﬀers a comparison to the sample of female microenterprises from
Sri Lanka used in de Mel et al. (2009a). We see that mean and median monthly profits for the
low initial profits female subsample is 37-38 cedis, approximately US$1 per day, while mean and
median profits are 4 to 6 times this level in the high profit group. Similarly, mean and median
sales diﬀers by a factor of 5 to 6 between the low and high initial profit groups. Mean capital
stock for the low initial profits group is 251, versus 456 for the high profits group. Comparing
to the other two groups, we see that the high initial profit females have larger profits than the
average male-owned firms in the sample, while the low initial profits group are similar in size to
the female-owned firms in the Sri Lankan study.
Table 6 also shows that women in the high initial profits group are more educated, have
richer households (which may be a consequence of the higher profits rather than a cause), are
more likely to keep accounts and to have had a formal loan, and have been in business slightly
longer than the low initial profits firms. When it comes to the reasons for choosing a particular
sector, women in the high profits group are more likely to say they chose their sector for earnings
potential and less likely to say they chose it because it had a low capital requirement.

30

Overall this paints a picture of the low profits group as much smaller in size, with subsistence
level income. For this group we see no impact of the grants on business profits. This is consistent
with the finding in Sri Lanka, where the grants had no impact on female-owned businesses. The
Sri Lankan businesses are similar in scale to the low initial profits female firms in Ghana — the
95th percentile of profits is only 70 per month in the Sri Lankan sample, which is the 10th
percentile of profits for the high initial profit group in Ghana. So for the types of female-owned
businesses in Ghana that are similar in scale to those in Sri Lanka, we obtain similar results.
Such businesses fit the hypothesis of Emran et al. (2007) that many of the women drawn into
subsistence self-employment have very low eﬃcient scale and are there only because of labor
market imperfections. As a result, according to our models, neither cash nor in-kind grants
should have any long-term impacts on business profitability for these types of low productivity
firms. The diﬀerence is that the Ghanaian sample also includes a group of more successful
female-owned businesses with larger scale, who do show increased profit growth from at least
the in-kind treatment.

7

Why does the impact of cash and in-kind treatments vary?

We now examine more in detail the possible reasons for the diﬀerence between the impact of
cash and in-kind grants, particularly for women. We first discuss whether the RTI models can
account for this diﬀerence.
The only way that the RTI models we presented in the conceptual section can account for
a diﬀerence between the two treatments is if the in-kind treatment  cannot be liquidated
immediately and the firm has already reached its steady-state. If this is the case, profits and
capital are predicted to rise above their steady state after the in-kind treatment, but only until
illiquid capital can be divested.
This eﬀect is unlikely to be prominent in our study. There is a relatively long lag between
treatment and ex post surveys. The time lag between receiving a grant and the immediately
subsequent survey is nearly 3 months. For those who received the grant after round 2, there
is an interval of nearly 12 months between receiving the grant and the last survey round. For
those receiving the grant after round 3, the time interval is 9 months. Given that recipients
of in-kind grants invest in raw materials, inventories, or simple equipment, it would be easy to
decapitalize in-kind grants between treatment and the next survey round. Furthermore, as we

31

will see below, there is no evidence of divestment of the in-kind grants.
Another possibility is to modify the RTI setup to allow for learning. To see this formally,
remember that in the RTI models the steady state capital stock is set by equating the marginal
return to capital  0 (∗  ) to the relevant discount rate — either  or  or  , depending on the
version of the model. If the entrepreneur believes  to be lower than its true value, say,   ,
then the firm may stop growing before reaching its true steady state. Having been forced to
expand thanks to an in-kind grant, the entrepreneur may realize that he or she can successfully
handle a larger firm, i.e., that    . If there are enough entrepreneurs with   , this could
explain our results.
Is there evidence in support of this hypothesis in the data? Prior to treatment, respondents
were asked whether they expected sales to increase if they invested more capital. Entrepreneurs
for whom    should respond negatively to this question. If learning explains our results,
the eﬀect of the in-kind treatment should be largest for entrepreneurs who expect the lowest
increase in sales from increasing capital. We test this hypothesis and find instead that the inkind treatment has larger — not smaller — eﬀects for firm owners who expected to see a larger
increase in sales from investing more capital. There is therefore little evidence for the learning
hypothesis in the data.
We thus have to turn to potential explanations that focus on asset non-integration, such as
internal and external pressure. The surveys contain variables that proxy for the degree of selfcontrol and the degree of external pressure to share facing business owners. With the exception
of the “high capture” dummy which we examined in Table 4, treatment randomization was not
stratified on any of these variables. Our analysis should therefore be considered exploratory in
nature.
We have four measures which each measure an aspect of self-control and the ability to save
cash, all of which were measured pre-treatment. The first two refer to actual saving behavior
as reported by respondents before treatment: whether the respondent used a susu collector and
whether the respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the statement “I save regularly”(which
two-thirds of respondents do). These first two variables have the advantage that they capture
actual, not hypothetical, behavior. But they could potentially be aﬀected by external pressure,
for instance if someone is unable to save because of a pressure to redistribute, or enters in a
contract with a susu collector to keep money away from a prying husband, as in Anderson and
Baland (2002). The other two variables we use are the discount rate and measure of hyperbolicity,

32

which are less subject to this possible confounding eﬀect, and are thus arguably more reliable.
We also extract the common signal in these four variables by forming a principal component,
which we call “lack of self-control”.14 High scores indicate a lower likelihood of using a susu and
of saving regularly, and a higher likelihood of being hyperbolic and of having a high discount
rate. The lack of self-control index is thus the common component of using a susu and saving
regularly that is correlated with hyperbolic time preferences.
The first five columns of Table 7 estimate model (8) to examine the heterogeneity in the
treatment eﬀect with respect to these self-control variables for the pooled sample in panel A,
and for females only in panel B. Point estimates show a larger impact of the cash treatment when
the firm owner uses a susu, saves regularly, is patient, and is not hyperbolic. The signs of the
coeﬃcients on the interaction with cash treatment for each of the four variables are consistent
with the idea that lack of self-control is associated with a smaller increase in business profits
from the cash treatment. Column 5 shows that when we combine all these variables into an
index of self-control using principal components, the interaction between cash treatment and
lack of self-control is significant at the 5 percent level. This implies that the eﬀect of the cash
treatment for someone with the most self-control is 29.2, which is similar to the average impact
of the in-kind treatment of 30.9 in column 4 of Table 3. The female only sample in panel B shows
a similar pattern in terms of signs of the coeﬃcients, but interaction terms are not significant,
possibly because the sample is smaller.
We also investigate whether cash and in-kind grants have a diﬀerentiated eﬀect on capital
retention depending on entrepreneur self-control. Figure 5 presents the evolution of capital stock
after treatment, contrasting between cash and in-kind grants for entrepreneurs with and without
self-control. The Figure shows that in-kind grants are retained in the firm and lead to further
accumulation of capital whether the entrepreneur lacks self-control or not — although the eﬀect
on capital accumulation is strongest for those with low self-control. In contrast, cash grants
have, if anything a negative eﬀect on capital accumulation among low self-control entrepreneurs
while the eﬀect is positive and growing for those with high self-control. This confirms that
the reason why in-kind grants have a strong positive eﬀect on profit is related to self-control
issues and their eﬀect on the accumulation of capital. If we further interact the self-control
index with high baseline profits, we find that self-control aﬀects the impact of treatment only
for female entrepreneurs with high baseline profits. For those with low initial profits, treatment
14

The principal component has mean zero, and ranges from -1.67 to 2.26.

33

has no eﬀect irrespective of self-control. If we are willing to regard baseline profits as proxy for
ability , this suggests that self-control is an impediment to growth only for more able female
entrepreneurs, who have more potential for growth.
Next we examine whether the pattern of heterogeneous treatment eﬀects in the sample is
consistent with external pressure. We first investigate capture by spouses. Unmarried individuals
are not, by definition, subject to capture by a spouse. Consequently, if capture by a spouse is
the main reason why cash treatments do not raise profit, this should not aﬀect unmarried
entrepreneurs — especially women. To test this hypothesis, we interact treatment with a married
dummy and expect the cash treatment eﬀect now to be positive and the interaction term to be
negative, especially for female entrepreneurs. The percentage of unmarried individuals in our
sample is 34% for females and 35% for males. Results, presented in columns (1) and (2) of Table
8, show that the cash treatment remains non-significant for female entrepreneurs. None of the
interaction terms is statistically significant but point estimates for females are positive for cash
and negative for in-kind, which is the opposite of what the external pressure hypothesis predicts.
Married status is also not (negatively) correlated with baseline capital stock, as should be case
if marriage leads to more capture.
Next we examine the determinants of bargaining power between married entrepreneurs. The
hypothesis is that less of the cash and in-kind treatment is taxed away from the business when a
married entrepreneur has more bargaining power with his or her spouse. We expect the eﬀect of
bargaining to be stronger for female entrepreneurs, given their subordinate status in traditional
society. The first proxy for bargaining power is the share of assets brought to marriage by the
owner. This information is available for 397 married respondents.
As shown in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8, point estimates are insignificant and do not go
in the expected direction: we would expect those who bring a higher share of assets into the
marriage to have more bargaining power, yet the interaction of this with the cash treatment is
negative. We also test (not shown) whether the share of assets brought to marriage is correlated
with baseline capital stock, as should be the case if entrepreneurs with more bargaining power
are less subject to spouse taxation and can accumulate more over time. We find no evidence of
this.
We investigate other possible determinants of intra-household bargaining power, such as
diﬀerences between spouses in age and education level. We expect older, more educated spouses
to have more bargaining power. The results, shown, in columns (5) to (8) of Table 8, are once

34

again not significant and the point estimates of the interaction terms are small. In columns (9)
and (10) we use more subjective data: namely whether the respondent agrees that they can
spend their income without consulting their spouse (72 percent of women and 71 percent of
men say they can). By construction, this information is only available for married respondents.
We again find no statistically significant interaction eﬀect with the cash treatment and point
estimates small for women.
The last proxy for bargaining power that we investigate is the share of individual income in
total household income or expenditure. Much of the literature on intra-household bargaining has
used relative incomes as proxy for bargaining power, either because having more income gives
more agency, or because earning an income outside the home results from having more bargaining
power. We construct our proxy using income and consumption information at baseline. We
expect spouses with a larger income share to retain more of the treatment and thus to have
a larger treatment eﬀect.15 Results, presented in columns (11) to (14) of Table 8, show no
statistically significant interaction.
We next turn to external pressure more broadly defined, i.e., including individuals other than
the spouse. The first proxy we consider is the absolute size of the household. Presumably, the
more members a household has, the more people there are who can put pressure on the respondent to share cash and in-kind grants. Pressure need not be explicit, though. If respondents are
altruistic towards other members of their household, they may feel the need to share the grants
with them instead of investing. In this case the needs of others are internalized and no explicit
pressure need be applied.
The next proxy is whether the firm owner says they feel a lot or some pressure to share
extra business income with other household members rather than invest in the business. 23
percent of females and 22 percent of males claim to feel this pressure. This information was only
collected in the last survey round, after treatments, so results should be considered as suggestive
only. There is, however, no diﬀerence in means on this variable between treated and untreated
samples. As a proxy for pressure from outside the household, we include the number of siblings
in the Accra/Tema area. Presumably, the more siblings a person has, the more relatives there
15

Share of household income or consumption is not an ideal proxy for our purpose since it also reflects entrepre-

neurial ability, and more able entrepreneurs may benefit more from treatment. For a given ability level, a higher
share of household income also implies that other household members are not high earners and hence that the
entrepreneur is more capital constrained. This too would predict a higher treatment eﬀect. Given that we find
no significant eﬀect, this issue is moot.

35

are who could put pressure on the respondent to share the grants — or the more relative there
are towards whom the respondent may have altruistic feelings.
Results are presented in Table 9. When we look at the full sample we do not see any
significant interactions between the cash treatment eﬀect and proxies for external pressure. The
size of the interaction terms on pressure to share is too small to generate large positive impacts
of the cash treatment. When we consider the females-only sample in panel B, we get a significant
but positive interactions on household size and on the number of siblings in the area — i.e., the
opposite sign of what we would expect from external pressure. This is nevertheless consistent
with Grimm et al. (2010) who find a positive impact of nearby networks on firm growth. These
findings are also in line with the lack of sizeable or significant interaction with low capture seen
in Table 4 for the low capture/high capture variable we stratified on.
Taken together, the evidence from Tables 7, 8 and 9 appears more consistent with self-control
rather than external pressure being the cause of the lack of an eﬀect of the cash treatment. One
might however worry that people who have trouble saving or have time-inconsistent preferences
and high discount rates are also those who more external pressure.
To examine this possibility, we test in Table 10 whether proxies for external pressure are
significantly associated with the lack of self-control index. In addition to the variables used
to proxy external pressure in Table 7, we also consider: whether they think inventories and
equipment held in the business are a good way of saving money so others don’t take it (55
percent of women and 72 percent of men say yes); whether the respondent had been compelled
to give money to their spouse in the three months prior to the baseline (10 percent of married
women and 15 percent of married men said yes); and whether their spouse is supportive of them
running a business (84 percent say yes for both men and women).
We cannot reject the null hypothesis that none of the proxies for external pressure are
associated with the self-control index. While measuring external pressure is diﬃcult, if selfcontrol was merely proxying for external pressure, we would expect some relationship, yet there
is none. We therefore conclude that there is more evidence to support the hypothesis that the
diﬀerence between cash and in-kind treatments is driven by self-control issues than by external
pressure.

36

8

Conclusions

We find that the eﬀect of in-kind and cash grants is significantly diﬀerent, a finding that is
diﬃcult to reconcile with models of accumulation that take either a standard Ramsey form,
or allow for pure time inconsistence. These results suggest a lack of asset integration, as if
entrepreneurs fail to take consumption and investment decisions jointly. The diﬀerence between
in-kind and cash grants is suggestive either that inventories and equipment serve as a selfcommitment device against impulse purchases — or that entrepreneurs evade a social solidarity
tax, by household members and relatives, on the cash flow of the firm but not its equipment
and inventories.
We find that cash and in-kind grants have significantly diﬀerent eﬀects for female entrepreneurs in Ghana. In-kind grants lead to large increases in business profits, but only for
female-owned firms which were initially more profitable — subsistence firms don’t grow when
given more capital. In-kind grants also lead to large increases in business profits for men, while
the eﬀect of cash grants is less robust — we find large positive and significant eﬀects when we
don’t condition on baseline profits, but smaller and insignificant eﬀects when we do. The diﬀerence between cash and in-kind treatments is strongest among successful female entrepreneurs,
that is, those with high pre-treatment profits.
We seek to identify the reason for the diﬀerence in treatment between cash and in-kind
grants, i.e., whether it originates in self-control diﬃculties or in pressure from household and
family members. The fact that the diﬀerence in treatment eﬀects is only statistically significant
among female entrepreneurs is suggestive of external pressure: given the social context, women
entrepreneurs are expected to be subjected to pressure from husband and children. However,
we fail to find confirmatory evidence for this hypothesis when interact treatment with proxies
for external pressure. In contrast, we find that individuals with more self-control diﬃculties
respond better to treatment in terms of profits. There is no evidence that female entrepreneurs
lack self-control more than men.
Ghana oﬀers a setting where women are the majority of small business owners, and in this
setting we find the top 40 percent of women in terms of profitability look similar or more
profitable than the average male firm. Such a large group of relatively high achieving women is
not present in the Sri Lankan sample of de Mel et al. (2009a), and indeed the remaining group
of subsistence-level Ghanaian female business owners have similar negligible business impacts
from the grants as the group of women in the Sri Lankan experiment.
37

The results oﬀer partially good news for advocates of directing microfinance at women. We
do find in Ghana a relatively large group of women whose profits increase a lot when given
in-kind transfers. Microcredit has been argued as allowing individuals to overcome present-bias
by providing self-discipline and encouragement through regular payments and group meetings
(Bauer et al, 2010). If this is true, the eﬀectiveness of micro loans in improving business outcomes
is likely to resemble the eﬀect of in-kind grants in our experiment. However, our findings suggest
this eﬀect to be more powerful for women who are already earning more to begin with, suggesting
possible limits on the ability of capital alone to generate business growth among poor subsistencelevel female enterprises. Moreover, as in prior work in Sri Lanka and Mexico, the results show
that the average male-owned microenterprise gains a lot from being granted additional access
to capital. This suggests that microfinance programs that focus primarily on women may be
ignoring a large group of enterprises with a need for more capital.
Finally, our results suggest that loans and grants intended to help female enterprises grow
would work better if disbursed in kind, not in cash. Banks already seem to know this, given that
bank loans are nearly always in kind: when borrowing to purchase a house, car, or machine,
the bank does not hand over the money to the borrower but rather pays the supplier/seller
directly.16 If their objective is to foster enterprise development, and not just saving, microfinance organizations may want to adopt similar practices.

References
Andersen, Stephen, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabeth Rutstrom (2008)
"Risk Aversion in Game Shows", Research in Experimental Economics, 12: 361-406
Anderson, Siwan, and Jean-Marie Baland (2002). "The Economics of Roscas and Intrahousehold Resource Allocation", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 963-95, August
Besley, Timothy (1995) “Savings, credit and insurance”, pp. 2123-2207 in Jere Behrman and
T.N. Srinivasan (eds.) Handbook of Development Economics Volume III, Elsevier: Amsterdam.
Baland, Jean-Marie, Catherine Guirkinger and Charlotte Mali (2007) “Pretending to be
Poor: borrowing to escape forced solidarity in credit cooperatives in Cameroon”, Mimeo. University of Namur.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2009) “The Experimental Approach to Development
16

This also applies to letter-of-credit-based lending for imports. This even applies, albeit partially, to lines of

credit given that the bank observes the identity of the payee — and will object/block payment if an enterprise’s
overdraft facility is used to pay for consumption items, such as a new car.

38

Economics”, Annual Review of Economics 1:151-78.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennester and Cynthia Kinnan (2010) “The Miracle
of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation”, BREAD Working Paper no. 278.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Sendhil Mullanaithan (2010) “The Shape of Temptation: Implications
for the Economic Lives of the Poor”, MIT Working Paper no 10-9.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilova and Jonathan Morduch (2010) “Behavioral Foundations of
Microcredit: Experimental and Survey Evidence from Rural India”, IZA Working Paper no.
4901.
Bigsten, Arne, Paul Collier, Stefan Dercon, Marcel Fafchamps, Bernard Gauthier, JanWillem Gunning, Anders Isaksson, Abena Oduro, Remco Oostendorp, Cathy Patillo, Mans
Soderbom, Francis Teal, Albert Zeufack, and Simon Appleton (2000) "Rates of Return on Physical and Human Capital in Africa’s Manufacturing Sector", Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 48(4): 801-27.
Bjorvatn, Kjetil, Lars Ivar Oppedal Berge, and Bertil Tungodden (2011) "Human and financial capital for microenterprise development: Evidence from a field and lab experiment", NHH
and CMI (mimeograph)
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie (2009) “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in Development Field Experiments”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(4):
200-32.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Gine, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang (2011). "Commitments to
Save: A Field Experiment in Rural Malawi", University of Michigan, May (mimeograph).
Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler (1997). "Labor
Supply of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day at a Time", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112: 407-41.
Charlier, Florence (1999) “Saving or Sharing: The African Households’ Dilemma”, Stanford
Department of Economics Ph.D. Dissertation.
Deaton, Angus (2010) “Instruments, Randomization, and Learning about Development”,
Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2): 424—55
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2008). “Returns to Capital:
Results from a Randomized Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1329—72.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2009a) “Are Women more
Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns.” Ameri-

39

can Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): 1-32.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2009b) “Measuring microenterprise profits: Must we ask how the sausage is made?”, Journal of Development Economics
88(1): 19-31
Di Falco, Salvatore and Erwin Bulte (2009) “The Dark Side of Social Capital: Kinship,
Consumption, and Investment”, Mimeo. University of Kent.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2010) “Nudging Farmers to Use
Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya”, American Economic Review forthcoming.
Duflo, Esther and Christopher Udry (2004) “Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Côte
d’Ivoire: Social norms, separate accounts, and consumption choices” , NBER Working Paper
no. 10498.
Emran, M. Shahe, AKM Mahbub Morshed and Joseph Stiglitz (2007) "Microfinance and
Missing Markets", Mimeo. George Washington University.
Fafchamps, Marcel, Christopher Udry, and Katherine Czukas (1998). "Drought and Saving
in West Africa: Are Livestock a Buﬀer Stock?", Journal of Development Economics, 55(2):
273-305, April
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2010) “Using
PDA consistency checks to increase the precision of profits and sales measurement in panels”,
Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Grimm, Michael, Flore Gubert, Ousman Koriko, Jann Lay and Christophe Nordman (2010)
“Does forced solidarity hamper entrepreneurial activity? Evidence from seven West-African
countries”, Mimeo. International Institute of Social Studies, Eramus University Rotterdam.
Harrison, Glenn, Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabeth Rutstrom (2007). "Estimating Risk Attitudes in Denmark: A Field Experiment", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 109(2): 341-68.
Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier (2011) "Does Africa need a rotten kin theorem? Experimental evidence from village economies", Mimeo. University of Washington, St Louis.
Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2010) “Expanding Microenterprise Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts in Manila”, Mimeo. Yale University.
Laibson, David (1997) "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic discounting", Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112(2): 443-77.
Lee, David (2009) “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on

40

Treatment Eﬀects”, Review of Economic Studies 76(3): 1071-1102.
McKenzie, David (2011) "Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 5639.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2008) “Experimental Evidence on Returns to
Capital and Access to Finance in Mexico”, World Bank Economic Review 22(3): 457-82
Platteau, Jean-Philippe (2000) Institutions, Social Norms and Economic Development. Harwood Academic Publishers: Amsterdam.
Ravallion, Martin (2009) “Should the Randomistas Rule?”, The Economists Voice 6(2).
Schündeln, Mathias (2006) “Modeling Firm Dynamics to Identify the Cost of Financing
Constraints in Ghanaian Manufacturing”, Mimeo. Harvard University.
Somville, Vincent (2011). "Daily Collectors, Public Good Provision, and Private Consumption: Theory and Evidence from Urban Benin", Department of Economics, Namur University
(mimeograph)
Spears, Dean (2009) “Dosas by the Dozen: Theory and Evidence of Present Bias in Microentrepreneurs”, Institute for Financial Management and Research Working Paper no. 27
Udry, Christopher (1996). "Gender, Agricultural Production and the Theory of the Household", Journal of Political Economy, 104(5): 1010-1046, October
Udry, Christopher and Santosh Anagol (2006) “The Return to Capital in Ghana”, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96(2): 388-93.

41

Appendix 1: Steady state firm size with time inconsistency
Let  denote the one period-ahead discount rate:17
1
≡ 
1+
Let  be the level of capital that satisfies:
 0 (  ) =  
Is   the steady state capital of a time inconsistent entrepreneur? It depends on whether the
decision maker is sophisticate or myopic, that is, whether he or she realizes that future decisions
were taken according to (3) or not.
Suppose the decision maker is sophisticate and sets  =  . Is this a steady state? The
Euler equation between  and  + 1 is:
1 +  0 (+1  ) =

1
0 ( )
· 0  
 +1 (+1 )

(11)

where +1 denotes the household’s predicted future decision about +1 . If the household is
myopic, +1 is expected to coincide with the decision made at time , i.e., as given by (2). If
the household is sophisticate, it is the correctly anticipated decision taken at time  + 1 as given
by the solution to (3).
First note that if +1 =  , then 0 ( ) = 0+1 (+1 ) and setting  =  satisfies the
above Euler equation. If the entrepreneur is sophisticate and sets  =  , she realizes that
the decision problem and Euler equation at  + 1 will be identical to those at . Hence she
correctly anticipates that +1 =  . It follows that  is the steady state level of firm capital for
a sophisticate entrepreneur.
If the entrepreneur is myopic and sets  =  , she incorrectly believes that she will be more
patient next period. Let 
+1 denote the consumption level she sets for  + 1, not realizing that

at  + 1 she will want to increase consumption beyond 
+1 . At  =  the entrepreneur expects
0

0


+1   , which implies that +1 (+1 )   ( ). Hence  does not satisfy the Euler equation

(11) and is not a steady state. For a myopic decision maker, the steady state capital  is such


that  = +1 and 
+1 = +2 . Since +1  +1 , it follows that

0 ( )
0
+1 (
+1 )

 1, which in turn

implies that     and
 0 (  )   
17

It is clear that   . If, as is likely,   , the household will never want to set   0. So we ignore savings

here.

42

Appendix 2: Robustness to Attrition
Attrition in the panel comes from firms closing, refusing to answer the survey, or answering
the survey but not providing profits data. Appendix Table A1 provides attrition rates per round
for the experimental sample. Recall that we eliminated firms which closed or refused to answer
the round 2 survey before undertaking the randomization. As a result, attrition from the survey
is zero by definition for the experimental group in rounds 1 and 2, although there is some item
non-response on profits. Over the course of our experiment we observe 6 percent of the firms
closing, with this rate not varying between treatment and control. We were able to keep attrition
fairly low over waves 3 through 6 of the survey, and exerted additional eﬀort in round 6 to try
and track and induce responses by firms that had attrited in previous waves. As a result, only
8 percent of the sample is not present in wave 6, although 11 percent do not report profits
data. Nevertheless, overall attrition rates are higher for the control group than either treatment
group, likely reflecting either an implicit obligation felt by those receiving grants to continue in
the survey, or discouragement of those who weren’t randomly selected for the grants. Whilst
statistically significant, the diﬀerence in attrition magnitudes are not that large, which should
limit the impact of this diﬀerential attrition on our results.
To examine how robust our results are to attrition, we use the bounding approach of Lee
(2009) to construct upper and lower bounds for the treatment eﬀect. The key identifying assumption for implementing these bounds is a monotonicity assumption that treatment assignment
aﬀects sample selection only in one direction. In our context, this requires assuming that there
are some firms who would have attrited if they had not been assigned to treatment, but that
no firm attrits because of getting assigned to treatment. This seems plausible in our context.
We then construct the bounds by trimming either the top or the bottom of the distribution of
profits for the treatment groups by the relative diﬀerence in attrition rates between treatment
and control. This is done on a wave by wave basis, and involves trimming up to 6 percent from
the top or bottom of the distribution of the treatment group.
Table A2 shows the results of estimating these Lee bounds. Columns 1 and 2 repeat the
main trimmed estimates from Table 3 for comparison. These lie between the bounds estimated
in columns 3 and 4 using OLS, and in columns 5 and 6 using fixed eﬀects. We see that our
parameter estimates are much closer to the upper bounds than the lower bounds, which reflects
the skewed distribution of profits.
The lower bounds occur only if it is the most profitable control firms that attrit. However,

43

a panel regression predicting attrition in the control group (in the form of missing profits) as
a function of the previous period’s profits finds that having the previous period’s profits in the
top 10 percent or in the bottom 10 percent, or below the median has no significant eﬀect on
attrition. Similarly, we firms which experience large changes in profits over two waves are no
more likely to attrit in the subsequent wave. As a result, it seems attrition in the control group is
not associated with previous levels or previous changes in profits. Given this, it seems reasonable
to assume that profits are either missing at random, or missing in firms which suﬀer negative
shocks that cause the firm to shut down or the owner to be sick in the survey period. That
is, there seems reason to believe either the panel estimates in columns (1) or (2), or the upper
bound estimates which are based on the least successful control firms attriting. There seems to
be no evidence to support the most successful control firms attriting, which is what the lower
bound estimates assume. We therefore conclude the main results do not seem to be driven by
attrition.

Appendix 3: Is it reasonable to pool eﬀects over time?
To test for pooling of treatment eﬀects we allow the coeﬃcients on treatment in equation (1)
to vary with time since treatment. In doing this, one should note that we only observe eﬀects 12
months after treatment for the firms treated after round 2, which is half of the treated sample.
In contrast, we observe eﬀects at 3 months and 6 months for the entire treated sample, and
eﬀects at 9 months for almost all the sample (excepting the 18 firms treated after round 4).
Appendix Table A3 then shows the results. We cannot reject that the impact of treatment does
not vary with time since treatment for the pooled sample, and for the male sample, or for the
female sample using OLS. For the female sample using fixed eﬀects, the p-value for equality of
in-kind treatment eﬀects over time is 0.057, oﬀering some suggestion that the impact is greater
with more time since treatment.

44

0

Cumulative Distribution
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 1: Post-treatment CDFs of Monthly Profits for Males by Treatment Group

0

500
1000
Monthly Profits in Waves 5 and 6
Control
Equipment

1500

Cash

0

Cumulative Distribution
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 2: Post-treatment CDFs of Monthly Profits for Females by Treatment Group

0

500
1000
Monthly Real Profits in Waves 5 and 6
Control
Equipment

Cash

1500

0

Cumulative Distribution
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 3: Post-treatment CDFs of Capital Stock for Males by Treatment Group

0

1000

2000
3000
4000
Capital Stock in Waves 5 and 6 (Cedi)
Control
Equipment

5000

Cash

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 4: Post-treatment CDFs of Capital Stock for Females by Treatment Group

0

1000

2000
3000
Capital Stock in Waves 5 and 6
Control
Equipment

Cash

4000

5000

Figure 5. Evolution of Capital Stock After Treatment
250

Cash - High Control
200

Equipment - High Control

Treatm
ment Effect on Capital Stock

Cash- Low Control
Equipment - Low Control

150

100

50

0
1

2

3

-50

-100

Quarters Since Treatment

4

Table 1: Characteristics of Microenterprises and Verification of Randomization
Full Sample
Trimmed Sample
N
Control
Cash
In‐kind
N
Control
Cash
Variables Using to Stratify or Match
Monthly profits in January 2009
781
128
132
131
753
103
99
Female
793
0.60
0.60
0.61
765
0.62
0.62
High Capture
793
0.58
0.58
0.57
765
0.58
0.58
High Baseline Capital Stock
793
0.49
0.49
0.49
765
0.48
0.48
Male in Male dominated industry
793
0.18
0.19
0.18
765
0.18
0.18
Male in Mixed industry
793
0.21
0.21
0.21
765
0.20
0.20
Female in Female dominated industry
793
0.29
0.29
0.29
765
0.30
0.29
Female in Mixed industry
793
0.31
0.31
0.31
765
0.32
0.32
Other Variables
Monthly profits in October/November 2008
729
124
133
104
704
93
129
Monthly sales in January 2009
790
724
463
630
762
412
402
Number of hours worked in last week
785
58.82
60.55
57.13
757
59.03
60.64
Total Capital Stock in January 2009
784
468
454
418
757
446
438
Inventories at end of January 2009
791
258
213
201
763
239
203
Uses a Susu Collector
791
0.49
0.46
0.49
763
0.49
0.46
Business operated out of home
793
0.76
0.78
0.82
765
0.77
0.78
Age of Firm
788
7.87
7.13
7.22
761
7.88
7.11
Ever had bank or microfinance loan
793
0.11
0.10
0.07
765
0.10
0.09
Business has a tax number
786
0.15
0.14
0.13
758
0.14
0.14
Owner is Married
791
0.65
0.64
0.67
763
0.65
0.63
Owner's Years of Education
775
8.87
8.75
9.05
749
8.81
8.70
Owner's Digitspan Recall
768
5.11
5.07
5.03
740
5.07
5.10
Owner is Akan Speaker
793
0.45
0.41
0.43
765
0.46
0.41
Owner is Ga/Dangme Speaker
793
0.28
0.27
0.31
765
0.29
0.27
Owner's Age
791
36.39
35.43
35.74
763
36.36
35.37
Note: Trimmed Sample eliminates matched groups in which baseline profits for at least one firm
in group exceed 1500 cedis per month
The only differences between groups which are statistically significant at conventional levels are January 2009 sales
and October/November 2009 profits in the trimmed sample.

In‐kind
115
0.62
0.57
0.48
0.18
0.20
0.30
0.32
99
595
56.64
410
198
0.51
0.83
7.14
0.07
0.13
0.68
9.00
4.99
0.43
0.32
35.79

Table 2: Correlates of Baseline Capital Stock
Hyperbolic Discounter
Low Discount Rate

(1)
‐196.1**
(82.13)
94.53
(73.46)

Lack of self‐control index
Feels pressure to share in household
Digitspan Recall
Raven test score
Education Years
Female
Age
Father's schooling
Mother's schooling
Constant

Observations
R‐squared
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

(2)

(3)

‐60.34*
(32.48)
‐201.3**
(87.38)
34.02*
35.51*
44.34**
(18.24)
(18.32)
(18.10)
13.20
15.85
21.77
(13.49)
(13.51)
(13.32)
13.95
13.42
6.674
(11.15)
(11.19)
(11.09)
‐193.9** ‐198.5*** ‐137.8*
(75.45)
(75.87)
(75.17)
13.63*** 14.02*** 12.57***
(4.162)
(4.179)
(4.228)
1.880
2.144
0.168
(7.408)
(7.445)
(7.283)
4.200
3.842
2.374
(8.064)
(8.106)
(8.001)
‐244.5
‐263.3
‐207.3
(220.8)
(220.9)
(220.0)
652
0.053

650
0.049

621
0.043

Table 3: Main Treatment Effects
Dependent Variable: Real Monthly Profits (Cedi)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS
OLS
FE
FE
Cash Treatment
14.50*
9.59
3.96
0.48
(8.68)
(7.32)
(13.89)
(8.23)
In‐kind Treatment
38.60*** 36.75*** 43.23*** 30.87***
(11.21)
(10.67)
(12.31)
(10.73)
Cash Treatment*Female
In‐kind Treatment*Female
Cash Treatment*Male
In‐kind Treatment*Male
Constant

Baseline trimming
Waves
Observations
Number of firms

(5)
OLS

(6)
OLS

(7)
FE

(8)
FE

5.21
5.17
1.22
‐2.30
(8.47)
(8.54)
(9.35)
(8.77)
35.75** 37.65** 35.61*** 32.87**
(14.94)
(14.94)
(13.56)
(13.21)
28.99
16.81
8.74
5.13
(17.68)
(13.25)
(31.58)
(16.10)
43.38** 35.45** 55.15**
27.83
(16.80)
(14.04)
(23.06)
(18.15)
119.69*** 102.19*** 120.34*** 103.05*** 119.70*** 102.20*** 120.37*** 103.05***
(8.84)
(4.40)
(7.37)
(3.71)
(8.85)
(4.39)
(7.38)
(3.70)
No
All
4354
792

Yes
All
4203
764

No
All
4354
792

Yes
All
4203
764

No
All
4354
792

Yes
All
4203
764

No
All
4354
792

Yes
All
4203
764

(9)
OLS

(10)
OLS

5.74
5.59
(11.57)
(11.62)
47.35** 49.92**
(21.35)
(21.44)
44.79** 34.17**
(19.42)
(15.51)
60.33*** 50.61***
(19.76)
(17.66)
99.47*** 94.92***
(5.95)
(5.50)
No
5 and 6
1392
736

P‐values for testing:
Cash = In‐kind
0.0668
0.0306
0.0128
0.0156
Cash = In‐kind for Females
0.0725
0.0565
0.0205
0.0187
0.0736
0.4873
0.2998
0.1486
0.3051
0.5164
Cash = In‐kind for Males
Cash Male = Cash Female
0.2254
0.4604
0.8196
0.6854
0.0845
In‐kind Male = In‐kind Female
0.7346
0.9145
0.4653
0.8224
0.6555
Notes:
All estimation includes wave effects, which vary by gender in columns 5 on. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level.
Trimmed specifications trim out matched quadruplets which have at least one firm with profits above 1500 cedis per month in wave 1 or 2
OLS estimation includes dummies for the matched quadruplets.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.

Yes
5 and 6
1344
710

0.058
0.4207
0.1406
0.9804

Table 4: Treatment Heterogeneity by Randomization Strata
Dependent Variable: Real Monthly Profits (Cedi)
(1)
(2)
OLS
FE
Interaction Category A
Single‐Sex Industry
Interaction Category B
Mixed Industry
Panel A: Females
Cash Treatment*Category A
Cash Treatment*Category B
In‐kind Treatment*Category A
In‐kind Treatment*Category B

Number of Observations
Number of Firms
P‐values for testing:
Cash Treatments equal
In‐kind Treatments equal
Cash=In‐kind
Panel B: Males
Cash Treatment*Category A
Cash Treatment*Category B
In‐kind Treatment*Category A
In‐kind Treatment*Category B

(3)
(4)
OLS
FE
Low Capture
High Capture

(5)
(6)
OLS
FE
Low Capital
High Capital

(7)
(8)
OLS
FE
Low Profits
High Profits

9.62
(10.08)
1.44
(13.37)
26.37*
(14.31)
48.26*
(25.60)

‐6.87
(10.57)
1.78
(13.47)
25.39
(17.03)
39.77**
(19.94)

2.12
(12.40)
7.89
(12.00)
28.30
(23.00)
46.66***
(14.15)

‐8.53
(13.55)
4.49
(11.35)
35.41
(24.07)
31.06**
(12.50)

3.13
(10.62)
8.29
(14.05)
15.96
(10.77)
65.06**
(30.21)

‐11.25
(11.75)
8.98
(13.06)
14.25
(10.41)
55.67**
(26.19)

3.29
(7.15)
6.83
(20.59)
2.21
(6.97)
96.18***
(36.95)

‐8.58
(9.65)
6.81
(17.01)
4.58
(7.52)
76.53**
(30.69)

2604
474

2604
474

2604
474

2604
474

2604
474

2604
474

2604
474

2604
474

0.625
0.456
0.156

0.614
0.584
0.058

0.740
0.457
0.056

0.462
0.873
0.061

0.771
0.124
0.155

0.250
0.142
0.051

0.871
0.013
0.119

0.432
0.023
0.056

‐2.82
(16.42)
36.60*
(20.25)
44.85**
(21.72)
28.55
(18.54)

‐5.75
(21.54)
17.00
(23.63)
23.47
(31.46)
33.69
(20.66)

‐0.06
(19.55)
25.13
(17.36)
43.56
(27.06)
30.49*
(15.76)

10.72
(23.92)
0.77
(21.00)
58.33
(35.74)
8.94
(19.42)

0.68
(18.06)
30.16
(18.83)
46.55**
(19.24)
25.78
(20.31)

‐0.72
(20.14)
8.66
(24.00)
26.33
(25.52)
28.51
(25.59)

17.23
(12.99)
15.43
(22.96)
35.08*
(18.00)
34.88
(21.57)

‐1.50
(12.76)
9.50
(27.99)
32.20
(23.07)
21.99
(27.48)

Observations
1599
1599
1599
1599
1599
1599
1599
Number of Firms
290
290
290
290
290
290
290
P‐values for testing:
Cash Treatments equal
0.132
0.477
0.337
0.755
0.260
0.765
0.946
In‐kind Treatments equal
0.569
0.786
0.677
0.226
0.458
0.952
0.994
Cash=In‐kind
0.151
0.596
0.312
0.349
0.171
0.509
0.563
Notes:
All estimation includes wave effects which vary by category. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level.
Trimmed sample used. OLS estimation includes dummies for the matched quadruplets.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.

1599
290
0.721
0.776
0.417

Table 5: Where do the grants go?

Capital
Stock
FE
Panel A: Males and Females
Cash Treatment*Female
In‐kind Treatment*Female
Cash Treatment*Male
In‐kind Treatment*Male
Number of Observations
Number of Firms
P‐values testing:
Cash = In‐kind Females
Cash = In‐kind Males
Panel B: Female Sub‐sample
Cash Treatment*Low Profits
Cash Treatment*High Profits
In‐kind Treatment*Low Profits
In‐kind Treatment*High Profits

Truncated Made a
Capital
Transfer
Stock
Out
FE
OLS

82.61
49.17
(72.01)
(37.27)
135.34** 120.24***
(65.55)
(34.51)
31.36
2.21
(70.33)
(61.10)
157.71
83.74
(102.12)
(69.85)
4256
4256
765
765
0.573
0.212

0.107
0.291

‐6.77
‐6.78
(29.67)
(29.69)
238.00
145.84*
(185.23)
(85.70)
59.17** 59.17**
(28.45)
(28.46)
262.60 223.24***
(166.25)
(77.66)
2654
2654
475
475

Amount
Transferred
Out
OLS

Quarterly
Weekly Quarterly Health &
Quarterly
Total
Log
Food
Clothing Education Ceremonies Quarterly Quarterly
Spending
Spending Spending
Spending Spending Spending
FE
FE
FE
FE
FE
FE

0.05*
(0.03)
0.02
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
0.01
(0.04)
2033
722

8.05**
(3.46)
1.76
(2.92)
‐4.06
(3.93)
‐6.01
(3.95)
2203
722

3.81
(2.44)
‐0.07
(2.60)
3.93
(3.12)
‐2.82
(3.42)
4268
765

3.38
(3.90)
‐0.50
(4.39)
9.52*
(5.08)
3.63
(5.83)
3911
761

‐1.05
(13.42)
‐6.08
(13.03)
0.98
(11.26)
‐0.85
(23.28)
3713
753

1.39
(3.17)
2.33
(3.46)
3.27
(3.92)
4.36
(5.20)
4286
765

120.54***
(45.61)
45.36
(44.36)
63.94
(50.82)
20.95
(65.12)
4495
765

0.08*
(0.04)
‐0.02
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
‐0.01
(0.05)
4299
765

0.294
0.693

0.137
0.630

0.198
0.111

0.478
0.428

0.776
0.942

0.817
0.856

0.172
0.573

0.054
0.611

0.07**
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
0.01
(0.03)
0.03
(0.05)
1260
446

6.13**
(2.80)
11.54
(8.35)
‐0.40
(2.02)
5.12
(6.76)
1260
446

7.26**
(3.32)
‐2.13
(4.27)
1.11
(3.93)
‐1.99
(3.94)
2657
475

4.66
(4.24)
8.29
(8.08)
4.10
(5.20)
‐2.43
(8.01)
2440
475

15.39
(18.93)
‐25.71
(18.79)
3.83
(18.81)
‐18.48
(17.24)
2323
468

2.94
(4.11)
‐8.05
(5.48)
‐2.38
(3.09)
3.11
(7.79)
2666
475

197.84***
(58.16)
‐53.38
(81.92)
32.92
(63.98)
18.07
(68.53)
2790
475

0.16**
(0.06)
‐0.07
(0.06)
‐0.02
(0.06)
‐0.04
(0.06)
2670
475

Number of Observations
Number of Firms
P‐values testing:
Cash Treatments Equal
0.193
0.093
0.351
0.540
0.083
0.691
0.124
0.109
0.013
In‐kind Treatments Equal
0.228
0.048
0.769
0.435
0.578
0.494
0.382
0.513
0.874
Notes:
All expenditure data truncated at the 99.5th percentile of the data.
All estimation includes wave effects which vary by gender, and by category in panel B. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level.
High and Low profits refers to groups defined on pre‐treatment profits.
Trimmed sample used. OLS estimation includes dummies for the matched quadruplets.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.

0.007
0.827

Table 6: Comparison of Characteristics of High and Low Profit Women
Low
Initial Profit
Men
Women
a
Monthly profits in January 2009
Mean
130
38
Median
91
37
Monthly sales in January 2009
Mean
502
187
Median
240
120
Total Capital Stock in January 2009
Mean
611
251
Median
255
102

High
Initial Profits
Women

Sri Lankan
Women

173***
137***

28
20

822***
500***

87
50

456***
162***

207
100

Age of Owner
35.4
35.9
37.0
Age of Firm
9.1
6.0
7.4**
Ever had a formal loan
0.07
0.08
0.15**
Keeps accounts
0.45
0.31
0.44**
Years of Education
10.04
7.80
8.63**
Digitspan Recall
5.70
4.59
4.80
Chose sector as it had low capital requirements
0.17
0.40
0.32*
Chose sector for profit potential
0.18
0.11
0.18**
Willingness to Take Risks
5.64
4.28
4.40
Save regularly
0.71
0.62
0.73**
Household Asset index
0.29
‐0.40
0.14***
Household has a Cellphone
0.94
0.88
0.91
Sample Size
290
296
179
Notes:
Means shown unless indicated otherwise. Trimmed subsample used.
*, **, and *** indicate high profit women statistically different from the low profit women
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
a. Figures for Sri Lanka are reported as of March 2005 Sri Lankan baseline, converted at
an approximate exchange rate of 100 Sri Lankan rupees to 1 cedi.
n.a. indicates not available in Sri Lankan data.

41.1
9.5
0.23
0.29
9.44
5.68
n.a.
n.a.
6.08
0.67
n.a.
0.22
190

Table 7: Heterogeneity according to self‐control
Dependent variable: Real profits
Interaction Category:
Used a
Susu at
Baseline
Panel A: Pooling Treatment Effects across Gender
Cash Treatment
‐5.117
(11.05)
In‐kind Treatment
25.24
(15.34)
Cash Treatment * Interaction
14.54
(16.70)
In‐kind Treatment *Interaction
10.35
(20.80)
p‐value for testing interactions jointly zero
0.6355
Observations
Number of firms
Panel B: Females Sub‐sample only
Cash Treatment
In‐kind Treatment
Cash Treatment * Interaction
In‐kind Treatment *Interaction
p‐value for testing interactions jointly zero

Said they Discount
Save
rate above
regularly
median

Hyperbolic
Discounter

Lacks
Self‐control

Says there is
Can spend
pressure to
freely without
share with hh
spouse

Household Number of
Size
Siblings
in Area

‐34.97**
(14.58)
‐4.260
(9.341)
50.95***
(17.69)
49.41***
(17.91)
0.001

13.26
(13.92)
13.97
(11.20)
‐21.97
(17.15)
31.00
(20.66)
0.1024

6.219
(10.33)
40.35***
(14.49)
‐18.70
(16.82)
‐38.88**
(18.09)
0.0708

2.768
(8.579)
29.80***
(10.81)
‐16.13**
(8.102)
‐6.587
(6.273)
0.0983

1.187
(9.886)
31.54**
(12.49)
‐0.705
(17.82)
‐23.61
(20.36)
0.501

‐8.618
(18.29)
8.972
(13.33)
13.44
(22.54)
20.68
(20.09)
0.535

2.191
(8.350)
28.79***
(10.62)
5.937
(4.238)
0.451
(5.022)
0.371

0.414
(8.624)
25.61**
(10.40)
2.166
(3.284)
6.469*
(3.835)
0.198

4,170
758

4,157
755

4,169
758

4,157
755

4,145
753

3,880
675

2,702
490

4,169
757

3,750
652

‐8.313
(12.94)
24.79
(21.96)
12.37
(17.51)
14.44
(27.10)
0.704

‐20.90
(17.44)
‐2.700
(8.508)
28.15
(20.15)
50.76**
(20.86)
0.033

9.207
(15.23)
12.62
(11.47)
‐19.78
(18.47)
38.26
(25.00)
0.139

0.955
(10.69)
41.12**
(17.56)
‐11.43
(18.97)
‐34.74
(23.17)
0.297

‐0.608
(9.100)
31.20**
(13.04)
‐11.65
(7.963)
‐3.526
(7.445)
0.318

‐3.369
(10.76)
35.56**
(17.04)
16.55
(16.63)
‐10.42
(23.13)
0.479

0.710
(19.53)
‐4.982
(12.88)
2.671
(24.14)
42.57**
(17.84)
0.051

‐3.461
(8.711)
30.52**
(13.40)
10.49**
(4.602)
‐1.392
(6.528)
0.064

0.0197
(9.261)
33.84**
(13.80)
5.174**
(2.092)
2.144
(2.694)
0.045

2,587
471

2,580
469

2,574
468

2,398
418

1,730
312

2,592
471

2,375
414

Observations
2,588
2,586
Number of firms
471
470
Notes: Results from Fixed effects estimation on trimmed sample.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.
All regressions include wave effects which vary with the interaction.

Table 8. Dependent Variable: Real Profits
Interaction is:
Whether they are
married
(1)
(2)
Female
Male
Cash Treatment
In‐kind Treatment
Cash*Interaction
In‐kind*Interaction

‐9.640
(12.84)
40.89
(33.71)
11.56
(17.18)
‐11.91
(35.28)

16.78
(24.73)
34.99
(23.63)
‐17.11
(33.14)
‐12.19
(34.08)

Observations
2,599
1,593
Number of firms
473
289
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Share of assets
brought to marriage
(3)
(4)
Female
Male

Difference in education
between spouses
(5)
(6)
Female
Male

Difference in age
between spouses
(7)
(8)
Female
Male

Spend income
without consent
(9)
(10)
Female
Male

Baseline profits
as share of income
(11)
(12)
Female
Male

Baseline profits
as share of consumption
(13)
(14)
Female
Male

20.54
(17.50)
49.01*
(27.46)
‐6.289
(27.52)
‐16.09
(39.86)

1.823
(60.36)
23.79
(63.60)
‐14.47
(77.95)
‐6.332
(84.32)

18.69
(17.00)
40.52**
(17.86)
0.752
(2.474)
0.101
(3.249)

2.177
(30.95)
20.61
(60.32)
1.820
(5.634)
6.441
(9.761)

‐0.0262
(25.64)
43.21
(27.16)
‐0.162
(2.339)
0.0207
(2.550)

‐3.651
(33.45)
26.00
(28.63)
0.0687
(6.121)
‐2.986
(4.113)

0.710
(19.53)
‐4.982
(12.88)
2.671
(24.14)
42.57**
(17.84)

‐47.59
(47.88)
29.59
(25.65)
55.74
(54.47)
‐13.18
(43.76)

‐8.692
(20.83)
32.56
(23.58)
8.387
(24.37)
‐0.605
(32.46)

‐25.43
(27.64)
147.1
(104.1)
34.63
(39.97)
‐135.2
(108.0)

0.0859
(13.84)
64.50*
(33.17)
‐2.005
(17.24)
‐54.76
(34.21)

7.697
(21.89)
24.56
(23.21)
16.82
(26.29)
12.98
(37.70)

1,273
222

864
151

956
172

799
147

1,520
264

932
163

1,730
312

972
178

2,408
431

1,501
267

2,604
474

1,599
290

Table 9: Heterogeneity according to external pressure
Dependent variable: Real profits
Interaction Category:
Household
Size
Panel A: Pooling Treatment Effects across Gender
Cash Treatment
In‐kind Treatment
Cash Treatment * Interaction
In‐kind Treatment *Interaction
p‐value for testing interactions jointly zero
Observations
Number of firms
Panel B: Females Sub‐sample only
Cash Treatment
In‐kind Treatment
Cash Treatment * Interaction
In‐kind Treatment *Interaction
p‐value for testing interactions jointly zero

Says there is
pressure to
share with hh

Number of
Siblings
in Area

2.191
(8.350)
28.79***
(10.62)
5.937
(4.238)
0.451
(5.022)
0.371

1.187
(9.886)
31.54**
(12.49)
‐0.705
(17.82)
‐23.61
(20.36)
0.501

0.414
(8.624)
25.61**
(10.40)
2.166
(3.284)
6.469*
(3.835)
0.198

4,169
757

3,880
675

3,750
652

‐3.461
(8.711)
30.52**
(13.40)
10.49**
(4.602)
‐1.392
(6.528)
0.064

‐3.369
(10.76)
35.56**
(17.04)
16.55
(16.63)
‐10.42
(23.13)
0.479

0.0197
(9.261)
33.84**
(13.80)
5.174**
(2.092)
2.144
(2.694)
0.045

2,398
418

2,375
414

Observations
2,592
Number of firms
471
Notes: Results from Fixed effects estimation on trimmed sample.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.
All regressions include wave effects which vary with the interaction.

Table 10: Is self‐control just proxying for external pressure
Dependent Variable: "Lack of Self‐control" Index

Female
Baseline profits below the median
Says there is pressure to share extra profits
with other household members
Baseline household Size
Number of Siblings in Accra/Tema
Agrees that whenever they have money on hand, their
spouse or other family members always end up requesting some.
Agrees that people who do well in their business are likely to receive
additional requests from family and friends for money to help out
Agrees that machines and equipment held in their business are a good
way of saving money so that others don’t take it.
At baseline spouse had compelled them to give money that they
didn't want to during last 3 months
Can spend their income without consulting their spouse

Males &
Females
(1)
‐0.0860
(0.0885)
0.0954
(0.0887)
0.0505
(0.103)
0.0144
(0.0226)
0.0239
(0.0157)
0.0583
(0.0989)
0.0393
(0.115)
0.0303
(0.0906)

Spouse is supportive of them running a business
Constant

0.00766
(0.130)

Married
Males & Females
(2)
‐0.0969
(0.110)
‐0.00624
(0.113)
‐0.0609
(0.122)
0.00290
(0.0305)
0.0120
(0.0208)
0.115
(0.125)
‐0.100
(0.146)
0.0507
(0.113)
‐0.0699
(0.158)
‐0.148
(0.122)
‐0.218
(0.160)
0.487**
(0.240)

Females
(3)

0.101
(0.118)
0.0359
(0.138)
‐0.000428
(0.0307)
0.0378**
(0.0190)
‐0.00133
(0.128)
0.0916
(0.145)
‐0.00774
(0.115)

‐0.0548
(0.157)

Number of Observations
667
427
403
R‐squared
0.009
0.017
0.010
0.581
0.897
0.682
P‐value for testing joint insignificance of all variables
Notes:
Coefficients are from an OLS regression of an index formed as the first principal component of using a susu, saving regularly,
being a hyperbolic discounter, and having above the median discount rate on the variables listed in the table
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.

Married
Females
(4)

‐0.0329
(0.148)
‐0.111
(0.162)
‐0.0191
(0.0404)
0.0250
(0.0238)
0.0620
(0.154)
‐0.0605
(0.184)
‐0.0186
(0.143)
0.220
(0.210)
‐0.219
(0.156)
‐0.215
(0.204)
0.493*
(0.284)
262
0.025
0.705

Appendix Table A1: Attrition Rates by Round
All firms

Control

Cash

In‐kind

Didn't Answer Survey
Wave 1
0
0
0
Wave 2
0
0
0
Wave 3
0.029
0.031
0.010
Wave 4
0.073
0.086
0.068
Wave 5
0.112
0.131
0.099
Wave 6
0.080
0.102
0.047
Any Wave
0.166
0.196
0.131
Missing profits data
Wave 1
0.080
0.091
0.071
Wave 2
0.016
0.013
0.025
Wave 3
0.069
0.076
0.061
Wave 4
0.098
0.123
0.076
Wave 5
0.129
0.149
0.121
Wave 6
0.114
0.141
0.086
Any Wave
0.285
0.329
0.236
Ever close business
0.064
0.073
0.063
Note: Test of equality if based on regression of attrition on treatment group
with controls for stratification groups and robust standard errors.

P‐value test
of equality

0
0
0.042
0.052
0.089
0.068
0.141

1
1
0.106
0.303
0.262
0.050
0.070

0.071
0.010
0.071
0.071
0.106
0.086
0.246
0.047

0.615
0.477
0.740
0.064
0.207
0.059
0.019
0.463

Appendix Table A2: Robustness of Treatment Effect to Lee Bounds
Dependent Variable: Real Monthly Profits (Cedis)
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
FE
OLS
Cash Treatment*Female
5.167
‐2.298
6.093
(8.545)
(8.768)
(8.767)
In‐kind Treatment*Female
37.65** 32.87** 40.88***
(14.94)
(13.21)
(15.41)
Cash Treatment*Male
16.81
5.132
21.82
(13.25)
(16.10)
(13.28)
In‐kind Treatment*Male
35.45**
27.83
37.26***
(14.04)
(18.15)
(14.07)

(4)
OLS
1.148
(7.106)
9.378
(7.066)
6.218
(11.28)
14.71
(10.14)

(5)
FE
‐1.441
(8.927)
35.34***
(13.59)
9.154
(16.02)
28.11
(18.21)

Lee Bounding

Lower

No

No

Upper

Upper

Number of Observations
4203
4203
4165
4167
4165
Number of Firms
764
764
764
764
764
Notes:
All estimation includes wave effects. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level.
Trimmed Sample used for all columns
OLS estimation includes dummies for the matched quadruplets.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.

(6)
FE
‐3.297
(7.226)
11.06
(7.661)
‐5.718
(13.87)
8.421
(14.07)
Lower
4167
764

Appendix Table A3: How does Treatment Effect Vary with Time Since Treatment?
Dependent Variable: Real Monthly Profits

Cash Treatment at 3 months
Cash Treatment at 6 months
Cash Treatment at 9 months
Cash Treatment at 12 months
In‐kind Treatment at 3 months
In‐kind Treatment at 6 months
In‐kind Treatment at 9 months
In‐kind Treatment at 12 months
Constant

Baseline trimming
Number of Observations
Number of Firms

(1)
OLS
14.27
(10.26)
7.18
(9.86)
12.97
(12.23)
38.09***
(13.55)
26.37**
(12.10)
34.62***
(11.68)
48.33**
(20.63)
58.35***
(19.42)
119.70***
(8.85)

Males and Females Pooled
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS
FE
FE
9.12
5.89
1.13
(8.01)
(11.23)
(8.31)
6.30
‐1.36
‐2.75
(9.16)
(17.27)
(10.34)
5.99
9.60
3.74
(10.96)
(15.97)
(11.07)
27.98**
17.73
17.01
(12.81)
(23.52)
(13.42)
26.65**
30.20**
18.86*
(11.42)
(12.64)
(11.36)
32.61***
38.34***
25.49**
(11.19)
(12.75)
(10.93)
48.90**
54.91***
45.24**
(19.96)
(20.25)
(18.50)
46.91***
78.17***
58.00***
(17.52)
(19.23)
(17.02)
102.20*** 120.34*** 103.05***
(4.40)
(7.38)
(3.71)

Males

Females

(5)
OLS
5.05
(15.03)
16.11
(17.21)
12.64
(20.12)
57.54***
(20.87)
33.59
(22.86)
19.12
(15.11)
39.49**
(17.33)
69.76*
(35.62)
127.88***
(7.52)

(6)
FE
‐2.58
(15.86)
5.90
(20.45)
11.01
(21.36)
30.41
(25.94)
25.34
(24.82)
9.98
(18.99)
36.59*
(19.41)
75.71**
(36.58)
128.69***
(6.47)

(7)
OLS
11.52
(9.15)
‐0.18
(10.32)
2.37
(12.47)
10.01
(16.15)
22.25*
(11.89)
41.03***
(15.44)
54.76*
(30.35)
32.76*
(17.47)
86.43***
(5.40)

(8)
FE
3.25
(9.24)
‐8.42
(10.91)
‐0.30
(11.93)
8.82
(14.69)
14.81
(10.06)
35.16***
(13.10)
50.66*
(27.33)
47.10***
(15.33)
87.33***
(4.49)

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

4354
792

4203
764

4354
792

4203
764

1599
290

1599
290

2604
474

2604
474

P‐value for testing constant effect:
of Cash Treatments
0.166
0.435
0.262
0.389
0.170
0.534
0.579
of In‐kind Treatments
0.492
0.577
0.121
0.163
0.458
0.249
0.189
Notes:
All estimation includes wave effects. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level.
*, ** and *** denote significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.
Trimmed specifications trim out matched quadruplets which have at least one firm with profits above 1500 cedis per month in wave 1 or 2.
OLS estimation includes dummies for the matched quadruplets.

0.353
0.057

