                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               INTERNATIONAL RECESSIONS

                                          Fabrizio Perri
                                        Vincenzo Quadrini

                                       Working Paper 17201
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w17201


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2011




We thank seminar participants at Boston University, Chicago Booth, Columbia University, Harvard
University, New York Fed, San Francisco FED, UC Berkeley, UCLA, University of Colorado, University
of Notre Dame and attendees at the Advances in International Macroeconomics conference in Brussels,
Bank of Japan International Conference, Challenges in Open Economy Macroeconomics after the
Financial Crisis conference at the St Louis FED, NBER IFM Meeting, Philadelphia Workshop on
Macroeconomics, Stanford SITE conference. We also thank Ariel Burstein, Fabio Ghironi, Jean Imbs,
Paolo Pesenti, Etsuro Shioji and Raf Wouters for excellent discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Fabrizio Perri and Vincenzo Quadrini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Recessions
Fabrizio Perri and Vincenzo Quadrini
NBER Working Paper No. 17201
July 2011
JEL No. E3,F3,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

The 2008-2009 crisis was characterized by an unprecedented degree of international synchronization
as all major industrialized countries experienced large macroeconomic contractions around the date
of Lehman bankruptcy. At the same time countries also experienced large and synchronized tightening
of credit conditions. We present a two-country model with financial market frictions where a credit
tightening can emerge as a self-fulling equilibrium caused by pessimistic but fully rational expectations.
As a result of the credit tightening, countries experience large and endogenously synchronized declines
in asset prices and economic activity (international recessions). The model suggests that these recessions
are more severe if they happen after a prolonged period of credit expansion.


Fabrizio Perri
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
4-177 Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
fperri@umn.edu

Vincenzo Quadrini
Department of Finance and Business Economics
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
701 Exposition Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
quadrini@usc.edu
1    Introduction
One striking feature of the 2007/2009 recession is that in the midst of it (the quarter after the
Lehman bankruptcy) all major industrialized countries experienced extraordinarily large and
synchronized contractions in real and financial aggregates. The main objective of this paper
is to provide an explanation for these two features of the crisis: the international dimension
(both real and financial) and its depth.
    Our hypothesis is that multiple self-fulfilling equilibria in credit markets can explain these
features. We will make our point by developing a two-country incomplete-markets model where
firm managers use credit to finance hiring and to pay dividends to owners. If managers are up
against a credit constraint, equilibrium employment is affected by the shadow cost of credit,
which in turn is affected by the tightness of credit constraints.
    Our first contribution is to show that if the two countries are financially integrated, the
shadow cost of credit is equalized across countries. Hence, an ‘exogenous’ tightening of credit
constraints affects economic employment and activity in both countries, regardless of where the
tightening originates. This result suggests a transmission channel for credit shocks but does
not deal with the more fundamental question of what causes a credit shock. Our second con-
tribution is to provide an ‘endogenous’ mechanism for the credit tightening. More specifically,
we show that tighter/looser credit constraints can emerge endogenously as multiple self-fulling
equilibria.
    In ‘bad’ equilibria, markets expect low resale prices for the assets of defaulting firms.
Because of this, firms face low credit capacity and are liquidity constrained. Then, the fact
that firms are liquidity constrained implies that the resale price of their assets is low since there
are no firms that have the ability to purchase the assets of liquidated firms. This rationalizes,
ex-post, the ex-ante expectation of low prices leading to bad equilibria. These equilibria are
characterized by depressed economic activity, financial intermediation and asset prices. On
the other hand, in ‘good’ equilibria, markets expect high resale prices of firms’ assets which
allows for higher debt. As a result of the high borrowing capacity, firms are unconstrained.
This implies that ex-post there are firms with the required liquidity to purchase the assets
of liquidated firms, which in turn keeps prices high. This rationalizes, ex-post, the ex-ante
expectations of high prices leading to equilibria with sustained levels of economic activity,
financial intermediation and asset prices.
    An important difference between exogenous and endogenous credit shocks is that, in finan-



                                                 1
cially integrated economies, the former imply co-movement in real activity but not necessarily
in financial intermediation, while the latter always imply co-movement in both real activity
and financial intermediation. The reason is because endogenous credit shocks are determined
by the resale price of firms’s assets. In a financially integrated economy the resale price is
common across countries. Hence, credit shocks are also common across countries and generate
co-movement in all variables, real and financial. Since we document that during the 2008
crisis there has been strong co-movement in both real and financial variables, the theory of
endogenous credit shocks seems better suited to explain recent events. Modeling the shocks
as an endogenous process has also important policy implications. It suggests that changes
in structural features of the economy, such us financial integration or the public provision of
liquidity, can change the volatility and the international correlation of shocks, which usually
are taken as exogenous.
   Our third contribution relates to the depth of the crisis. We argue that ‘ordinary’ credit
shocks, that is, shocks that would cause mild contraction under normal circumstances, can
indeed generate ‘extra-ordinary’ recessions if they happen after a long period of credit expan-
sion. In order to illustrate this, we study a version of the model with occasionally binding
constraints and show that there exists an equilibrium path in which credit constraints are not
binding for a long period of time. During this period both economies undergo a persistent
expansion in economic activity (gradual) and in credit (rapid). However, if constraints become
binding after this long expansionary phase, firms are forced to implement a large de-leveraging
which causes a sharp contraction in real macroeconomic variables. This happens even if agents
fully anticipate the possibility of the reversal. We argue that this asymmetry between the
expansion phase—with fast growing credit growth and mild real growth—and the contraction
phase—with sharp collapse in both economic activity and credit—captures well the macroeco-
nomic developments of advanced economies during the recent cycle and during other episodes
of financial crises (see for example Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)).
   One important observation concerning the international dimension of the recent crisis is
that, although real GDP experienced similar contractions in the US and in the rest of the
G7 countries, employment was hit particularly hard in the US but not in the remaining G7
countries (see Ohanian (2010)). As a consequence of this, labor productivity soared in the US
but declined in the rest of the G7 countries. Our baseline model with integrated credit markets
and symmetric labor markets fails to explain this cross country difference. However, in the
final section of the paper we show that this is not necessarily a problem with credit shocks


                                              2
but it is likely to derive from cross-country differences in the structure of the real economies
and, more specifically, in the labor markets. We show this by introducing a stylized labor
market asymmetry (more flexibility in the US and less flexibility in other G7 countries). With
this extension credit shocks have the potential to explain the similar responses of GDP and
financial markets and the asymmetric responses of employment and labor productivity.
      Our paper is related to the vast literature (both empirical and theoretical) studying the
sources of macroeconomic co-movement and international transmission of shocks. Usually co-
movement is explained as the result of synchronized disturbances (global or common shocks, see
for example Crucini, Kose and Otrok (2011)) and/or as the result of country-specific shocks
that spill to other countries (international transmission of country specific shocks). In this
paper we show that credit shocks generate co-movement for both reasons: exogenous credit
shocks spill-over from one country to the other, and endogenous credit shocks will appear to
the econometrician like a common-shock or a global factor. This finding is consistent with
the empirical results of Helbling, Huidrom, Kose & Otrok (2011) according to which credit
market shocks matter in explaining global business cycles, especially during the 2009 global
recession. Recent contributions that analyze directly the strong international co-movement
during the 2007-2009 crisis include Dedola & Lombardo (2010), Devereux & Yetman (2010),
Devereux & Sutherland (2011), and Kollmann, Enders & Müller (2011). All these studies focus
on the international transmission of shocks in models with financial market frictions but do
not consider the possibility of endogenously generated credit shocks.
      The role of credit shocks for macroeconomic fluctuations has been investigated recently but
in closed economies.1 Furthermore, while in most of the recent contributions credit shocks are
purely exogenous, in our paper we provide a micro foundation which is based on self-fulling
expectations. Our theory is in line with the idea of liquidity crises resulting from multiple
equilibria outcomes as discussed in Lucas and Stokey (2011). It shares some similarities with
the multiple equilibria property of the model studied in Kocherlakota (2009).
      In our model the multiplicity of equilibria derives from ‘occasionally binding’ constraints.
This is another important difference between our paper and other studies that investigate the
macroeconomic impact of financial shocks. Most of these contributions limit the analysis to
equilibria with always binding constraints and the quantitative properties are studied using
linear approximation techniques. In our model, instead, borrowing constraints are only occa-
  1
    Examples are Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2009), Gertler and Karadi (2009), Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2009), Goldberg (2010), Jermann and Quadrini (2011), Khan and Thomas (2010), Lorenzoni and Guerrieri
(2010).


                                                  3
sionally binding and this is important to generate the asymmetry between long and gradual
credit driven booms and sharp credit driven recessions. Mendoza (2010) also studies an econ-
omy with occasionally binding constraints but does not investigate the importance of financial
shocks. Furthermore, by focusing on a small open economy, the paper does not address the
issue of international co-movement which is central to our study. Occasionally binding con-
straints are also central to Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010) but the analysis is limited to
productivity shocks and in a closed economy.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the macroeconomic and financial
evidence about the recent crisis. We then present the theoretical framework gradually, starting
in Section 3 with a version of the model where capital is fixed and credit shocks are exogenous.
Section 4 makes the credit shocks endogenous and describes the conditions for multiple equi-
libria. Section 5 adds capital accumulation and Section 6 presents the quantitative results. In
Section 7 we extend the model by allowing for cross-country heterogeneity in domestic labor
markets. Section 8 concludes.


2     Macroeconomic evidence
In this section we first present some facts about international co-movement in several vari-
ables during the 2007-2009 crisis and then some evidence on the relation between credit and
employment for different countries.


2.1   International co-movement

Figure 1 plots the GDP dynamics for the G7 countries in six of the most recent US recessionary
episodes. In each panel we plot the percent deviations of GDP for each country from the
level of GDP in the quarter preceding the start of the US recession (based on the NBER
business cycle dating committee). Comparison of the bottom right panel of the figure with
the other panels suggests how the 2007-2009 period, and in particular the period following the
Lehman crisis (shaded area), stands out both in terms of depth and in terms of macroeconomic
synchronization among the G7 countries. In none of the previous recessions the GDP fell so
much and in all countries.
    To make the point of increasing international co-movement a bit more generally, Figure 2
plots the average correlation of 10 years rolling windows of quarterly GDP growth between
all G7 countries. The figure also plots 2 standard deviation bands. The dates in the graph


                                               4
                                          1973Q4                                                                                       1980Q1                                                                                               1981Q3
      1.04                                                                                      1.04                                                                                  1.04

      1.02                                                                                      1.02                                                                                  1.02

      1.00                                                                                      1.00                                                                                  1.00

      0.98                                                                                      0.98                                                                                  0.98

      0.96                                                                                      0.96                                                                                  0.96

      0.94                                                                                      0.94                                                                                  0.94

      0.92                                                                                      0.92                                                                                  0.92

      0.90                                                                                      0.90                                                                                  0.90
              I        II          III   IV      I          II          III    IV         I                 II          III            IV            I               II         III           IV         I            II          III       IV          I          II          III      IV
                            1973                                 1974                    1975                      1979                                          1980                        1980                          1981                                         1982
                                         1990Q3                                                                                             2001Q1                                                                                          2007Q4

     1.04                                                                                       1.04                                                                                  1.04

     1.02                                                                                       1.02                                                                                  1.02

     1.00                                                                                       1.00                                                                                  1.00

     0.98                                                                                       0.98                                                                                  0.98

     0.96                                                                                       0.96                                                                                  0.96

     0.94                                                                                       0.94                                                                                  0.94

     0.92                                                                                       0.92                                                                                  0.92

     0.90                                                                                       0.90                                                                                  0.90
                  IV          I           II          III                 IV         I                 II         III             IV            I        II               III   IV            I     II          III          IV         I        II          III        IV       I          II
             1989                              1990                                 1991                         2000                                         2001                                       2007                                         2008                           2009

                                                                                                       US                     Japan           Germany            UK
                                                                                                       France                 Italy           Canada




 Figure 1: The dynamics of GDP during the six most recent recessions in the G7 countries.


correspond to the end points of the window used to compute the correlation. The figure shows
that during the last two quarters of 2008 (the vertical line marks the third quarter), the average
correlation jumped from 0.3 to 0.7 and the sample standard deviation of the correlations fell
from 0.19 to 0.09. This confirms that the 2007-2009 stands out in the post-war era as a period
of extraordinarily high co-movement for all developed countries. See also Imbs (2010).
   The high degree of international co-movement between US and other major countries is also
observed in other real and financial variables. Figure 3 plots GDP, consumption, investment
and employment in the period 2005-2010 for the US and an aggregate of the other countries in
the G7 group (from now on G6). The figure highlights that GDP, consumption and investment
were all hit hard in both the US and the G6 countries. This is especially noticeable after the
third quarter of 2008, marked by the vertical line. Employment also declined in US and abroad




                                                                                                                                            5
                            1.0
                                       Mean
                            0.8        +/- 2 S.D.

                            0.6

                            0.4
              Correlation




                            0.2

                            0.0

                            -0.2

                            -0.4

                            -0.6
                               1965   1970    1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010


           Figure 2: Rolling correlations of quarterly GDP growth among G7 countries.


even though the US decline is much larger than the decline in the G6.2 .
       Figure 4 plots the dynamics of some selected financial variables. The top left panel reports
the growth rate of stock prices for the US and for the G6 and it documents the massive and
synchronous decline in stock prices that took place during the crisis.3 The other panels plot
different measures of credit conditions in the business sector. The top right panel reports the
growth in total net debt for the non-financial businesses sector.4
       Indicators of credit market conditions based on credit volumes have been criticized as
they do not take into account that a credit crunch might induce firms to draw on existing
credit lines, so creating a distress that does not (immediately) show up in quantities. See,
for example, Gao and Yun (2009). For this reason the bottom left panel reports a different
indicator of credit market conditions. The indicator is not based on volumes of credit but on
   2
      This feature of the crisis has been emphasized by Ohanian (2010). In the last part of the paper we will
consider a possible explanation for the heterogeneous behavior of the labor market
    3
      Stock prices for the US are the MSCI BARRA US stock market index, while stock prices in the G6 countries
are computed using the MSCI BARRA EAFE+Canada index which is an average of stock prices in advanced
economies except the US.
    4
      The series for the US real debt is from the Flows of Funds Accounts and for the whole nonfinancial business
sector. The series for the G6 is the sum of net debt (in constant PPP dollars) of the corporate non-financial
sector for the Euro Area, Japan and Canada. Debt is defined as credit markets instruments minus liquid assets
i.e. the sum of foreign deposits, checkable deposits and currency, time and savings deposits, money market funds,
securities RPs, commercial paper, treasury securities, agency and GSE backed securities, municipal securities
and mutual fund shares



                                                              6
                                                        GDP                                                                                 Private Consumption
            1.04                                                                                         1.04


            1.00                                                                                         1.00


            0.96                                                                                         0.96


            0.92                                                                                         0.92


            0.88                                                                                         0.88


            0.84                                                                           G6                                                                                  G6
                                                                                                         0.84
                                                                                           USA                                                                                 USA

            0.80                                                                                         0.80
                      I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV                    I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV
                         2005         2006          2007         2008          2009         2010                    2005         2006          2007            2008   2009      2010
                                              Gross fixed capital Formation                                                                  Employment
             1.04                                                                                        1.04


             1.00                                                                                        1.00


             0.96                                                                                        0.96


             0.92                                                                                        0.92


             0.88                                                                                        0.88


             0.84                                                                           G6           0.84                                                                 G6
                                                                                            USA                                                                               USA

             0.80                                                                                        0.80
                       I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV                  I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV
                         2005          2006         2007          2008         2009          2010                  2005          2006         2007             2008   2009     2010

                    Note: Data for GDP, private consumtion, gross fixed capital formation are from OECD Quarterly National Accounts in PPP constant dollars.
                    Data for employment are from OECD Main Economic Indicators. All series are normalized to 1 in the fourth quarter of 2007.




       Figure 3: GDP, Consumption, Investment and Employment in US and G6: 2005-2010


opinion surveys of senior loan officers of banks. The plotted index is the percentage of banks
that relaxed the standards to approve commercial and industrial loans minus the percentage
of banks that tightened the standards. Therefore, a negative number represents an overall
tightening of credit.5
       As can be seen from the third panel of Figure 4, the index shows a credit tightening that
starts before the decline in credit growth. To take both types of evidence into account, the
bottom right panel constructs a credit index that is a simple average of the two previous
measures, where each measure is normalized by its own standard deviation. The key lesson
we learn from Figure 4 is that, right around 2008, credit conditions moved from strongly
loose/expansionary to strongly tight/contractionary both in the US and in the G6 countries.
   5
    The series for the US is collected by the Federal Reserve Board (Senior Loan Officers Opinions Survey).
The series for the G6 is based on similar surveys collected by the European Central Bank (ECB Bank Lending
Survey), Bank of Japan (Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey) and Bank of Canada (Senior Loan Officers
Opinions Survey). The index for the G6 is a weighted average of the indexes in the three areas with weights
proportional to the size of their debt. This index is typical reported with the inverted sign (tightening credit
standards instead of relaxing credit standards).



                                                                                                         7
This evidence will be particularly important in the second part of the paper as it allows us to
identify more precisely the nature of the crisis.
                                      Growth in stock prices                                                                   Growth in net business debt
           .4                                                                                      .12


           .2                                                                                      .08
                                                                                                                                                                        G6
                                                                                                                                                                        US
           .0                                                                                      .04


          -.2                                                                                      .00


          -.4                                                                                      -.04


          -.6                                                                          G6          -.08
                                                                                       US

          -.8                                                                                      -.12
                I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV                   I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV
                  2005        2006          2007          2008          2009           2010                 2005        2006         2007         2008       2009        2010




                            Percentage of loan officers easing credit - % tightening                                             Credit Conditions Index
          40                                                                                         3


          20
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                       G6
           0                                                                                                                                                           US
                                                                                                     1

          -20

                                                                                                     0
          -40


                                                                                       G6           -1
          -60
                                                                                       US

          -80                                                                                       -2
                I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV                   I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV
                  2005         2006         2007          2008          2009            2010                2005        2006         2007         2008       2009        2010




       Figure 4: GDP, Stock markets and credit conditions in US and G6: 2005-2010



2.2   Domestic co-movement between credit and employment

As discussed in the introduction, our main hypothesis is that tight credit affects economic
activity and especially employment. Here we provide some empirical support for this idea by
plotting the growth rates of employment, GDP and business credit during the crisis in US and
in the G6. Figure 5 shows that in the quarters following the Lehman crisis (shaded area) both
credit and employment slow-down significantly in US and in the G6. Interestingly, GDP also
declines initially but recovers more quickly than employment and credit. For example, in the
first quarter of 2009, credit and employment are still depressed (experiencing negative growth)
in US and in the G6. However, GDP has already recovered (experiencing positive growth) in
both countries. We view this evidence as consistent with our basic hypothesis: tight credit
reduces employment and as employment fall labor productivity increases so that the decline

                                                                                               8
in GDP is not as severe as the decline in employment.

                                                       G6                                                                                       US
                 .08                                                                                       .08
                                                                                                  2                                                                                         2
                 .06                                                                                                                         Credit Index
                                                         Credit Index                                      .06

                 .04                                                                              1        .04
                                                                                     GDP                                                                                       GDP          1
                 .02                                                                                       .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Credit Index
        Growth




                                        Employment
                 .00                                                                              0        .00                                                                              0

                 -.02                                                                                      -.02                                                             Employment

                 -.04                                                                             -1                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                           -.04

                 -.06                                                                                      -.06
                                                                                                  -2                                                                                        -2
                 -.08                                                                                      -.08
                        I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV                   I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV
                          2005        2006        2007         2008        2009        2010                         2005        2006        2007            2008     2009        2010




       Figure 5: Domestic co-comovement of credit, employment and GDP: 2005-2010

   A final observation relates to the asymmetry between real and financial variables in the
expansion phase before the crisis and the collapse during the crisis. Figure 5 shows that
debt experienced rapid growth (about 6% per year in US and 4% per year in the G6) in the
years preceding the crisis, while the growth in real variables has been moderate (GDP grew at
about 2% per year both in US and the G6). In the crisis period, instead, all variables, real and
financial, contracted sharply. This feature is not unique to the 2007-2009 crisis. Several authors
have observed that many historical episodes of credit booms are not associated with much
faster growth in real economic activity. However, when the credit booms reach a sudden stop,
their reversals are often associated with sharp macroeconomic contractions. See for example
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Classens, Kose and Terrones (2011), and Jordà, Schularick, and
Taylor (2011).
   The facts presented in this section—high international co-movement in real and financial
variables during the crisis, the large employment (for US) and stock markets collapse, and the
asymmetry between the pre-crisis phase and post crisis phase—cannot be easily explained with
a standard work-horse international business cycle model. In the next sections we propose a
theoretical framework with credit disturbances that we believe is useful for understanding the
empirical facts.



                                                                                                       9
3     The model with fixed capital and exogenous credit shocks
We start with a simple model without capital accumulation and with exogenous credit shocks.
This allows us to provide the intuitions for some of the key results of the paper analytically.
After the presentation of the simple model it will be easy to add capital accumulation.
    There are two types of atomistic agents, investors and workers. A key difference between
these two types of agents is the availability of different investment opportunities. Due to the
assumption of markets segmentation only investors have access to the ownership of firms while
workers can only save in the form of bonds. Investors discount the future at rate β while the
discount factor of workers is δ > β. The different discounting between the owners of firms
(investors) and workers implies that firms borrow from workers subject to the enforcement
constraints describe below.
    To facilitate the presentation we first describe the closed-economy version of the model.
Once we have characterized the autarkic equilibrium, it will be easy to extend it to the envi-
ronment with international mobility of capital.

3.1    Investors and firms
                                     P∞        t u(c ).
Investors have lifetime utility E0     t=0 β        t     They are the owners of firms and derive income
only from dividends. Denoting by dt the dividends paid by firms, the effective discount factor
for investors is mt+1 = βuc (dt+1 )/uc (dt ). This is also the discount factor used by firms since
they maximize shareholders’ wealth. As we will see, fluctuations in the effective discount rate
play a central role in the analysis of this paper.
    Firms operate the production function F (ht ) = k̄hνt , where k̄ is a fixed input of capital and
ht is the variable input of labor. The parameter ν is smaller than 1 implying decreasing returns
to scale in the variable input. In this version of the model without capital accumulation we
can think of k̄ as a normalizing constant.
    Firms start the period with intertemporal debt bt . Before producing they choose the labor
input ht , the dividends dt , and the next period debt bt+1 . The budget constraint is

                                                                   bt+1
                                 bt + wt ht + dt = F (ht ) +            ,                            (1)
                                                                    Rt

where Rt is the gross interest rate.
    The payments of wages, wt ht , dividends, dt , and current debt net of the new issue, bt −
bt+1 /Rt , are made before the realization of revenues. This implies that the firm faces a cash

                                                      10
flow mismatch during the period. The cash needed at the beginning of the period is wt ht +
dt + bt − bt+1 /Rt . To cover the cash flow mismatch, the firm contracts the intra-period loan
lt = wt ht + dt + bt − bt+1 /Rt which is repaid at the end of the period, after the realization of
revenues. From the budget constraint, equation (1), we can also see that the intra-period loan
is equal to the revenue F (ht ).
    Debt contracts are not perfectly enforceable as the firm can default. Default takes place at
the end of the period before repaying the intra-period loan. At this stage the firm holds the
revenues F (ht ) which are equal to the intra-period loan lt . These are liquid funds that can be
easily diverted in the event of default. Default gives the lender the right to liquidate the firm’s
assets. But after the diversion of lt = F (ht ), the only remaining asset is the physical capital k̄.
Suppose that the liquidation value of capital is ξt k̄, where ξt is stochastic. Since default arises
at the end of the period, the total liabilities of the firm are lt + bt+1 /Rt . To ensure that the
firm does not default, the total liabilities are subject to the enforcement constraint

                                                            bt+1
                                             ξt k̄ ≥ lt +        .                                       (2)
                                                             Rt

A formal derivation of this constraint is provided in Appendix A and it is based on similar
assumptions as in Hart and Moore (1994).
    Fluctuations in ξt affect the ability to borrow and, as we will see, they generate pro-cyclical
movements in real and financial variables.6 Our goal is to derive the variable ξt endogenously
from liquidity considerations. As we will describe below, fluctuations in this variable are
induced by self-fulfilling expectations leading to multiple equilibria. For the moment, however,
we treat ξt as an exogenous stochastic variable. Once we have characterized the equilibrium
with an exogenous ξt , we will make it endogenous in Section 4.
    To illustrate the role played by fluctuations in ξt , consider a pre-shock equilibrium in
which the enforcement constraint is binding. Starting from this equilibrium, suppose that ξt
decreases. In response to the decline in ξt the firm is forced to reduce either the dividends
and/or the input of labor. To see this, let’s start with the case in which the firm is unwilling
to change the input of labor. This implies that the intra-period loan lt = F (ht ) also does not
change. Thus, the only way to satisfy the enforcement constraint, equation (2), is by reducing
the intertemporal debt bt+1 . We can then see from the budget constraint, equation (1), that
the reduction in bt+1 requires a reduction in dividends. Thus, the firm is forced to substitute
  6
    Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) provide some evidence that the liquidity of capital ξt must be procyclical to
match the amount of capital reallocation observed in the data.


                                                     11
debt with equities.
   Alternatively the firm could keep the dividend payments unchanged and reduce the intra-
period loan lt = F (ht ). This would also ensure that the enforcement constraint is satisfied but
it requires the reduction in the input of labor. Therefore, after a reduction in ξt , the firm faces
a trade-off: paying lower dividends or cutting employment. The optimal choice depends on the
relative cost of changing these two margins which, as we will see, depends on the stochastic
discount factor for investors mt+1 = βuc (dt+1 )/uc (dt ).


Firm’s problem: The optimization problem of the firm can be written recursively as
                                                    (                          )
                                                              0       0   0
                              V (s; b) = max0 d + Em V (s ; b )                                 (3)
                                            d,h,b



                                              subject to:


                                                                              b0
                                            b + d = F (h) − wh +                                (4)
                                                                              R

                                                             bt+1
                                            ξ k̄ ≥ F (h) +        ,                             (5)
                                                              Rt

where s are the aggregate states, including the shock ξ, and the prime denotes the next period
variable. The enforcement constraint takes into account that the intra-period loan is equal to
the firm’s output, that is, lt = wt ht + dt + bt − bt+1 /Rt = F (ht ).
   In solving this problem the firm takes as given all prices and the first order conditions are

                                                          w
                                            Fh (h) =         ,                                  (6)
                                                         1−µ


                                            REm0 = 1 − µ,                                       (7)

where µ is the Lagrange multiplier for the enforcement constraint. These conditions are derived
under the assumption that dividends are always positive, which will be the case if the investors’
utility satisfies uc (0) = ∞. The detailed derivation is in Appendix B.
   We can see from condition (6) that there is a wedge in the demand for labor if the enforce-
ment constraint is binding (µ > 0). This derives from the fact that the input of labor needs


                                                    12
to be financed and part of the financing has to come from equity (through lower payment of
dividends). As long as the cost of equity, 1/Em0 , is greater than the cost of debt, R, expanding
the input of labor is costly in the margin because the firm needs to substitute debt with equity.
It is then the equity premium 1/Em0 − R that determines the labor wedge as can be seen from
condition (7).7 The wedge is strictly increasing in µ and disappears when µ = 0, that is, when
the enforcement constraint is not binding.


Some partial equilibrium properties:               The characterization of the firm’s problem in par-
tial equilibrium provides helpful insights about the property of the model once extended to a
general equilibrium set-up. For partial equilibrium we mean the allocation achieved when the
interest rate and the wage rate are both exogenously given and constant.
       Under these conditions, equation (7) shows that µ decreases with the expected discount
factor Em0 . A decrease in ξ makes the enforcement constraint tighter. Because firms reduce
the payment of dividends, the investors’s consumption has to decrease. This induces a decline
in the discount factor m0 = βuc (d0 )/uc (d) and an increase in the multiplier µ according to
condition (7). From condition (6) we can then see that the demand for labor declines.
       Intuitively, when the credit conditions become tighter, firms need to rely more on equity
financing and less on debt. This requires investors to cut consumption (dividends) which is
costly since they have concave utility. Because of this, in the short-term firms do not raise
enough equity needed to keep the pre-shock production scale and cut employment. If investors’
utility were linear (risk-neutrality), the discount factor would be equal to Em0 = β and the
credit shock would not affect employment. This also requires that the interest rate does not
change, which is the case in the partial equilibrium considered here. In the general equilibrium,
of course, prices do change. In particular, movements in the demand of credit and labor affect
the interest rate R and the wage rate w. To derive the aggregate effects we need to close the
model and characterize the general equilibrium.


3.2      Closing the model and general equilibrium
                                                                              P∞         t U (c , h ),
There is a representative household/worker with lifetime utility E0              t=0 δ         t t       where ct
is consumption, ht is labor and δ is the intertemporal discount factor. It will be convenient to
   7
    Notice that we are using the term ‘equity premium’ to denote the differential between the expected share-
holders’ return and the interest rate on bonds. Since shareholders and bondholders are different agents, the
equity premium is not only determined by the cost of risk (risk premium).




                                                     13
assume that the period-utility takes the form

                                                                   1+ 1
                                                               h η
                                    U (ct , ht ) = log(ct ) − α t 1 .
                                                               1+ η

   The worker’s budget constraint is

                                                               bt+1
                                        wt ht + bt = ct +           ,
                                                                Rt

and the first order conditions for labor, ht , and next period bonds, bt+1 , are

                                      Uh (ct , ht ) + wt Uc (ct , ht ) = 0,                          (8)

                                                                      
                                                   Uc (ct+1 , ht+1 )
                                      δRt Et                               = 1.                      (9)
                                                     Uc (ct , ht )

   We can now define a competitive general equilibrium. The aggregate states, denoted by s,
are given by the credit conditions ξ and the aggregate stock of bonds B.

Definition 3.1 (Recursive equilibrium) A recursive competitive equilibrium is defined by a
set of functions for (i) workers’ policies hw (s), cw (s), bw (s); (ii) firms’ policies h(s; b), d(s; b),
b(s; b); (iii) firms’ value V (s; b); (iv) aggregate prices w(s), R(s), m(s0 ); (v) law of motion
for the aggregate states s0 = Ψ(s). Such that: (i) household’s policies satisfy the optimality
conditions (8)-(9); (ii) firms’ policies are optimal and V (s; b) satisfies the Bellman’s equation
(3); (iii) the wage and interest rates are the clearing prices in the markets for labor and bonds,
and the discount factor for firms is m(s0 ) = βuc (dt+1 )/uc (dt ); (iv) the law of motion Ψ(s) is
consistent with the aggregation of individual decisions and the stochastic processes for z and ξ.

   To illustrate the main properties of the model we look at some special cases. Consider
first the economy without uncertainty, that is, ξ is constant. In this economy the enforcement
constraint binds in a steady state equilibrium. To see this, consider the first order condition
for the bond, equation (9), which in a steady state becomes δR = 1. Using this condition
to eliminate R in (7) and taking into account that in a steady state Em0 = β, we get µ =
1 − β/δ > 0 (since δ > β). Firms want to borrow as much as possible because the cost of
borrowing—the interest rate—is smaller than their discount rate.
   With uncertainty, however, the enforcement constraint may be binding only occasionally.

                                                      14
In particular, after a large and unexpected decline in ξ. In this case firms will be forced to
cut dividends inducing a change in the discount factor Em0 . Furthermore, the change in the
demand for credit impacts on the equilibrium interest rate. Using condition (7) we can see
that these changes affect the multiplier µ, which in turn impacts on the demand for labor
(see equation (6)). On the other hand, an increase in ξ may leave the enforcement constraint
non-binding without direct effects on the demand of labor. Therefore, the responses to credit
shocks could be highly asymmetric: negative shocks induce large falls in employment and
output while the impacts of positive shocks is moderate.


3.3      Capital mobility

Let’s consider now two countries, domestic and foreign, with the same size, preferences and
technology as described in the previous section. Although we consider the case with only
two symmetric countries, the model can be easily extended to any number of countries and
with different degrees of heterogeneity. For the moment we continue to assume that ξt is an
exogenous stochastic variable, specific to each country.
       Once we allow for cross-country capital mobility, we have to specify what agents can do
in an integrated financial market. We continue to assume that there is market segmentation
in the ownership of firms, that is, workers are unable to purchase shares of firms. However,
in addition to domestic bonds they can purchase foreign financial assets as specified below.
Furthermore, investors are now able to purchase shares of foreign firms.


Investors/firms:        Because firms are subject to country specific shocks, investors would gain
from diversifying the cross-country ownership of shares. Therefore, in an economy that is
financially integrated, investors choose to own the worldwide portfolio of shares and we have
a representative ‘worldwide’ investor.8 Because domestic and foreign firms are owned by the
same representative shareholder, they will use the same discount factor mt+1 = βuc (dt+1 +
d∗t+1 )/uc (dt +d∗t ), where investors’ consumption is the sum of dividends paid by domestic firms,
dt , plus the dividends paid by foreign firms, d∗t . From now on we will use the star superscript
to denote variables pertaining to the foreign country.
       Besides the common discount factor, firms continue to solve problem (3) and the first order
conditions are given by equations (6) and (7). Let’s focus on condition (7), which we rewrite
   8
    A perfect diversification of portfolios is optimal because investors’ utility depends only on consumption. If
investors derived utility also from leisure, a perfect diversification would not be necessarily optimal.



                                                       15
here for both countries,

                                       Rt Emt+1 = 1 − µt ,
                                       Rt∗ Em∗t+1 = 1 − µ∗t .

   Since the discount factor is common to domestic and foreign firms, that is, Emt+1 = Em∗t+1 ,
and the interest rate is equalized across countries, Rt = Rt∗ , the above conditions imply that
the lagrange multipliers will also be equalized, that is, µt = µ∗t . Therefore, independently of
which country is hit by a shock, if the enforcement constraint is binding for domestic firms,
it will also be binding for foreign firms. This also implies that the labor wedges are equalized
across countries. In fact, condition (6) is still the optimality condition for the choice of labor
in both countries, that is,
                                                            
                                                        1
                                    Fh (ht ) = wt              ,
                                                     1 − µt
                                                             
                                                         1
                                    Fh (h∗t ) = wt∗             .
                                                      1 − µ∗t

This property is crucial for understanding the cross-country impact of a financial shock as we
will describe below. Later we will also consider an extension of the model where the labor
wedge may respond differently in the two countries.


Households/workers:           Although workers are still prevented from accessing the market for
the ownership of firms, with capital mobility they can engage in international financial trans-
actions with foreign workers. In addition to holding bonds issued by domestic firms, domestic
workers can buy state-contingent claims from foreign workers. We still assume that firms
borrow from domestic workers but they cannot sign state contingent contracts with workers.
The assumption that firms borrow only from domestic workers is without loss of generality:
whether they borrow domestically or in the foreign market is irrelevant in an integrated capital
market. The unavailability of state-contingent claims between firms and workers is essential
to retain market incompleteness.
   Denote by nt+1 (st+1 ) the units of consumption goods received at time t + 1 by domestic
workers if the aggregate states are st+1 . These are worldwide states, and therefore, they include
the aggregate states of both countries as will be made precise below. Of course, in equilibrium,
the consumption units received by workers in the domestic country must be equal to the


                                                 16
consumption units paid by workers in the foreign country, that is, nt+1 (st+1 ) + n∗t+1 (st+1 ) = 0.
This must be satisfied for all possible realizations of the aggregate states st+1 .
   The budget constraint of a worker in the domestic country is
                                                              Z
                                           bt+1
                    wt ht + bt + nt = ct +      +                      nt+1 (st+1 )q(st+1 )/Rt ,
                                            Rt                  st+1


where qt (st+1 )/Rt is the unit price of the contingent claims.
   Given the specification of the utility function, the first order conditions for the choice of
labor, ht , next period bonds, bt+1 , and foreign claims, nt+1 (st+1 ), are

                      αhγt ct = wt ,                                                                  (10)

                                          
                                     ct
                      δRt Et                   = 1,                                                   (11)
                                    ct+1
                                               
                                     ct
                      δRt                           p(st+1 ) = q(st+1 ),             for all st+1 ,   (12)
                                ct+1 (st+1 )

where p(st+1 ) is the probability (or probability density) of the aggregate states in the next
period for the world economy.
   Since in equilibrium the prices and probabilities of the contingencies are the same for
domestic and foreign workers, condition (12) implies that

                                               ct  ct+1 (st+1 )
                                                ∗ = ∗           = χ.                                  (13)
                                               ct  ct+1 (st+1 )

Therefore, the ratio of consumption of domestic and foreign workers remains constant over time.
This is a well known property in environments with a full set of state-contingent claims. In our
environment the constancy of the consumption ratio is among workers (and among investors)
but not between workers and investors because of the assumption of market segmentation.
   Before continuing we would like to clarify that the assumption of contingent claims among
workers is not essential for the results of the paper. We could simply assume that workers can
engage in international non-contingent lending and borrowing only. Or equivalently, that firms
can engage in international borrowing. However, the availability of contingent claims greatly
simplifies the characterization of the equilibrium because it allows us to reduce the number of
‘sufficient’ state variables. This property will be convenient once we extend the model with


                                                           17
capital accumulation.


Aggregate states and equilibrium:                  We can now define the equilibrium for the open-
economy version of the economy. The aggregate states s are given by the variables ξ and ξ ∗ ,
the financial liabilities of firms, Bt and Bt∗ , and the net foreign asset position of the domestic
country, Nt . Since in equilibrium the net foreign asset position of the domestic country is the
negative of the foreign position, once we know Bt , Bt∗ and Nt we also know the total wealth of
domestic workers, Bt + Nt , and foreign workers, Bt∗ − Nt . Therefore, st = (ξ, ξ ∗ , Bt , Bt∗ , Nt ).

Definition 3.2 (Recursive equilibrium) A recursive competitive equilibrium is defined by a
set of functions for: (i) households’ policies hw (s), cw (s), bw (s), nw (s; s0 ), h∗w (s), c∗w (s), b∗w (s),
n∗w (s; s0 ); (ii) firms’ policies h(s; b), d(s; b), b(s; b), h∗ (s; b), d∗ (s; b), b∗ (s; b); (iii) firms’ values
V (s; b) and V ∗ (s; b); (iv) aggregate prices w(s), w∗ (s), R(s), m(s, s0 ), q(s; s0 ); (v) law of motion
for the aggregate states s0 = Ψ(s). Such that: (i) household’s policies satisfy the optimality
conditions (8)-(12); (ii) firms’ policies are optimal and satisfy the Bellman’s equation (3)
for both countries; (iii) the wages clear the labor markets; the interest rates and the price
for contingent claims clear the worldwide financial markets; the discount rate used by firms
satisfies m(s, s0 ) = βuc (dt+1 + d∗t+1 )/uc (dt + d∗t ); (iv) the law of motion Ψ(s) is consistent with
the aggregation of individual decisions and the stochastic process for ξ and ξ ∗ .

    The only difference with respect to the equilibrium in the closed economy is that there
is the additional market for foreign claims and the discount factor for firms is given by the
worldwide representative investor. The market clearing condition for the foreign claims is
N (s0 ) + N ∗ (s0 ) = 0. This is in addition to the clearing conditions for the domestic bond
markets (lending to firms).
    Although the general definition of the recursive equilibrium is based on the set of state
variables st = (ξt , ξt∗ , Bt , Bt∗ , Nt ), we can use some of the properties derived above and charac-
terize the equilibrium with a smaller set of states. Let Wt = Bt + Bt∗ be the worldwide wealth
of households/workers. This is the sum of bonds issued by domestic firms, Bt , and foreign
firms, Bt∗ . Then using the fact that the consumption ratio of domestic and foreign workers is
constant at χ and the employment policy of firms does not depend on the individual debt, the
recursive equilibrium can be characterized using the state variables st = (ξt , ξt∗ , Wt ). The as-
sumption of cross-country risk-sharing among workers and investors (but not between workers
and investors) allows us to reduce the number of ‘endogenous’ states to only one variable.


                                                       18
       Intuitively, by knowing Wt , we know the worldwide liability of firms, but not the distribu-
tion between domestic and foreign firms. However, to characterize the firms’ policies, we only
need to know the worldwide debt, which is equal to Wt . Since investors own an internationally
diversified portfolio of shares, effectively there is only one representative global investor. It is
as if there is a representative firm with two productive units: one unit located in the domes-
tic country and the other in the foreign country. Since both units have a common owner, it
does not matter how the debt is distributed between the two units. What matters from the
perspective of the investor is the total debt and the total payment of dividends.9
       Total workers’ wealth is also a sufficient statistic for the characterization of the workers’
policies since the consumption ratio between domestic and foreign households remains constant
at χ. This property limits the computational complexity of the model, making feasible the use
of non-linear approximation methods. We will come back to this point after the description of
the general model with capital accumulation.
       We are not ready to state the following proposition about the impact of a financial shock.


Proposition 3.1 An unexpected change in ξt (domestic credit shock) has the same impact on
employment and output of domestic and foreign countries.

Proof 3.1 We have already shown that the Lagrange multiplier µt is common for domestic
and foreign firms. If the wage ratio in the two countries does not change, the first order
conditions imply that all firms choose the same employment. To complete the proof we have
to show that the cross-country wage ratio stays constant. Because firms in both countries have
the same demand for labor and the ratio of workers’ consumption remains constant, the first
order condition for the supply of labor from workers implies that the wage ratio between the
two countries does not change.


       Therefore, independently of whether a credit shock hits the domestic or foreign markets,
both countries experience the same macroeconomic consequences. However, although exoge-
nous credit shocks can explain co-movement in GDP and other real variables, there are two
problems with this approach. The first is that treating shocks as exogenous does not help us
   9
    This is similar to the problem solved by a multinational firms that faces demand uncertainty in different
countries as studied in Goldberg and Kolstad (1995). There is also some similarity with the problem faced by
multinational banks that own subsidiaries in different countries. Cetorelli and Goldberg (2010) provide evidence
that multinational banks do reallocate financial resources internally in response to country specific shocks.



                                                      19
understanding the causes of these shocks and the desirability of policy interventions. The sec-
ond and more specific problem is that, even if a country-specific exogenous shock can generate
co-movement in real macroeconomic variables, it also induces financial flows that tend to move
in opposite directions. To show this, consider an initial equilibrium in which the enforcement
constraints are not binding in either countries. Starting from this equilibrium suppose that the
domestic economy is hit by a credit contraction (reduction in ξt but not in ξt∗ ) inducing binding
enforcement constraints in both countries. Since ξt is lower only in the domestic country, the
outstanding debt of domestic firms contracts but the debt of foreign firms increases. Foreign
firms increase their debt to pay more dividends to shareholders in order to compensate the
reduction in dividends paid by domestic firms. Therefore, the model with ‘exogenous’ credit
shocks generates negative cross-country co-movement in debt.
    This feature of the model is inconsistent with the data in figure 4 showing a high degree
of cross-country co-movement also in credit variables. However, as we will see in the next
section, once we make fluctuations in ξt and ξt∗ endogenous, the model also generates a high
degree of co-movement in financial flows, introducing a second source of real macroeconomic
synchronization.


4    Endogenous credit shocks
After illustrating how a credit shock propagates to the real sector of the economy, we now
provide a micro foundation for endogenous fluctuations in ξt . We proceed first with the closed-
economy model and then we extend it to a two-country set-up.


Financial autarky: Suppose that in case of liquidation, physical capital k̄ can be sold
either to households or firms. In the first case one unit of capital is transformed in ξ units of
consumption. Alternatively, the capital can be sold to other firms for productive uses. In this
case one unit of capital can be transformed in ξ units of reinstalled capital. The reallocation in
other firms is more efficient than its transformation in consumption goods, that is, ξ < ξ ≤ 1.
However, in order for non-defaulting firms to purchase additional capital, they need liquid
funds. In this sense our model shares some features of the model studied in Kiyotaki and
Moore (2008). Since all firms face the enforcement constraint

                                                  bt+1
                                        ξt k̄ ≥        + yt ,                                (14)
                                                   Rt


                                                  20
a non-defaulting firm can purchase additional capital only if the firm has previously chosen not
to borrow up to the limit, that is, constraint (14) is not binding. Therefore, if at the beginning
of the period firms choose not to borrow up to the limit, ex-post there will be firms that have
the ability to purchase the capital of a defaulting firm. In this case the market price of the
liquidated capital is ξ. On the other hand, if at the beginning of the period all firms choose to
borrow up to the limit, ex-post there will not be any firm with liquidity. Then the capital of
a defaulting firm can only be sold to households and the price is ξ.
   Since the value of liquidated capital depends on the financial choices of firms, which in turn
depends on the expected liquidation value, the model could generate multiple self-fulfilling
equilibria.
   Suppose that the expected liquidation price is ξt = ξ. The low price makes the enforcement
constraint (14) tighter, which may induce firms to borrow up to the limit in order to contain
the cut in dividends and/or employment. Then, if all firms borrow up to the limit, ex-post
there will not be any firm that has liquidity to purchase the capital of a defaulting firm. Thus,
the ex-post liquidation price is ξ, fulfilling the market expectation.
   Now suppose that the expected liquidation price is ξ. Because the enforcement constraint
(14) is not tight in the current period but could become tighter in the future, firms may choose
not to borrow up to the limit. But then, in case of liquidation, there will be firms capable of
purchasing the liquidated capital and the market price is ξ. So also in this case we have that
the ex-ante expectation of a high liquidation price is fulfilled by the firms’ borrowing choice.
   Whether the two equilibria described above are possible depends on the particular states
of the economy. Three cases are possible:

   1. The liquidation price is ξ with probability 1. This arises if we are in a state in which
      firms choose to borrow up to the limit independently of the expectation over ξt .

   2. The liquidation price is ξ with probability 1. This arises if we are in a state in which
      firms do not borrow up to the limit independently of the expectation over ξt .

   3. The liquidation price is ξ with some probability p ∈ (0, 1). This arises if we are in a state
      in which firms choose to borrow up to the limit when the expectation for the liquidation
      value is ξt = ξ but they do not borrow up to the limit when the expectation for the
      liquidation price is ξt = ξ.

   The third case is the most interesting because it generates multiple sunspot equilibria, and
therefore, potential fluctuations in ξt . In this case the low liquidation price ξ could arise with

                                                21
any probability p. In general we can denote by pt (st ) the probability of ξt = ξ. Besides the
fact that the probability distribution of ξt could be time variant, the properties of the model
characterized in previous sections do not change.


Financial integration: As in the closed economy, different values of ξt are associated to
self-fulling expectations. If countries are in financial autarky, ξt could be different from ξt∗ . We
want to show now, however, that ξt cannot be different from ξt∗ once the two countries become
financially integrated.
   As we have seen in the previous section, if the enforcement constraint is binding in one
country, it must also be binding in the other country, that is, µt = µ∗t > 0. This eliminates
equilibria where ξt = ξ and ξt∗ = ξ. We state this property formally in the next proposition.


Proposition 4.1 In equilibria with integrated financial markets, ξt is always equal to ξt∗

Proof 4.1 Suppose that the equilibrium is characterized by ξt = ξ and ξt∗ = ξ. In order to have
ξt = ξ we need that µt > 0 and to have ξt∗ = ξ we need that µ∗t = 0. But in an equilibrium with
integrated financial markets µt is always equal to µ∗t . Therefore, this cannot be an equilibrium.
Using the same argument we can exclude the possibility of an equilibrium with ξt = ξ and
ξt∗ = ξ. Thus, the only possible equilibria are those with ξt = ξt∗ .


   Therefore, financial integration implies perfect cross-country co-movement in ξt , which
introduces a second channel of real macroeconomic synchronization: not only a change in one
country ξ affects the real sector of the other country but movements in ξ become perfectly
correlated across countries. This also implies international co-movement in financial flows.
This is a key theoretical result of this paper and suggests that the Lehman default could be
interpreted as the trigger that switched the world economy from an equilibrium with globally
loose credit to an equilibrium with tight credit and shortage of liquidity, causing widespread
contraction in economic and financial activities.
   Also in the case of financial integration the probability of ξt = ξ can be expressed as a
function of the aggregate states, that is, p(st ). Now, however, one of the two equilibria can be
induced by changes in expectations in one of the two countries. For simplicity suppose that
in states with multiple equilibria the domestic country expects ξt = ξ with probability p. The
same for the foreign country. Based on this assumption we have that p(st ) can take three
values, that is, p(st ) ∈ {0, 2p̄(1 − p̄) + p̄2 , p̄2 , 1}. The probability is zero when firms choose not

                                                   22
to borrow up to the limit (µt = µ∗t = 0) even if the expectation is ξt = ξt∗ = ξ. The probability
is 2p̄(1 − p̄) + p̄2 if firms choose to borrow up to the limit (µt = µ∗t > 0) when either ξt or ξt∗
are equal to ξ. The probability is p̄2 if firms choose to borrow up to the limit (µt = µ∗t > 0)
only if both ξt and ξt∗ are equal to ξ. Finally, the probability is 1 if firms choose to borrow up
to the limit (µt = µ∗t > 0) independently of the values of ξt and ξt∗ .
    The general definition of equilibrium is analogous to the definition provided for the model
with exogenous ξt . We simply need to add the probability function p(st ) which must be
consistent with the optimal decisions of firms as described here.


5    Model with capital accumulation
We now relax the assumption that the input of capital is fixed. This introduces additional
state variables that increase the computational complexity of the model. Since the enforce-
ment constraint is only occasionally binding, we need to use global approximation techniques.
Unfortunately, these techniques are computationally intensive and become quickly impractical
when we have a large numbers of state variables. Therefore, in order to reduce the sufficient
set of state variables, we will make some special assumptions about the production technology.

Investors-firms:     The production function takes the form

                                     yt = (Kt + Kt∗ )1−θ ktθ hνt ,

where Kt is the ‘aggregate’ capital in the domestic country and Kt∗ in the foreign country, kt
is the ‘individual’ input of capital and ht is the ‘individual’ input of labor. We assume that
θ + ν < 1.
    The dependence of the production function from the worldwide stock of capital, Kt + Kt∗ ,
captures positive externalities. The purpose of the externalities is to have constant returns in
reproducible factors (AK technology), without loosing the competitive structure of the model,
that is, each producer runs a production technology with non-increasing returns. As we will
see, the AK structure simplifies the computation of the equilibrium and this is the only reason
we make this assumption.
    Given it the flow of investment, the stock of capital evolves according to
                                                                   
                                                               it
                                 kt+1 = (1 − τ )kt + Υ                  kt ,
                                                               kt

                                                  23
where τ is the depreciation rate and the function Υ(.) is strictly increasing and concave, cap-
turing adjustment costs in investment. The assumption of capital adjustment costs is common
in international macro models and it is made to prevent excessive volatility of investments.
    The budget constraint of the firm is

                                                                                         bt+1
                        bt + dt + it = (Kt + Kt∗ )1−θ ktθ hνt − wt ht +                       ,
                                                                                          Rt

and the enforcement constraint

                                                                              bt+1
                              ξt kt+1 ≥ (Kt + Kt∗ )1−θ ktθ hνt +                   .
                                                                               Rt

    We will now take advantage of the AK structure and normalize the model by the worldwide
stock of capital Kt + Kt∗ . Using the tilde sign to denote normalized variables, we can rewrite
the budget constraint, law of motion for capital and enforcement constraint as

                                                                                    gt b̃t+1
                              b̃t + d˜t + ĩt = F (k̃t , ht ) − w̃t ht +                     ,    (15)
                                                                                      Rt
                                                                       
                                                                  ĩt
                              gt k̃t+1 = (1 − τ )k̃t + Υ                    k̃t ,                 (16)
                                                                  k̃t

                                                              gt b̃t+1
                              ξt gt k̃t+1 ≥ F (k̃t , ht ) +            .                          (17)
                                                                Rt

    We have denoted by F (k̃t , ht ) = k̃tθ hνt the normalized production function with k̃t =
kt /(Kt + Kt∗ ) the normalized individual capital. The variable gt = (Kt+1 + Kt+1
                                                                              ∗ )/(K + K ∗ )
                                                                                    t   t
is the gross growth rate of worldwide capital. We will denote by st = Kt /(Kt + Kt∗ ) the ag-
gregate share of capital owned by domestic firms. Since in equilibrium kt = Kt , we also have
that k̃t = st .
    As in the model without capital accumulation, investors hold an internationally diversified
portfolio of shares, and firms use the common discount factor mt+1 = β[(dt+1 + d∗t+1 )/(dt +
d∗t )]−σ . In terms of normalized variables, the discount factor can be rewritten as
                                                              !−σ
                                             d˜t+1 + d˜∗t+1
                         mt+1 =    gt−σ β                               = gt−σ m̃t+1 .
                                                d˜t + d˜∗t




                                                    24
   The optimization problem solved by an individual firm can be rewritten as
                                                                 (                                     )
                         Ṽ (s̃; k̃, b̃) =          max          d˜ + g 1−σ E m̃0 Ṽ (s̃0 ; k̃ 0 , b̃0 )          (18)
                                                   ˜ h̃,ĩ,b̃0
                                                   d,



                                                   subject to (15), (16), (17),

where Ṽ is the firm’s value normalized by aggregate worldwide capital K + K ∗ , and s̃ denotes
the normalized aggregate states as specified below.
   We can now see the analytical convenience of having the capital externality. Thanks to the
AK structure, we can write the firm’s value function as Vt = (Kt + Kt∗ ) · Ṽt and rescale the
problem of the firm by worldwide capital. By doing so, we do not need to keep track of the
aggregate stock of capital as a state variable. Of course, because we are looking at a general
equilibrium, we also need to make sure that the supply of labor does not grow over time. This
will be the case with the workers’ utility function specified earlier.
   Appendix C derives the first order conditions for the firm. After imposing the equilibrium
conditions kt = Kt and k̃t = st , the first order conditions can be written as

                               w̃t
           Fh (st , ht ) =          ,                                                                             (19)
                             1 − µt


           gt−σ Rt E m̃t+1 = 1 − µt ,                                                                             (20)


           Qt Υ0 ĩt = 1,
                    
                                                                                                                  (21)

                                             
           Qt = ξt µt +      ḡt−σ E m̃t+1       (1 − µt+1 )Fk (st+1 , ht+1 ) − ĩt+1
                                                                                        h                    
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                       + 1 − τ + Υ ĩt+1 Qt+1 .   (22)


   Here µt is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the enforcement constraint and Qt is
the Lagrange multiplier associated with the law of motion for the stock of capital (Tobin’s q).
We can verify that capital does not enter these equations, which validates the conjecture that
the optimal policies are independent of the stock of capital.
   Notice that the property that the Lagrange multipliers and the labor wedge 1/(1 − µt ) are



                                                                     25
equalized across countries also applies to this extended model. In fact, from condition (20)
we can see that the common discount factor and the equalization of the interest rates across
countries imply µt = µ∗t . Therefore, if the enforcement constraint is binding in one country, it
must also be binding in the other.


Aggregate states and equilibrium:                Denote by W̃t = B̃t st + B̃t∗ (1 − st ) the normalized
worldwide wealth of households/workers. Thanks to the AK technology and the normalization
described above, we only need to keep track of two ‘endogenous’ state variables: W̃t and
st . Therefore, compared to the simpler model considered earlier, the introduction of capital
accumulation adds only one state variable, that is, the share of worldwide capital owned by
domestic firms, st .10 By having only two endogenous state variables, it becomes manageable
to solve the model numerically using global approximation methods. Appendix D reports the
list of equilibrium conditions and describes the computational procedure.


6         Quantitative analysis
This section studies the properties of the model quantitatively. We think of country 1 as the
US and country 2 as representative of the other countries in the group of the seven largest
industrialized economies, that is, Canada, Japan, France, Germany, Italy and the United
Kingdom. We refer to this group as G6 countries.
         The discount factor for workers, δ, and the discount factor for investors, β, are set to target
an average interest rate of 1.6 percent and an average return on equity of 7 percent. In the
deterministic steady state the interest rate is equal to 1/δ − 1 and the return on equity is equal
to 1/β − 1. In the stochastic economy the relations between the intertemporal discount factors
and the average returns are more complex. Therefore, to choose δ and β we follow an iterative
procedure where we fix the parameters, solve the model, and check whether the average returns
match the targets. The required values are δ = 0.996 and β = 0.984. Therefore, there is a 1
percent difference between the two discount factors. This is smaller than the equity premium,
5.4%/4 = 1.35%. The difference is the ‘risk’ premium.
         The utility function takes the form U (c, h) = ln(c)−αh1+1/η /(1+1/η) where η is the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply. We set the elasticity to 0.75 which is between the micro and macro
estimates. The parameter α is set so that working hours are 0.3 on average.
    10
    This additional state is necessary because of the adjustment cost in investment. In absence of adjustment
costs, we could also ignore st .


                                                     26
       Next we parameterize the production function. The parameter ν is chosen to have a steady
state labor income share of 0.7. Without uncertainty, the fraction of output going to workers
in the form of wages is νβ/δ.11 Given the values of δ and β, we choose ν so that this fraction
is equal to 0.7. Of course, in the stochastic economy the average labor share is not exactly 0.7
but the difference is small. Next we set the return to scale for an individual firm to θ + ν = 0.9.
Given the value of ν we derive the value of θ = 0.9 − ν.
       The stock of capital evolves according to k 0 = (1 − τ )k + Υ(i/k)k with
                                                1−ζ
                                        i     φ1  i
                                     Υ     =            + φ2 .
                                        k    1−ζ k

This functional form is widely used in the literature (see, for example, Jermann (1998)). The
parameters φ1 and φ2 are chosen so that in the deterministic steady state Q = 1 and I = τ K.
This requires φ1 = τ ζ and φ2 = −ζτ /(1 − ζ). Therefore, we need to calibrate two parameters,
τ and ζ. The first is the depreciation rate which we set to τ = 0.02. The second determines
the sensitivity of the adjustment cost and we set it to ζ = 0.5.
       At this point we are left with the calibration of the shock process. The variable ξ takes
only two values. In addition to the choice of these two values we have to pin down p̄, that
is, the probability with which each country forms pessimistic expectations (ξ = ξ) in states
with multiple equilibria. We choose ξ, ξ and p̄ to match three targets: (i) the average leverage
(debt over capital) which we set to 0.5; (ii) the standard deviation of debt over output; (iii)
the frequencies of crisis, which we set to about 4%.12 The full list of parameters are reported
in Table 1.
       Appendix D describes the computational procedure which is based on the discretization of
the state space. The endogenous states b̃t and st are each discretized on a grid with eleven
points. Values outside the grids are determined through bi-linear interpolation.
  11
     From the first order condition of labor, equation (6), we derive wh/F (z, k, h) = ν(1 − µ), which provides
an expression for the labor share. We now use condition (7) to derive an expression for µ. Taking into account
that in a deterministic steady state m0 = β and R = 1/δ, this condition becomes β/δ = 1 − µ. Substituting in
the labor share ν(1 − µ), we get the expression reported in the main text.
  12
     Although the three parameters are chosen jointly, we can identify the primary parameter that affects each
of the three targets. The average leverage is mostly determined by the average ξ. The standard deviation of
debt is mostly determined by the difference between ξ and ξ. The frequency of crisis is mostly determined by p̄.




                                                      27
                                   Table 1: List of parameters


                            Discount factor for households/workers, δ    0.996
                            Discount factor for entrepreneurs, β         0.986
                            Utility parameter, α                        16.293
                            Production technology, θ                     0.200
                            Production technology, ν                     0.700
                            Depreciation rate, τ                         0.020
                            Capital adjustment cost, ζ                   0.050
                            Low liquidation value, ξ                     0.550
                            High liquidation value, ξ                    0.650
                            Frequency of low liquidation value, p̄       0.200




6.1   Results

Our first result follows simply by noticing that proposition 4.1 extends to this more general
environment so that with endogenous credit disturbances credit markets conditions (changes
in ξt and ξt∗ ) are perfectly correlated. Since countries are symmetric, with credit shocks alone
all variables (real and financial) are perfectly correlated across countries. Hence a large credit
shock can generate very strong co-movements in real and financial variables like the ones
documented in Section 2.
   In presenting additional results we outline four main properties: (i) the asymmetric response
to shocks; (ii) the counter-cyclicality of labor productivity in response to credit shocks; (iii)
the severity of crisis that arrive after long periods of credit and macroeconomic booms; (iv)
the importance of credit shocks for the volatility of labor and asset prices.


Asymmetry:       Figure 6 plots the impulse responses to a credit expansion and a credit con-
traction. We report only the responses for one country since for the other countries they are
equal. A credit expansion is generated starting from the limiting equilibrium in which the
economy converges after a long series of draws ξt = ξ. From this equilibrium we consider a
sequence of draws ξt = ξ starting at t = 1. Therefore, a credit expansion is generated by a
permanent switch from ξ to ξ. Similarly, the impulse responses to a credit contraction are
generated starting from the limiting equilibrium in which the economy converges after a long
series of draws ξt = ξ. Starting at t = 1 the economy experiences a sequence of draws ξt = ξ.
   Two remarks are in order. First, the impulse responses take place in a range of states
that admit multiple equilibria. Therefore, the draws of ξt are possible equilibrium outcomes.
Second, agents do not know in advance the actual draws of ξt . Therefore, they take into


                                                  28
account the uncertainty induced by the stochastic distribution of ξt .




             Figure 6: Impulse responses to credit expansions and contractions.

   In response to the credit expansion we see a gradual increase in the stock of debt and a
persistent expansion in labor and output. The magnitude of the macroeconomic expansion,
however, is not large at impact. The macroeconomic expansion induced by the credit boom
arises through the following mechanism. At impact the firm becomes unconstrained which
eliminates the labor wedge. In addition to that and after the initial period, there is a second

                                              29
mechanism. As firms take on more debt, they pay more dividends, increasing the discount
factor m0 . Thanks to the lower discounting, firms invest more. At the same time, the higher
borrowing from firms increases the equilibrium interest rate which in turn increases labor
supply and output. The response to a credit contraction displays a different pattern. The
stock of debt declines more quickly and the response of labor, output and investment are much
larger at impact. Therefore, the model generates a strong asymmetry in the responses to credit
expansions and contractions.
   The intuition for the asymmetry is best understood starting from a situation in which the
enforcement constraint is not binding. If the constraint gets relaxed, the Lagrange multiplier
cannot fall below zero and the expansionary effect on unemployment is mild (only through
the general equilibrium discussed above). Instead, if the constraints get tighter, the Lagrange
multiplier goes from 0 to being positive and that causes a fall in employment and output
(through equation 19). As we discussed in section 2, this asymmetry is consistent with the
macroeconomic dynamics observed during the period 2005-2010.


Countercyclical labor productivity: The last panel of Figure 6 plots the impulse re-
sponses of labor productivity, that is, the ratio between output and hours. As in the previous
figure we see an asymmetry between credit expansions and credit contractions. More im-
portantly, a credit expansion causes a decline in labor productivity while a credit contraction
generates an increase in labor productivity. This is important for capturing the counter-cyclical
dynamics of the US labor productivity during the recent crisis as documented in section 2.


Credit booms and severity of recessions: Figure 7 plots the impulse responses to credit
expansions that later revert back to the pre-expansion levels. A credit boom is generated as
described above. Starting from an equilibrium to which the economy converges after a long
series of ξt = ξ, we assume that at time 1 the economy experiences a switch to ξt = ξ (credit
expansion). The value of ξ stays at the higher value for several periods and then it reverts
back to ξ permanently. We consider credit booms with duration of 4 quarters (left panels) and
20 quarters (right panels).

   The key finding is that the macroeconomic impact of the credit contraction increases with
the duration of the credit expansion. After a protracted credit boom, the economy accumulates
large leverages. When the credit reversal arrives, the required de-leveraging is more severe.
This forces firms to implement larger hiring cuts and generates a stronger macroeconomic

                                               30
Figure 7: Duration of credit expansions and severity of contractions.




                                 31
contraction. In this way the model captures why recessions that arise after long periods of
financial and macroeconomic expansions tend to be associated with more severe contractions.


Volatility of labor and asset prices:             The first column of Table 2 reports the standard
deviations of various variables. The statistics are computed after detrending the simulated
series with a band-pass filter that preserves cycles of 1.5-8 years (Baxter and King (1999)).

     Table 2: Business cycle statistics of key variables from detrended simulated series.


                                                Productivity       Credit          Both
                                                shocks only      shocks only      shocks


                                                            Standard deviations
                 Output                             0.88            0.76            1.16
                 Consumption                        0.68            0.44            0.77
                 Labor                              1.26            0.26            1.26
                 Investment                         2.27            0.77            2.36
                 Tobin’s q                          1.14            0.38            1.18
                 Stock market value                 2.46            0.54            2.45
                 Interest rate                      0.48            0.25            0.48
                 Return on equity                   5.82            0.37            5.82

                                                    Expected returns (% annualized)
                 Interest rate                      1.40          1.56          1.40
                 Return on equity                   6.96          5.62          6.96
                 Equity risk premium                1.56          0.06          1.56

                 Nonbinding constraints, %          96.44           99.99          96.04

                 Notes: The standard deviations for the returns on stocks and bonds are cal-
                 culated on unfiltered data.


   Two properties are especially noticeable. First, the model can generate high volatility of
labor, bringing the model closer to the US data for the crisis where employment fell even more
than output (see figure 5). The reason is simply that credit shocks cause, through the Lagrange
multiplier on the enforcement constraints, autonomous movements in employment that, due
to decreasing returns, drive smaller movements in output. Second, credit shocks also generate
a high volatility of asset prices. In particular, the stock market value (equity value of firms)
is almost three times more volatile than output. This can also be seen in the bottom panel of
Figure 6 which plots the impulse responses of the market value of equity to a credit expansion
and contraction. The reason for the high asset prices volatility is mainly that credit shocks can
sharply change the stochastic discount factor of investors (see equation 19) who hold shares


                                                     32
of firms. Hence, large fluctuations in stock prices emerge in equilibrium. This suggests that
credit shocks can contribute to explaining at least part of the large volatility of stock prices
we have observed during the crisis (see figure 4).
       As a result of the higher volatility of asset prices and of the discount factor of investors,
the model can also generate a non-negligible equity risk-premium.13 This is about 1.56 percent
yearly. We also observe that the volatility of equity returns is quite high in the model but the
volatility of the interest rate is small.


Productivity shock:          Before closing this section we would also like to report how the model
performs if instead of credit shocks we consider standard productivity shocks. Since a large
body of literature in international macroeconomics has developed from the International Real
Business Cycle, this seems a natural exercise.
       To add productivity shocks we specify the production function as yt = zt (Kt +Kt∗ )1−θ ktθ hνt ,
where zt denotes the stochastic level of productivity. The variable zt is country-specific and
follows a first order Markov process. After constructing Solow residuals series for the US and
for the aggregate of the G6 countries, we estimate the dynamic system
                                     !       "             #                  !              !
                              US )
                         log(zt+1                ρz   ψz        log(ztU S )           U S
                                                                                       t+1
                                         =                                        +              .
                              G6 )
                         log(zt+1                ψz   ρz        log(ztG6 )            G6
                                                                                       t+1


       The log series are linearly detrended and U S      G6
                                                  t+1 and t+1 are mean zero white noises with
standard deviation σzU S and σzG6 respectively. The estimation returns ρz = 0.98, ψz = −0.008,
σzU S = 0.0059, σzG6 = 0.0065. The correlation between residuals is 0.15.
       The estimation shows that there is very low cross-country comovement between the Solow
residuals of the two countries and they have very similar standard deviations. Therefore, the
process for the productivity variables can be well approximated by symmetric and independent
first order autoregressive processes with autocorrelation parameter ρ = 0.98 and standard
deviation of residuals σ = 0.0062.
       The second column of Table 2 reports the business cycle properties with only productivity
  13
    We should be careful in defining the equity risk-premium. Since bond holders (workers) have a higher
discounting than equity holders (investors), the difference between the expected return on equity (for investors)
and on bonds (for workers) is not the risk premium. In fact, even in absence of risk, the return on equity will
be higher than the return on bonds. Given the calibration of δ = 0.996 and β = 0.986, the return differential in
absence of risk would be about 4 percent yearly. Given this, we define the equity risk-premium as the difference
between the return differential between equity and bonds and the difference in discount rates between investors
and workers.



                                                           33
shocks. As we can see, the model generates much lower volatilities of hours and asset prices.
It is also worth nothing that the enforcement constraint is basically never binding. Because
of this, the labor wedge is (almost) always zero, which explains why labor and asset prices
are not very volatile. However, productivity shocks generate larger movements in investment.
When we consider both shocks (third column), the model generates reasonable business cycle
statistics in all macroeconomic variables.


7    Global financial crisis with heterogeneous labor markets
In Section 2 we pointed out that the dynamics of employment during the recent crisis is
different between US and other G7 countries, a fact first shown by Ohanian (2010). This point
is also illustrated using the ‘labor wedge’, that is, the difference between the marginal rate of
substitution in consumption and leisure and the marginal product of labor. Formally, this is
defined as Uh (ct , ht )/Uc (ct , ht )−Fh (kt , ht ), where Uh and Uc are the marginal utilities of leisure
and consumption respectively and Fh is the marginal product of labor. With CES utility and
Cobb-Douglas production function, the labor wedge is equal to

                                                  φct           yt
                                     W edge =          − (1 − θ) .                                    (23)
                                                1 − ht          ht

    Using this formula, Ohanian and Raffo (2011) find that while in the US the labor wedge
dropped dramatically during the recent crisis, the average wedge in other G7 counties experi-
enced a modest drop. In few countries like Germany it even increased. The goal of this section
is to show that the different behavior of the labor market can be reconciled with the view of
a global financial crisis when the structure of the labor market differs across countries.
    In order to show this point we extend our model by adding two elements: variable labor
utilization and heterogeneous labor rigidities. The role of variable labor utilization is to allow
for a more powerful mechanism for endogenous fluctuations in measured labor productivity.
The role of labor rigidities is to allow for a different response of labor utilization and measured
labor input to shocks. By further assuming that labor rigidities differ across countries, the
model can generate heterogeneous responses of macroeconomic and labor market variables.
Ohanian and Raffo (2011) refer to indicators from the OECD Employment Outlook (2008)
and report that the US is the country with the most flexible labor market. On the other hand,
many of the countries in continental Europe and Japan are placed at the opposite end in the
scale of labor market flexibility.

                                                    34
    Let’s start with labor utilization. The production function is specified as F (Kt , kt , nt ),
where nt is the ‘effective’ input of labor. This results from the combination of (measured)
hours, ht , and (unmeasured) utilization, et , according to the function
                                                                     %
                                               %−1        %−1
                                                               
                                                                    %−1
                                                %          %
                                       nt = ht       + et                 .


    The parameter % is the elasticity of substitution between hours spent in the working place
and the actual utilization of labor. When % = 1 we have nt = ht · et , which is used often
in the literature. The cost of utilization comes from workers disutility. Given the utility
function U (ct , ht + et ), workers face higher disutility not only when they spent more hours in
the working place but also when their services are utilized more intensively. An implication of
this specification is that the utilization cost is equal to the wage rate wt , and the total cost of
labor for the firm is (ht + et )wt .
    So far the addition of labor utilization is inconsequential for the properties of the model.
Given the CES aggregation and the fact that the wage rate is the price for both ht and ut , firms
always choose et = ht . Thus, we can simply focus on ht as in the original model and abstract
from utilization. This equivalence no longer holds once we add labor market rigidities on
working hours ht . Some authors interpret labor market rigidities as constraining the extensive
margin (employment) rather than the intensive margin (per-worker hours). However, since the
model does not distinguish the extensive from the intensive margin, we interpret labor market
rigidities as restricting total hours ht . More specifically, firms incur the convex cost

                                           κ(ht − h̄)2 wt ,

where h̄ is exogenous.
    Ideally, we would like to use a more standard adjustment cost. For example something
like κ(ht − ht−1 )2 wt . This alternative formulation, however, would introduce an additional
state variable, ht−1 , which increases the computational complexity of the model. To avoid
this, we specify the cost as deviation from a fixed target. The multiplication by the wage rate
is motivated by economic and technical considerations. From an economic point of view it is
likely that the direct cost of labor, which depends on the wage, also affects the cost of changing
employment. An example is severance payments. From a technical point of view the presence
of the wage allows us to apply the same normalization procedure used in the version of the



                                                     35
model with capital accumulation.
   The key parameter is κ. With a positive value of κ, the response of utilization et to shocks
is bigger than the response of total hours ht . This generates a decline in measured TFP and,
potentially, a decline in measured labor productivity yt /ht . These effects increase with the
value of κ (labor market rigidity). Therefore, if in our model the first country (the US) is
characterized by lower labor market rigidities than the second country (the other G7), the
model could generate very different responses of labor markets to a financial shock. This will
also be reflected in the responses of the labor wedge.


7.1   Simulation results

We describe here only the calibration of the parameters that need to be re-calibrated or were
not present in the baseline model. We start with the elasticity of substitution between hours
and utilization, the parameter %, which we set to 5. This value implies a high degree of
substitutability between hours and utilization. The utility parameter α is chosen to have
average working hours of 0.33 in the equilibrium without labor rigidities.
   At this point we are left with the parameters h̄, κ1 for country 1 and κ2 for country 2.
Given the values of κ1 and κ2 , we could choose h̄ to have the desired differential in average
employment between the two countries. We choose total hours in the US to be 5 percent higher
than in other G7 countries. However, this is not important for the quantitative properties of
the model. The important parameters are κ1 and κ2 . Unfortunately we are not aware of
statistics that can be used directly to pin down these two parameters. Because of this we take
a more pragmatic approach. We pick the values of κ1 = 0.3 and κ2 = 1.5 so that the model
generates heterogeneous drops in labor wedges after a negative credit shock similar to the
drops observed during the recent crisis. Of course, the relevance of the exercise is only to show
that the model ‘could’ generate the heterogeneous responses of the labor market observed in
the US and in the G6 countries. The exercise is helpful in clarifying that the idea of a global
financial crisis as a driver of the recent recession cannot be written down by the observation
of cross country heterogeneity in labor market dynamics.
   Figure 8 plots the impulse responses of several variables to a permanent credit contraction.
The impulse responses are constructed using the same methodology as in Figure 6. As can
be seen from the figure, the responses of investment and output are very similar in the two
countries. However, the responses of hours and the labor wedge are significantly smaller in



                                               36
country 2.14 We also observe strong heterogeneity in the response of labor productivity which
falls only slightly in country 1 but experiences a large drop in country 2. Therefore, the
model could replicate the different dynamics of the labor market between the US and other
G6 countries even if the dynamics of other macroeconomic variables are similar.
         Before closing, we would like to make some remarks about the concept of labor rigidities.
These are typically interpreted as the consequence of institutional factors such as regulations
and union power. Here, instead, we would like to give a broader interpretation. For example,
it is well known that labor market rigidities are different across sectors. To the extent that
in certain countries the crisis has impacted sectors with greater labor market flexibility, we
may observe larger declines in employment and hours. For instance, the construction sector
is typically characterized by flexible hiring because of its cyclicality. Then, countries that
experience large contractions in the real estate sector are also likely to experience large drops
in employment. This is the case for Spain, a country where the real estate sector experienced
an abnormal boom before the crisis. In this sense, a country like Spain could be considered
a country with a flexible labor market, simply because the sectors with greater labor market
flexibility were hit harder by the crisis.


8         Conclusion
We have documented that the recent financial crisis has been characterized by an historically
high degree of international synchronization in real and financial variables. We have proposed
a theoretical framework in which endogenous credit booms and credit crises can result from
self-fulfilling expectations. These episodes affect the real sector of the economy through a
credit channel: booms enhance the borrowing capacity of firms and in the general equilibrium
they lead to (mildly) higher employment and production. Crises curtail borrowing capacity
and they lead to sharp contractions in real activity and financial prices.
         When countries are financially integrated, self-fulfilling credit booms/crises also generate
large spillovers to the real and financial sectors of other countries. There are two channels
    14
      In our model, the labor wedge is slightly different from equation (23) because the production function is
not constant returns. Furthermore, there is labor utilization and ct is only the consumption of workers, not
aggregate consumption. However, we measure the labor wedge as if the true model was the standard RBC since
this is the way it has been measured in the literature. After simulating the model and generating the series for
ct , ht and yt , we compute the wedge by plugging the series in equation (23). The values of the parameters are
the same values used in Ohanian and Raffo (2011), that is, β = 0.99, θ = 0.36, δ = 0.0175, g = 0.005 and φ is
chosen so to have steady hours of 0.33.



                                                      37
Figure 8: Impulse responses to a credit contraction with asymmetric labor markets.




                                       38
of international transmission. The first is through the cost of capital which in an integrated
financial market is equalized across countries. The second channel is based on the endogenous
nature of credit market conditions. These conditions change when the economy switches from
one self-fulfilling equilibrium to another self-fulfilling equilibrium. But in an integrated world
market the shift in one country can only arise if the shift takes place also in the other. There-
fore, changing financial market conditions are highly synchronized when financial markets are
internationally integrated.
   This study does not exclude the possibility that other sources of business cycle fluctu-
ations also generate international co-movement in real variables. Our interest in changing
credit market conditions as a source of business cycle is motivated by their ability to generate
large cross-country co-movements in the real sector of the economy together with the large
international co-movements in the flows of financing and asset prices.




                                               39
Appendix

A      Debt renegotiation
The enforcement constraint is derived from the following assumptions. Default arises at the end of the
period before repaying the intra-temporal loan lt . In case of default the lender can confiscate the firm
and sell the physical capital at price ξt but it cannot confiscate the liquidity lt = F (ht ).
    Define first the value of the firm recursively as

                                     Vt (bt ) = dt + Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ),

where mt+1 is the discount factor, taken as given by an individual firm. Since default takes place at the
end of the period, after the dividends, the value of not defaulting is Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ). We now derive
the value of defaulting.
    In the event of default the parties negotiate a repayment τt to the lender. If they reach an agrement,
the firm continues operation and its value is Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ) + lt − τt . What this says is that the
firm retains its continuation value Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ) plus the liquidity net of the bargained payment
τt . Without an agrement the firm retains only the divertible liquidity lt (threat value). The net value
of an agrement is the difference between the value of renegotiation and the threat value, that is

                                          Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ) − τt .                                  (24)

    Let’s consider now the lender. With an agrement the lender gets τt + bt+1 /Rt . The intertemporal
debt is discounted since it will be repaid next period. Without an agrement the lender receives the
liquidation value of physical capital, ξt k̄ (threat value). Thus, the net value of renegotiation is

                                                     bt+1
                                              τt +        − ξt k̄.                                     (25)
                                                      Rt

    The net surplus is the sum of the net values for the firm, (24), and the lender, (25), that is

                                                                      bt+1
                                St (bt+1 ) = Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ) +        − ξt k̄                     (26)
                                                                       Rt

Under the assumption that the firm has all the bargaining power, the value of defaulting is lt + St (bt+1 ).
    Incentive compatibility requires that the value of not defaulting is not smaller than the value of
default, that is
                                    Et mt+1 Vt+1 (bt+1 ) ≥ lt + St (bt+1 ).

    Substituting the definition of the net renegotiation surplus St (bt+1 ), equation (26) and rearranging
                                                     bt+1
we obtain the enforcement constraint ξt k̄ = lt +     Rt .



                                                       40
B      First order conditions
Consider the optimization problem (3) and let λ and µ be the Lagrange multipliers associate with the
two constraints. Taking derivatives we get:

                                          d:           1−λ=0
                                          h:           λ[Fh (h) − w] − µFh (h) = 0
                                                                           λ  µ
                                         b0 :          Em0 Vb0 (s0 ; b0 ) + −   =0
                                                                           R R

The envelope condition is:

                                                           Vb (s; b)    = −λ

The above conditions can be re-arranged as in (6) and (7).


C      First order conditions for the model with capital
Differentiating the firm’s problem (18) with respect to ht , b̃t+1 , ĩt , k̃t+1 , we get:

                                                                      w̃t
                                       Fh (zt , k̃t , ht ) =                                      (27)
                                                                    1 − µt

                                       1 − µt
                                              + gt−σ E m̃t+1 Ṽb (s̃t+1 ; k̃t+1 , b̃t+1 ) = 0     (28)
                                         Rt
                                                          
                                                     ĩt
                                       Qt Υ0                   =1                                 (29)
                                                     k̃t

                                       Qt = ξt µt + gt−σ E m̃t+1 Ṽk (s̃t+1 ; k̃t+1 , b̃t+1 )     (30)

where µt is the lagrange multiplier associated with the enforcement constraint and Qt is the lagrange
multiplier associated with the law of motion of capital (Tobin’s q). The multiplier associated with the
budget constraint is 1. For the foreign country we have the same conditions but with country specific
variables denoted with the start superscript.
    The envelope conditions are:

                       Ṽb (s̃t ; k̃t , b̃t ) = −1                                                (31)

                                                                               
                                                                       ĩt       ĩt ĩt
                       Ṽk = (1 − µt )Fk (zt , k̃t , ht ) + 1 − τ + Υ      − Υ0          Qt       (32)
                                                                       k̃t       k̃t k̃t


                                                                      41
    Substituting the envelope conditions and imposing the equilibrium conditions kt = Kt and k̃t = st ,
we obtain (19)-(22).


D     Dynamic system and solution approach
We will use the bar sign to denote aggregate worldwide variables normalized by the worldwide stock of
capital. For example, d¯t is the normalized worldwide dividend, defined as

                                            dt + d∗t
                                      d¯t =          ≡ d˜t + d˜∗t .
                                            Kt + Kt∗




                                                   42
The full list of equilibrium conditions are:
                                             −1
                                      c̄t+1
       1 = δgt−1 Rt Et                                                                                                         (33)
                                        c̄t


       c̃∗t = χc̃t                                                                                                             (34)


                                                    gt b̄t+1
       w̃t ht + w̃t∗ h∗t + b̄t = c̄t +                                                                                         (35)
                                                      Rt

                                                                                        ḡt b̄t+1
       b̄t + d¯t + īt = F (zt , st , ht ) + F (zt∗ , s∗t , h∗t ) − w̃t ht − w̃t∗ h∗t +                                        (36)
                                                                                           Rt

                                               gt b̄t+1
       gt (ξt st+1 + ξt∗ s∗t+1 ) ≥                      + F (zt , st , ht ) + F (zt∗ , s∗t , h∗t )                             (37)
                                                 Rt


       (1 − µt )d¯−σ
                  t  = βgt−σ Rt E d¯−σ
                                    t+1                                                                                        (38)


                    w̃t
       αhγt =                                                                                                                  (39)
                    c̃t

                           w̃t∗
       α(h∗t )γ =                                                                                                              (40)
                           c̃∗t
                                                         
                                                    ĩt
       gt st+1 = (1 − τ )st + Υ                               st                                                               (41)
                                                    st

                                                    ĩ∗t
                                                          
       gt s∗t+1 = (1 − τ )s∗t + Υ                              s∗t                                                             (42)
                                                    s∗t

                                      w̃t
       Fh (zt , st , ht ) =                                                                                                    (43)
                                    1 − µt

                                        w̃t∗
       Fh (zt∗ , s∗t , h∗t ) =                                                                                                 (44)
                                      1 − µt
                         
                    ĩt
       Qt Υ0                   =1                                                                                              (45)
                    st

                    ĩ∗t
                          
       Q∗t Υ0                  =1                                                                                              (46)
                    s∗t
                                           ¯ −σ                                                                        
                                           dt+1                                           ĩt+1                 ĩt+1
       Qt = ξt µt + βgt−σ E                        (1 − µ t+1 )Fk (zt+1 , st+1 , ht+1 ) −       +   1 − τ + Υ            Q t+1 (47)
                                             d¯t                                          st+1                  st+1
                                               ¯ −σ 
                                                                                              ĩ∗t+1
                                                                                                                   ∗        
                                               dt+1                                                                 ĩt+1
       Q∗t = ξt∗ µt + βgt−σ E                          (1 − µ           ∗      ∗      ∗
                                                              t+1 )Fk (zt+1 , st+1 , ht+1 ) − ∗      +   1 − τ + Υ        Q ∗
                                                                                                                            t+1 (48)
                                                 d¯t                                         st+1                     ∗
                                                                                                                    st+1




                                                                                 43
 Equations (33)-(48) form a dynamic system composed of 16 equations. Given the states zt , ξt , zt∗ , ξt∗ , b̄t , st ,
the unknown variables are ht , h∗ , ct , c∗ , wt , w∗ , it , i∗ , Qt , Q∗ , gt , µt , Rt , d¯t , b̄t+1 , st+1 . Therefore, we
                                            t       t         t         t        t
have a dynamic system of 16 equations in 16 unknowns.
    The computational procedure is based on the approximation of four functions:

       Γ1 (st+1 )   =    c̄−1
                           t+1



       Γ2 (st+1 )   =    d¯−σ
                           t+1


                                                                                                 
                                                                   ĩt+1                ĩt+1
       Γ3 (st+1 )   =    d¯−σ
                           t+1   (1 − µ t+1 )F (z  , s
                                              k t+1 t+1 , ht+1 ) −       +  1 − τ + Υ            Qt+1
                                                                   st+1                 st+1
                                 (                                                     "                  !#           )
                                                                                ĩ∗t+1           ĩ∗t+1
       Γ4 (st+1 )   =    d¯−σ
                           t+1       (1 −              ∗
                                            µt+1 )Fk (zt+1 , s∗t+1 , h∗t+1 )   − ∗ + 1−τ +Υ                    Q∗t+1       .
                                                                                st+1             s∗t+1

    In addition to these four function, we need to guess the function p(st+1 ), that is, the probability of
ξt+1 = ξ. This is necessary to compute the next period expectation.
    The procedure starts with a guess for the values of the approximated functions Γ1 (st+1 ), Γ2 (st+1 ),
Γ3 (st+1 ), Γ4 (st+1 ). We first form a two dimensional grid for the endogenous states b̄ and s. Then for
each realization of the exogenous shocks—zt , ξt , zt∗ , ξt∗ —we guess the values taken by the above functions
over the grid points. Values outside the grid are obtained through bi-linear interpolation. Next we guess
p(st+1 ) for each grid point. Once we know the approximated functions and probabilities for ξt+1 , we
can solve for the 16 unknowns of the system (33)-(48) at each grid point and for each possible values of
zt , ξt , zt∗ , ξt∗ . In finding the solutions we check whether the enforcement constraint is binding (µt > 0)
or not binding (µt = 0). We then use the solutions found at each grip point to update the guesses for
the four functions Γ1 (st+1 ), Γ2 (st+1 ), Γ3 (st+1 ), Γ4 (st+1 ) and the probabilities p(st+1 ). To update these
probabilities we need to check whether multiple equilibria are feasible at any possible states. Effectively
we check this on the grid points of the states. We keep iterating until the guesses for Γ1 (st+1 ), Γ2 (st+1 ),
Γ3 (st+1 ), Γ4 (st+1 ) and p(st+1 ) at each grid point for the states are equal to the values obtained by
solving the dynamic system.




                                                                   44
References
Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J. and F. E. Kydland (1992). International Real Business Cycles.
    Journal of Political Economy, 100(4), 74575.

Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1999). Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass
    Filters for Macroeconomic Time Series. Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 575-
    93.

Brunnermeier, M. and Y. Sannikov (2010). A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector.
    Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.

Cetorelli N. and L. S. Goldberg (2010). Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission.
    Unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Claessens S. Kose, A and M. Terrones (2011). Financial Cycles: What? How? When?, CEPR
    Discussion Paper No. 8379

Crucini, M. J., Kose M. A. and C. Otrok (2011). What Are The Driving Forces of Interna-
    tional Business Cycles? Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(1), 156-75.

Dedola L. and G. Lombardo (2010). Financial frictions, Financial integration and the inter-
    national propagation of shocks. Unpublished manuscript, European Central Bank.

Devereux, M. B. and J. Yetman (2010). Leverage Constraints and the International Trans-
    mission of Shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 71-105.

Devereux, M. B. and A. Sutherland (2011). Evaluating international financial integration
    under leverage constraints. European Economic Review, 55(3), 427-42.

Eisfeldt, A.L., and A. Rampini. (2006). Capital Reallocation and Liquidity. Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 53(3): 369-99.

Gao P. and H. Yun (2009). Commercial Paper, Lines of Credit, and the Real Effects of
    the Financial Crisis of 2008: Firm-Level Evidence from the Manufacturing Industry.
    Unpublished manuscript, University of Notre Dame.

Garin J., M. Pries and E. Sims (2010). The Changing Nature of Economic Fluctuations.
    Unpublished manuscript, University of Notre Dame.


                                           45
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2009). A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy. Unpublished
    manuscript, New York University.

Gertler M. and N. Kiyotaki (2009). Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business
    Cycle Analysis, Unpublished manuscript, New York University and Princeton University.

Goldberg J. (2010), A Model of Deleveraging, Unpublished manuscript, MIT

Goldberg, L. S. and C. D. Kolstad (1995). Foreign Direct Investment, Exchange Rate Vari-
    ability and Demand Uncertainty. International Economic Review, 36(4), 855-73.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1994). A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
    Capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 841-79.

Heathcote, J. and F. Perri (2004). Financial Globalization and Real Regionalization. Journal
    of Economic Theory, 119(1), 207-43.

Helbling, T., Huidrom, R., Kose, M. A. and C. Otrok (2011). Do Credit Shocks Matter? A
    Global Perspective. European Economic Review, 55(3), 340-53.

Imbs, J. (2010). The First Global Recession in Decades. IMF Economic Review, 58(2),
    327-54.

Jermann, U. (1998). Asset Pricing in Production Economies. Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 41(2), 257-75.

Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2011). Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks. American
    Economic Review, forthcoming.

Jordà, O. Schularick, M. and A. Taylor (2011), Financial crises, credit booms and external
    imbalances: 14 years of lessons. NBER Working Paper No. 16567

Khan, A. and J. Thomas (2010). Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an Economy
    with Production Heterogeneity. Unpublished manuscript, Ohio State University.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. H. Moore (2008). Liquidity, Business Cycle, and Monetary Policy. Un-
    published manuscript, Princeton University and Edinburgh University.

Kollmann, R., Z. Enders and G. J. Müller (2011). Global Banks and International Business
    Cycle. European Economic Review, 55(3), 407-26.

                                            46
Lorenzoni, G. and V. Guerrieri (2010). Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings and the Liquidity
    Trap, Unpublished manuscript, Chicago Booth School of Business.

Lucas R. and N. Stokey (2011). Liquidity Crises, Unpublished manuscript, University of
    Chicago.

Mendoza, E. (2010). Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage. American Economic
    Review, 100(5), 1941-66.

Morgan, P., Rime, B. and P. Strahan (2004). Integration and State Business Cycles. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 119(3), 1555-85.

Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2009). This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.
    Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Ohanian L. (2010) The Economic Crisis from a Neoclassical Perspective, Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 24(4), Fall, 45-66

Ohanian L. and A. Raffo (2011). Hours Worked over the Business Cycle in OECD Countries,
    1960-2010. Article prepared for the April 2011 Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
    Public Policy.




                                             47
