                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TAX POLICY AND THE EFFICIENCY OF U.S. DIRECT INVESTMENT ABROAD

                                            Mihir A. Desai
                                            C. Fritz Foley
                                          James R. Hines Jr.

                                        Working Paper 17202
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w17202


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2011




We thank Matt Johnson for excellent research assistance, and Kimberly Clausing and various seminar
participants for very helpful comments on earlier drafts. Desai and Foley thank the Division of Research
of the Harvard Business School for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Policy and the Efficiency of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 17202
July 2011
JEL No. D92,H21,H25

                                               ABSTRACT

Deferral of U.S. taxes on foreign source income is commonly characterized as a subsidy to foreign
investment, as reflected in its inclusion among “tax expenditures” and occasional calls for its repeal.
This paper analyzes the extent to which tax deferral and other policies inefficiently subsidize U.S.
direct investment abroad. Investments are dynamically inefficient if they consistently generate fewer
returns to investors than they absorb in new investment funds. From 1982–2010, repatriated earnings
from foreign affiliates exceeded net capital investments by $1.1 trillion in 2010 dollars; and from 1950–2010,
repatriated earnings and net interest from foreign affiliates exceeded net equity investments and loans
by $2.1 trillion in 2010 dollars. By either measure, cash flows received from abroad exceeded 160
percent of net investments, implying that foreign investment over these periods was dynamically efficient.


Mihir A. Desai                                            James R. Hines Jr.
Graduate School of Business Administration                Department of Economics
Harvard University                                        University of Michigan
Soldiers Field                                            343 Lorch Hall
Boston, MA 02163                                          611 Tappan Street
and NBER                                                  Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
mdesai@hbs.edu                                            and NBER
                                                           jrhines@umich.edu
C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ffoley@hbs.edu
1.       Introduction

         Thoughtful observers wrestle with the question of whether the U.S. system of worldwide
taxation, including its deferral of the taxation of unrepatriated foreign income, provision of
foreign tax credits, and other features, inefficiently subsidizes direct investment abroad. To
some, the answer is clearly yes. The notion that aspects of current U.S. tax policy implicitly
subsidize foreign investment has been enshrined by including deferral of U.S. taxes on the list of
tax expenditures, thereby implying that deferral constitutes a significant deviation from normal
tax practice.1 And the possibility that proposals to replace the current U.S. worldwide tax system
with a territorial tax might in the process generate greater U.S. tax revenue adds credibility to the
interpretation of the current worldwide tax system as a subsidy to foreign investment.

         If the current U.S. tax system inefficiently subsidizes foreign investment, then U.S. firms
can be expected to invest significant resources abroad, substituting foreign economic activity for
domestic consumption, and impairing the efficiency of resource allocation. Musgrave (1963),
Horst (1980) and others analyze models in which foreign tax credits and deferral of home
country taxes on unrepatriated income represent inefficient subsidies from the standpoint of
home countries. Deferral, the foreign tax credit, and other features of the U.S. taxation of foreign
income are by no means universally regarded as inefficient subsidies; indeed, capital ownership
considerations generally imply that the United States currently imposes an inefficiently high tax
burden on foreign investment, as argued by Desai and Hines (2003, 2004). While this
disagreement is framed by welfare considerations, there have been few, if any, direct empirical
tests of the extent to which foreign investment is inefficiently subsidized.

         This paper provides one such test by comparing direct investment abroad with repatriated
investment returns over the last sixty years. This is a simple cash flow comparison of the
difference between direct investment funds that leave the U.S. and direct investment returns that
are received in the United States. This method of evaluating investment performance is implied
by the theory of dynamic efficiency: a dynamically efficient investment profile cannot be
improved upon by reducing investment levels. If foreign investment consistently absorbs more

1
 According to the United States Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation (2011), deferral of active income of
controlled foreign corporations is estimated as the largest corporate tax expenditure at $70.6 billion over the period
2010-2014. The rising importance of deferral is evidenced by the fact that the corresponding estimate was $5.7
billion for 1995-1999, $19.8 billion for 2000-2004, and $25.8 billion for 2005-2009.

                                                           2
resources than it returns, then it is dynamically inefficient, whereas if the opposite is true – if
foreign investment generates net cash flow surpluses – then it is dynamically efficient.

       The evidence indicates that repatriated returns attributable to U.S. direct investment
abroad exceed new foreign investments by significant margins. Between 1982 and 2010, the
repatriated earnings from the foreign affiliates of U.S. companies exceeded net capital
investments abroad by their U.S. parent companies by $1.1 trillion in 2010 dollars. Data for a
broader category of investments and investment returns are available for a significantly longer
time period, and these data reveal a similar imbalance between investments and their returns:
between 1950 and 2010, repatriated earnings and net interest from foreign affiliates exceeded net
equity investments and loans by U.S. parent companies by $2.1 trillion in 2010 dollars. Both
measures indicate that cash flows received from abroad exceeded 160 percent of net investments,
implying that foreign investment over these periods was dynamically efficient.

       The application of dynamic efficiency to investigate the presence of subsidies to
investment abroad is complicated by several factors, which are discussed in detail below. The
most obvious complication is that the theory of dynamic efficiency was developed for economies
on balanced growth paths, whereas in recent decades foreign economies, and U.S. direct
investment abroad, have grown more rapidly than has the U.S. economy. These growth rate
differentials encourage U.S. firms to reinvest foreign earnings, a process that depresses
repatriations and makes it all the more striking that aggregate repatriated earnings far exceed
direct investments abroad.

       A second concern in analyzing these data is that high U.S. tax rates encourage firms to
reallocate taxable income from the United States to low-tax foreign jurisdictions. If there is
extensive reclassification of domestic earnings as foreign income, then high reported rates of
return to foreign investment can be misleading, possibly suggesting that investment is efficient
even though it is not. The use of repatriations as a measure of foreign investment returns,
however, attenuates this concern in evaluating the dynamic efficiency of direct investment
abroad. Taxpayers generally have incentives to reallocate taxable income from the United States
to foreign locations only if they anticipate deferring repatriation of that income; immediately
repatriated foreign income is subject to U.S. taxation, which removes the benefit of low foreign
tax rates. In addition, taxpayers do not have incentives to defer repatriating if they expect to earn


                                                   3
the low rates of return associated with dynamically inefficient investment. Consequently, the
cash flow measure of foreign investment offers an efficiency test that is robust to potential
income reallocation, since there is little if any incentive for a U.S. firm to reallocate income from
the United States to a foreign country only to repatriate that income immediately, and firms will
defer repatriation only if foreign investment is dynamically efficient.

       Section 2 of the paper reviews the theory of dynamic efficiency, applies the theory to
foreign investment, and considers the potential effect of U.S. tax provisions on the dynamic
efficiency of U.S. direct investment abroad. Section 3 evaluates evidence of investment returns
and levels of U.S. direct investment abroad since 1950. Section 4 is the conclusion.

2.     The Dynamic Efficiency of Foreign Investment

       This section reviews the meaning of dynamic efficiency in a growing economy and
applies this concept to foreign investment. The analysis identifies the circumstances in which a
country that provides foreign tax credits while taxing only repatriated foreign income will
encourage dynamically inefficient levels of foreign investment.

2.1    Dynamic Efficiency

       The normative theory of appropriate saving and investment rates was first developed in
the context of closed economies, for which saving and investment are by definition equal to each
other. Since the early work of Phelps (1961), Allais (1962), Robinson (1962), Swan (1964),
Koopmans (1965), and Cass (1965), it has been clear that it is possible for a growing economy to
save too much and therefore also to invest too much. In a simple economy with a growing
population and no technological change, the Golden Rule capital stock level is that at which the
marginal product of capital, net of depreciation, equals the rate of population growth.
Equivalently, the capital stock in such an economy is associated with a saving rate that equals the
share of capital in national income. Maintaining the economy’s capital stock at the Golden Rule
level maximizes steady state consumption. An economy with a capital stock exceeding the
Golden Rule level has a marginal product of capital that is less than the population growth rate,
and is said to be dynamically inefficient. If an economy is dynamically inefficient, then there is
overinvestment in the quite powerful sense that there exists a feasible reform that would increase
consumption in every time period, as elaborated by Phelps (1965).

                                                  4
        A clear example of a dynamically inefficient economy is one in which there is positive
annual population growth but investment levels are so great that capital accumulates to the point
that the net marginal product of capital equals zero (the gross marginal product of capital equals
the capital depreciation rate). In such an economy there is no economic cost to reducing the size
of the steady state capital stock, since marginal units of capital are unproductive; as a result, it is
possible to increase consumption in the first period without reducing consumption in any
subsequent period. In more general settings, dynamically inefficient economies populated with
representative agents born in each period are Pareto-inefficient, since intertemporal reallocations
can provide all generations with higher levels of utility. If an economy is not dynamically
inefficient, then any feasible intertemporal reform entails utility losses for some cohorts, which is
the sense in which dynamically efficient economies are Pareto efficient.

        Diamond (1965), generalizing the work of Samuelson (1958), notes that a perfectly
competitive economy with overlapping generations can produce dynamically inefficient
outcomes due to the infinite nature of time and the inability of future generations to trade with
present generations; Cass (1972) offers a more general characterization of dynamically
inefficient economies. Taxes and other government policies that influence returns to saving and
investing have the potential to discourage consumption to the extent that economies become
dynamically inefficient.

        While dynamic inefficiency is evidently feasible, it has not been simple to resolve the
question of whether economies in practice are dynamically inefficient. Mapping the theory of
dynamic efficiency to an empirical test must meet the demanding data requirements of
determining whether an economy’s saving rate exceeds, or is less than, its share of capital
income; or alternatively, whether the true marginal product of capital exceeds, or is less than, the
population growth rate. Abel et al. (1989) propose a different test based on investment cash
flows. They show that, for a competitive economy characterized by constant returns to scale,
whether or not investment in every year exceeds total returns to capital investment is also a valid
criterion for assessing dynamic efficiency. Specifically, if new investment levels exceed
investment returns then an economy is dynamically inefficient, whereas if investment returns
exceed new investment levels then an economy is dynamically efficient. This cash flow criterion
is equivalent to the other empirical tests of dynamic efficiency, so an economy in which new


                                                   5
investment levels regularly exceed investment returns is also an economy in which the marginal
product of capital is less than the population growth rate.

       Intuitively, the cash flow criterion corresponds to whether investment is a sink or a
source of funds: an economy in which investment continually absorbs more resources than it
returns is dynamically inefficient, whereas an economy in which investment regularly generates
more returns than it absorbs is dynamically efficient. Abel et al. (1989) offer evidence that, for
the U.S. economy from 1929–1985, and other G-7 economies from 1960–1984, gross profits
from capital investment significantly exceeded gross investment levels every year; furthermore,
the same was true, to an even greater extent, of the U.S. nonfinancial corporate sector for every
year from 1953–1985. Whether due to tax, regulatory, monetary, or other policies, or simply the
practical operation of markets, it appears that western economies did not invest to dynamically
inefficient levels over these time periods.

2.2    Dynamically Efficient Foreign Investment

       It is possible to evaluate the dynamic efficiency of a country’s foreign investment by
using a cash flow measure that is analogous to the measure developed by Abel et al. (1989) for a
closed economy. As applied to foreign investments, this measure is the difference between funds
invested abroad and returns from those investments: if the difference is positive, then foreign
investment is dynamically inefficient, whereas if the difference is negative, foreign investment is
dynamically efficient. Were the data to imply that U.S. direct investment abroad is dynamically
inefficient, it would follow that the United States could increase domestic consumption in every
period by reducing foreign investment.

       A simple illustration helps to clarify the sense in which dynamic inefficiency implies the
possibility of increasing domestic resources by reducing foreign investment. Suppose that
foreign investment grows at rate g, and let r denote the rate of return earned by investments
abroad after payment of foreign taxes. For illustrative purposes assume that foreign earnings are
immediately repatriated to the home country. If g > r, then the economy invests more money
abroad every year than it receives in return, which by both the rate of return and cash flow
criteria implies that foreign investment is dynamically inefficient.

       Dynamic inefficiency, as represented by g > r, implies that it is possible to increase
domestic consumption in the first period without reducing domestic consumption in any

                                                 6
subsequent period. How could this be arranged? Intuitively, the notion is that domestic investors
might reduce their foreign investment at the start of the first period by $1, which frees $1 for
domestic consumption. Reduced foreign investment is not costless of course, since yearend
foreign earnings thereby decline by r, which then threatens to reduce domestic resources newly
available at yearend – except that the induced shortfall in repatriated foreign profits can be made
up by further drawing down foreign investment by r, thereby leaving the flow of yearend
domestic resources unchanged. By the second period foreign investment will have fallen by
(1+r), thereby reducing yearend period two foreign returns by r(1+r), and requiring that much
additional foreign disinvestment in order to maintain the flow of domestic resources at the same
level as it was prior to the drawdown of foreign investment in the first period. This process can
continue indefinitely, assuming that there remain sufficient foreign assets to be drawn down. The
$1 reduction in foreign investment in the first period, coupled with compensating subsequent

drawdowns of foreign investment, entails a foreign capital stock that is 1  r  smaller by the
                                                                                 n



end of period n.

       If g > r, then the stock of foreign assets grows at a rate faster than the contemplated
drawdown. Letting S0 denote the initial stock of foreign assets, the stock by the end of period n

will equal S0 1  g   1  r   , which increases with n as long as g > r. Consequently,
                       n          n
                                   
despite the growing annual reduction in foreign assets, there will always be sufficient foreign
funds to finance the drawdowns; put differently, the shortfall in foreign funds diminishes over
time compared to the growing size of the foreign capital stock, ultimately shrinking to an
arbitrarily small percentage of it. Hence dynamic inefficiency implies that it is feasible to
increase domestic consumption in the first period without reducing domestic consumption in any
subsequent period. Since such a reform can be repeated, dynamic inefficiency implies that
greater domestic consumption is feasible in every period by reducing foreign investment. By
extension, such a Pareto-superior reallocation is infeasible if g ≤ r.

2.3    Taxation and the Dynamic Efficiency of Foreign Investment

       Under what circumstances would the deferral of home country taxation of foreign
income, together with the foreign tax credit and other tax provisions, create sufficiently strong
incentives that foreign investment becomes dynamically inefficient? To address this question, it

                                                  7
is useful first to identify the investment impact of tax deferral and foreign tax credits, and second
to consider foreign investment in a system with deferral, foreign tax credits, and other potential
investment subsidies, the last of which are grouped together and denoted by s. Firms subject to
home country taxation of repatriated profits have incentives to delay repatriation, and instead
reinvest profits abroad, if foreign after-tax rates of return are sufficiently great – and there is
ample evidence, including Desai, Foley and Hines (2001), that affiliates in countries with low
foreign tax rates are more likely than others to defer repatriating foreign profits. Hartman (1985)
notes that a firm with a subsidiary in a low-tax foreign country whose after-foreign-tax rate of
return exceeds the domestic discount rate has an incentive to reinvest profits abroad; otherwise
the firm does better to repatriate its profits, incur the domestic tax charge, and deploy the
remaining funds domestically.

           The Hartman result comes from the observation that dividends received from foreign
subsidiaries (D) are first grossed up to account for the pretax foreign profits responsible for them,
then subject to home country taxation net of foreign tax credits, assuming that the domestic tax
rate exceeds the foreign tax rate. A dividend of D is therefore subject to home country tax of
       D
              , in which τ is the domestic tax rate and τ* the foreign tax rate; the firm is also entitled
    1   * 
                                          D
to claim a foreign tax credit of  *              , as a result of which the net tax obligation is
                                       1   * 

D
        , and the firm’s after-tax dividend equal to D  D     , or
           *                                                               *

                                                                                    D
                                                                                        1      . As
    1   
           *
                                                                1      *
                                                                                        1   
                                                                                              *



Hartman notes, the repatriation-and-reinvestment plan that maximizes the present value of

D
     1      also maximizes the present value of D, so repatriation taxes do not influence
    1   
           *



repatriation patterns, since in the absence of repatriation taxes the firm would choose a pattern of
repatriations that likewise maximizes the present value of D. Repatriation taxes reduce the value
of foreign investments from the standpoint of the parent company, and thereby reduce the return
to initial investment, but need not influence repatriation patterns during the stage that foreign
investments are financed by retained earnings abroad.



                                                      8
        The Hartman result can serve as the basis of a broader consideration of how foreign tax
credits, deferral, and additional domestic subsidies might together result in dynamically
inefficient foreign investment. Consider the case in which a multinational firm makes an equity-
financed overseas investment that lasts for n years, producing annual returns of r   1   *  , in

which ρ is the pretax foreign rate of return, τ* is the foreign tax rate, and r therefore the after-
foreign-tax foreign rate of return. The foreign tax rate is assumed to be lower than the domestic
tax rate. The foreign affiliate reinvests its profits every year, and at the end of n years the
marginal product of capital falls, reducing the incentive to reinvest abroad and prompting the
firm to repatriate its foreign profits together with its initial investment. A firm investing $1

initially will have accumulated 1  r  by the end of n years, of which, upon repatriation, all but
                                               n



$1 will be taxable by the home country. The home country imposes a tax at rate τ on repatriated
foreign profits, grossed up to include the creditable foreign taxes available on these profits, so
the after-tax funds available to the domestic parent company at the end of n years is:

                        1       1  r  n  1  1  
                                                            1 
                                                                      1  r  
                                                                              n    * 
                                                                                            .
                        1   *                        1   *             1   *             (1)

        It is useful to consider a home country tax system that provides deferral and foreign tax
credits, and has other features that subsidize foreign investment at rate s and thereby effectively
reduce the cost of a $1 foreign investment to (1-s). The firm’s alternative to foreign investment is
to invest the same $(1-s) domestically, earning an annual after-tax return of  , which by the end

of n years is 1  s 1    . Equating foreign and domestic returns produces:
                           n




                                                   1  s  1   *     * 
                               1  r   1                       
                                      n            n
                                                                                  .
                                                       1            1                          (2)

Foreign investment is dynamically inefficient if g > r, in which g is the growth rate of the
economy, and therefore also the growth rate of foreign investment on a balanced growth path;

this condition is equivalent to 1  g   1  r  , which, from equation (2), implies that:
                                           n           n




                                                   1  s  1   *     * 
                               1  g   1                       
                                       n           n
                                                                                  .
                                                       1            1                          (3)


                                                           9
        Expression (3) identifies conditions under which deferral and the foreign tax credit can
together support dynamically inefficient foreign investment levels even in the absence of policies
that reduce the cost of foreign investment by s. Setting s = 0, (3) implies:

                                1 g 
                                        n

                                             
                                                  * 
                                                               
                                                                  1 
                                          1               1           .
                                1           1   *   1   n                           (4)

Since    * by assumption, (4) implies that g   is a necessary condition for dynamically
inefficient foreign investment. As the investment period (n) lengthens, the extent to which g must
exceed  in order to support dynamically inefficient investment levels declines, reflecting that
as the benefits of tax deferral increase firms are willing to undertake more marginal foreign
investments. Regardless of the length of time over which home country taxes are deferred,
however, foreign investment will not be dynamically inefficient unless the growth rate of the
economy exceeds the domestic opportunity cost of funds.

        The potential availability of policies that reduce the cost of foreign investment by s
broadens the range of cases in which foreign investment can be dynamically inefficient. What
value of s is sufficient to satisfy (3) and therefore support dynamically inefficient foreign
investment levels? This requires:

                              s  1
                                             
                                                *
                                                               1  g  1   
                                                             
                                                                         n

                                                                      
                                     1    1            1    1   
                                           *             n                    * .

                                                                                                    (5)

        In using (5) to identify the magnitude of the required s, it is helpful to start by considering
the case in which the growth rate of the economy equals the firm’s opportunity cost of foreign
investment; then g   , and (5) simplifies to:

                                       s
                                              1  1
                                                    *
                                                                         
                                                                        .
                                          1     1   
                                                    *                n
                                                                                                  (6)

This case can be further simplified to a setting of very short-lived investments (n = 1). In this
                          *  
case, a very small s                       is sufficient to encourage dynamically inefficient
                      1    1    
                                       *



investment levels. As the discount rate that firms use to evaluate foreign investments is just
equal to the economy’s growth rate, firms will undertake investments that are just at the margin

                                                        10
of being dynamically inefficient even in the absence of an explicit subsidy. Starting from this
knife-edged point, any value of s that more than offsets the home country tax on one-period
returns is all that is required to support dynamically inefficient investment.

        As the investment period lengthens, the s necessary to encourage dynamically inefficient
investment grows; in the limit as n becomes very large, the required s equals the domestic tax
                                                      *  
burden on a dollar of repatriated foreign profits              . Almost all of the cash flows received
                                                   1    
                                                           *



from a long-lived foreign investment are ultimately subject to home country taxation; said
another way, the present value of the firm’s savings from the nontaxation of the portion of
returns constituting return of paid-in equity diminishes over time to insignificance. Since the
dollar originally invested abroad is therefore effectively taxed as a dividend, it is necessary for s
to exceed the home country tax rate on foreign source dividends in order to induce dynamically
inefficient investment. To the degree that deferral of home country taxation encourages firms to
avoid repatriation and lengthen foreign investment periods – as many studies, including Desai,
Foley and Hines (2001), seem to indicate – then policies that reduce the cost of foreign
investment by larger amounts are necessary to support dynamically inefficient investment levels.

        Departing from the case in which g   further illustrates the efficiency consequences of
different levels of s. Inspection of (5) indicates that higher values of  increase the s necessary
to support dynamically inefficient investment, whereas higher rates of g reduce it. When   g ,
firms have high opportunity costs of funds that discourage dynamically inefficient investment.
This condition appears to be empirically salient, as there is ample evidence that the opportunity
cost of funds for the U.S. corporate sector exceeded the growth rate of the U.S. economy during
the postwar period. For example, Fama and French (1999) calculate annual after-tax inflation-
adjusted investment returns earned by U.S. corporations between 1950 and 1996, reporting
values that range between 6.0 and 7.8 percent, depending on the estimation method. By contrast,
the U.S. national income and product accounts (available at www.bea.gov) indicate that inflation-
adjusted (chain weighted) U.S. GDP grew at a compound annual rate of 3.4 percent between the
same years. Consequently, significant tax subsidies would have been necessary to encourage
dynamically inefficient foreign investment over this period.



                                                   11
       What form might such tax subsidies take? Some studies, including Grubert and Mutti
(2001), Grubert (2001), and Gravelle (2009), argue that the foreign tax credit, deferral, expense
allocation, and source of income rules effectively subsidize U.S. direct investment abroad. For
example, the ability of taxpayers to treat some or all of U.S. export income as having foreign
source, thereby making it untaxed for taxpayers who otherwise have excess foreign tax credits,
and a similar treatment for royalty income for exploitation of U.S.-owned intangible property in
foreign counties, is sometimes characterized as a subsidy for the foreign operations that generate
the excess foreign tax credits. In addition, U.S. taxpayers are entitled to claim U.S. tax
deductions for some U.S. expenses that contribute to the production of foreign income that is
lightly taxed by the United States, and some argue that this too effectively subsidizes foreign
income production.

       It is certainly the case that the United States has many tax provisions that influence
effective tax burdens on foreign income, though it should be noted that Desai and Hines (2004)
offer evidence of significant U.S. tax burdens – in the neighborhood of $50 billion annually – on
U.S. direct investment abroad. The empirical exercise of evaluating cash flows presented below
effectively considers the cumulative effect of all tax and other policies that influence levels of
direct investment abroad. Evidence of dynamic inefficiency would suggest that deferral, the
foreign tax credit, and various other tax provisions combine to support inefficiently high foreign
investment levels.

2.4    Dynamic Efficiency and Asset Ownership

       Foreign investment is dynamically inefficient if it generates a sufficiently low rate of
return that the economy would be able to have greater resources available for domestic
consumption every year by reducing its foreign investment level. It is important that dynamic
efficiency is defined in terms of consumption possibilities, as this criterion can differ
significantly from the efficiency measure that comes from the exercise of comparing home
country returns to one dollar of foreign investment with home country returns to one dollar of
domestic investment. The latter comparison is the basis of the capital export neutrality analysis,
as elaborated by Musgrave (1963) and Horst (1980), which implicitly assumes that the cost of
foreign investment is that the invested resources are thereby made unavailable to the domestic
economy.


                                                 12
       The reality is that most foreign direct investment takes the form of acquisitions of
existing companies, and the impact of foreign investment largely takes the form of changing the
ownership of capital assets, as noted by Desai and Hines (2003). For example, greater direct
investment abroad by U.S. parent companies can be associated with greater foreign direct
investment in the United States, since potential U.S. targets or other investment opportunities not
chosen by U.S. investors who instead commit their funds abroad may as a consequence be
capitalized upon by foreign firms. In such a setting, tax-induced changes to levels of direct
investment abroad need not affect the size of the U.S. capital stock, but instead will influence the
identity of who owns capital within and without the United States, and thereby also affect rates
of return to those investments. Furthermore, even for U.S. firms investing abroad, the evidence
offered by Desai, Foley and Hines (2009) and others suggests that greater foreign investment
levels are associated with expanded domestic investments.

       The cash flow analysis used to evaluate the dynamic efficiency of foreign investment
applies with equal force to cases of shifting capital ownership. From the standpoint of the United
States, the after-tax rate of return to domestic ownership of capital assets is the alternative to
foreign investment returns, and this is the discount rate that firms use to evaluate investments.
Abel et al. (1989) report evidence that the U.S. corporate sector is dynamically efficient,
implying that the discount rates used by U.S. firms to value their investments produces
investment levels that support dynamically efficient capital stocks. Consequently, foreign
investments that appear dynamically efficient from a cash flow standpoint are also efficient
compared to the alternative of changing ownership.

3.     Testing the Dynamic Efficiency of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad

       Data on U.S. direct investment abroad are available to measure the extent to which
foreign investment is a net sink or source of U.S. funds, corresponding to the Abel et al. (1989)
metric of dynamic efficiency as applied to foreign investment. These data are provided by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce, based on annual surveys of
U.S. multinational companies, and are available at www.bea.gov. The implication of the Abel et
al. (1989) analysis is that, if foreign investment generates returns that exceed the resources it
absorbs, then investment is dynamically efficient; otherwise, it is not.


                                                  13
3.1      Evidence on U.S. Firms Investing Abroad

         Column 1 of Table 1 presents annual information for repatriated earnings of foreign
affiliates owned at least 10 percent by U.S. persons, the 10 percent ownership criterion
corresponding to the threshold for direct investment. All of the entries in Table 1 are current
dollars. The reporting of repatriated earnings differs according to the organizational form of
foreign affiliates. Repatriated earnings include dividend repatriations from foreign subsidiaries
plus all earnings of unincorporated (branch) affiliates. Figures for repatriated earnings make no
adjustment for withholding taxes imposed by foreign governments on cross-border flows. Data
for repatriated earnings are available at an annual frequency starting only in 1982, so Table 1
presents data for 1982–2010; the 2010 figure is preliminary.

         Column 2 of Table 1 presents annual U.S. net equity investments in foreign affiliates
owned at least 10 percent by U.S. persons; they are called equity outflows. Equity capital
outflows occur when a U.S. parent increases its equity investment in one of its existing foreign
affiliates or makes a new equity investment in a foreign business enterprise, either by acquiring
an existing foreign business or by establishing a new one. Equity capital outflows are reduced
when a U.S. parent reduces its equity interest in an existing affiliate.2 Equity outflows do not
include the reinvested earnings of incorporated affiliates, but they do include the reinvested
earnings of branch affiliates; these earnings are treated in the statistics as though they were
repatriated to the U.S. parent company then invested anew in the foreign operations. Branches
make up only a small fraction of all affiliates.

         Column 3 of Table 1 presents the difference between distributed earnings and equity
outflows. In 22 of these 29 years the difference is positive, reflecting that distributed earnings
exceeded equity outflows, or that the United States received greater returns than it invested
abroad. Not surprisingly, the years in which the difference is negative are those in which U.S.
direct investment abroad shows particular strength, such as the period at the end of the 1990s.
The amounts by which equity outflows exceed distributed earnings in the seven years in which
this difference is positive tend to be rather modest compared to amounts by which distributed
earnings exceed equity outflows in other years. It is possible to calculate the net present value of

2
 As an illustration, if a U.S. firm invests 100 in a Spanish affiliate in year 1, and sells the affiliate to a German
acquirer for 300 cash in year 8, then the United States has a capital outflow of 100 in year 1 and a negative capital
outflow of 300 in year 8.

                                                          14
the differences over the 1982–2010 period, measured in 2010 dollars using nominal U.S. GDP as
the relevant deflator. This calculation implicitly takes the growth rate of U.S. GDP to be the
discount factor, which is consistent with the theory that underlies the dynamic efficiency
calculations of Abel et al. (1989). By this measure, U.S. parent companies received $2.951
trillion of distributed earnings from their foreign affiliates over 1982–2010, and had only $1.817
of net equity outflows, for a difference of $1.134 trillion. The distributed earnings of the foreign
operations of U.S. companies were 162 percent of net equity outflows over this period,
producing a sizeable net surplus.

       Panel A of Figure 1 depicts cumulative discounted distributed earnings and equity
outflows over the 1982–2010 period. The solid locus in the figure represents the cumulative sum
of distributed earnings scaled by the ratio of nominal 2010 U.S. GDP to nominal U.S. GDP at the
time of earning distribution, and the dotted locus represents the cumulative sum of scaled equity
outflows. It is clear from the figure that the difference between cumulative distributed earnings
and cumulative equity outflows is positive in every year and generally growing over time.

       Data identifying distributed earnings and net equity outflows are not available annually
prior to 1982, though other measures of earnings and investment are. Column 1 of Table 2
presents the sum of net interest receipts and distributed earnings received from foreign affiliates
owned at least 10 percent by U.S. persons for each year starting in 1950. Distributed earnings
are defined in the same way as in the calculation underlying Column 1 of Table 1. Net interest
receipts equal the difference between interest received by U.S. parent companies from their
foreign affiliates and interest paid by U.S. parent companies to their foreign affiliates. In
practice, U.S. parent companies receive considerably more interest from their foreign affiliates
than they pay, which is why the entries in Column 1 of Table 2 for 1982–2010 regularly exceed
the corresponding entries in Column 1 of Table 1.

       Column 2 of Table 2 presents the sum of net equity investments and other intercompany
outflows to foreign affiliates owned at least 10 percent by U.S. persons for each year from 1950–
2010. Net equity investments are defined in the same way as in the calculation underlying
Column 2 of Table 1. Other intercompany outflows are annual differences in net intercompany
indebtedness between parent companies and their foreign affiliates. Thus, for example, if a U.S.
parent company loans its foreign affiliate 100, then other intercompany outflows increases by


                                                  15
100; whereas if a foreign affiliate loans its U.S. parent company 25, other intercompany outflows
declines by 25.

       Column 3 of Table 2 presents differences between the sum of distributed earnings and net
interest receipts and the sum of equity investments and other intercompany outflows. In 49 of
these 61 years the difference is positive, reflecting that the United States received greater returns
in dividends and interest than it invested abroad in the form of equity and debt. This series for
1982–2010 resembles the pattern in Column 3 of Table 1, reflecting the relative size of the
equity components of investments and returns compared to the debt components. The amounts
by which equity and debt outflows exceed distributed earnings and net interest in the 12 years in
which this difference is positive tend to be of modest magnitude compared to the amounts by
which equity and debt returns exceed equity and debt outflows in other years. The present value
of dividends and interest received from foreign affiliates over 1950–2010, taking the growth rate
of U.S. GDP to be the discount rate, was $5.461 trillion, whereas the present value of equity and
debt outflows was $3.347 trillion, for a difference of $2.114 trillion. This is a significant surplus:
returns from debt and equity investments over this period were 163 percent of net debt and
equity investments, a ratio of returns to investment that is very similar to that for just the equity
component of investment over 1982–2010. Panel B of Figure 1 depicts cumulative returns and
investments from 1950–2010, using the same scaling as in the figure in Panel A. As is evident
from this figure, total investment returns consistently exceed total investment levels.

3.2    Interpreting the Evidence

       The evidence indicates that U.S. parent companies received considerably more from their
foreign affiliates in investment returns than the affiliates absorbed in investment resources,
thereby suggesting that U.S. direct investment abroad is dynamically efficient. There are,
however, some considerations that may complicate the evaluation of this evidence. The first is
that the analysis of dynamic efficiency is typically conducted by considering balanced growth
paths. The foreign investment profile of the United States, and that of most other capital
exporting nations, may not correspond to steady state growth, since foreign investment has
expanded rapidly in recent decades, a consequence not only of globalization but also of foreign
economic growth rates that exceed the U.S. rate. Equity and other intercompany outflows
averaged 0.2114 percent of U.S. GDP over the 1950–1959 decade, but averaged 0.7623 percent


                                                  16
of U.S. GDP over the 2000–2009 decade. Since foreign investment rose significantly as a
fraction of the U.S. economy, even a highly efficient foreign investment sector might absorb
resources as firms reinvest their substantial profits abroad rather than immediately repatriating
them to the United States. The relatively rapid growth of foreign economies therefore biases the
cash flow test in favor of finding that foreign investment is dynamically inefficient, a
consideration that strengthens the inference that the foreign investment sector is dynamically
efficient.

         A second important consideration is that the available data reflect reported earnings and
investment levels, which include any tax-motivated adjustment of these items. One possibility is
that the rate of return to foreign investment is overstated by U.S. firms that adjust the location of
taxable income in order to report greater foreign profits at the expense of domestic profits.3 The
concern is that, as a result of this adjustment, foreign investment that is otherwise of limited
profitability, and possibly even dynamically inefficient, could appear to be dynamically efficient.

         Careful consideration of taxpayer incentives suggests that relocation of taxable income
by U.S. taxpayers is unlikely to undermine the cash flow test of dynamic efficiency. Firms with
lightly taxed foreign profits do not have incentives to relocate taxable income from the United
States to a low-tax foreign location if the foreign profits are to be immediately repatriated to the
United States, since they will then be subject to U.S. taxation;4 furthermore, such income
relocation is typically costly. Hence firms have incentives to relocate taxable income out of the
United States and into low-tax foreign locations only when they also have incentives to defer
repatriation – which, as Hartman notes, requires that the after-foreign-tax foreign rate of return
exceed the domestic discount rate. Furthermore, as the discussion of the Fama and French (1999)

3
  There is ample evidence that reported rates of return to U.S. investment are higher in low-tax foreign locations than
in high-tax foreign locations (e.g., Grubert and Mutti, 1991; Hines and Rice, 1994; Desai, Foley and Hines, 2003;
Clausing, 2009), which, together with the relatively high U.S. corporate tax rate, raises the possibility that the
reported profitability of U.S. direct investment abroad includes the effect of tax-motivated reallocation of taxable
income.
4
  There are some firms with excess foreign tax credits that would benefit from relocating taxable income from the
United States to low-tax foreign locations even if U.S. taxation of the foreign income would not be deferred, since
such firms would benefit from increasing their foreign tax credit limits and thereby deploying some of their excess
foreign tax credits to offset U.S. tax liabilities on the relocated income. Since the U.S. tax rate significantly exceeds
foreign tax rates, this is an uncommon situation; furthermore, U.S. firms have excess foreign tax credits only when
their foreign tax rates exceed the U.S. tax rate, a scenario that does not usually raise concerns that there might be
inefficiently high levels of foreign investment, or that large amounts of taxable income are allocated outside of the
United States for tax purposes. It is nevertheless the case that some U.S. firms with excess foreign tax credits benefit
from reallocating U.S. income to low-tax foreign jurisdictions, and the aggregate data reflect, in part, their behavior.

                                                           17
evidence indicates, the domestic discount rate exceeds the growth rate of the economy; so firms
have incentives to relocate taxable income out of the United States only when their foreign rates
of return exceed the growth rate of the economy.

       This reasoning implies that tax-motivated income reallocation inflates measured returns
to foreign investment only if foreign investment is dynamically efficient, which makes it possible
to use measured returns to test for dynamic efficiency. If U.S. direct investment abroad is
dynamically inefficient, then true foreign rates of return are low and firms do not have incentives
to defer repatriation, nor do they have incentives to reallocate taxable income from the United
States to low-tax foreign locations, so measured foreign returns are accurate representations. If
instead U.S. direct investment abroad is dynamically efficient, then foreign rates of return are
high and firms may have incentives to reallocate taxable income from the United States, as a
result of which measured cash flows could overstate the profitability of foreign investment. But
since this possibility arises only when foreign investment is dynamically efficient, the use of
reported foreign returns does not produce a misleading test of dynamic efficiency.

       Another consideration that arises in interpreting the evidence is that the data reflect actual
investment returns rather than the expected risk-adjusted returns envisioned by the theory of
dynamic efficiency. Consequently, foreign exchange gains and losses are included in reported
returns, as is any risk premium associated with foreign exchange exposure. It is not clear to what
extent U.S. firms were exposed to foreign exchange risk over the postwar period, and whether in
practice they experienced gains or losses from currency movements. The magnitude of the risk
premium is a function of the degree to which exposure to currency risks is priced, a topic of
considerable debate; as exchange rates are prices, it is commonly assumed that there is no
systematic risk associated with bearing currency risk, and consequently such risk is not priced to
generate returns – though models with unequal hedging demands can give rise to currency risk
premia, and the evidence on uncovered interest parity is consistent with there being a return to
holding currencies. U.S. firms investing abroad also face business and political risks that are
reflected in the valuation of these investments and in efforts by the firms to hedge these risks, as
considered by, among others, Desai, Foley and Hines (2008). As with currency risks, it is
difficult to know the extent to which realized returns reflect the outcomes of risky business
investments, and the risk premia associated with them. As long as realized returns do not differ
systematically from expected returns to foreign investment, then the mere existence of risk does

                                                 18
not undermine the use of reported returns to evaluate dynamic efficiency; and it is hard to
conceive of scenarios in which riskiness alone would account for the large reported differences
between foreign investment levels and foreign investment returns.

       Finally, the analysis treats repatriated income as the only U.S. return to its direct
investment abroad. If foreign and domestic activities are complementary within firms, as the
evidence offered by Desai, Foley and Hines (2009) suggests, then some of the return to foreign
investment may appear in enhanced returns to domestic activity, which is not captured by
repatriations.

3.3    Foreign Direct Investment in the United States

       There is nothing intrinsic to the process of foreign direct investment that makes its
outcome dynamically efficient. To illustrate this point, it is instructive to compare the evidence
of investment returns and investment levels for U.S. direct investment abroad to parallel
evidence for foreign direct investment in the United States. Table 3 presents data on distributed
earnings and net equity outflows for foreign investors in the United States; cumulative earnings
and outflows (discounted by U.S. GDP growth rates) are depicted in Panel A of Figure 2. This
pattern is clearly distinguishable from that for U.S. direct investment abroad, as net equity
outflows exceed cumulative earnings every year. A very similar pattern appears in Table 4 using
the broader investment and return concepts employed in Table 2 for U.S. direct investment
abroad, that include returns to intercompany loans; these cumulative returns and investment
levels are depicted in Panel B of Figure 2.

       The evidence for foreign direct investment in the United States serves as a reminder that
the method of comparing investment returns and new investment levels need not generate the
conclusion that investment is dynamically efficient, since foreign direct investment in the United
States appears not to be. A number of studies, including Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005), Gourinchas
and Rey (2007), Habib (2010), and Gourinchas, Rey and Govillat (2010), measure and attempt to
explain the low rate of return that foreign investors earn on portfolio as well as direct investment
in the United States, describing the apparent anomaly as “exorbitant privilege” attributable to the
market power of the United States in world capital markets. Other potential explanations include
the possibility that foreign governments effectively subsidize investment in the United States, or
that foreign investment returns in the United States are systematically understated.

                                                 19
4.     Conclusion

       U.S. direct investment abroad generates sizeable positive cash flows measured net of new
outflows – not quite every year, but in most years, and in aggregate amounts that exceed $1
trillion for equity investments from 1982–2010 and $2 trillion for equity and debt investments
from 1950–2010. These large net cash flows imply that U.S. foreign investment is dynamically
efficient, so reduced investment today entails fewer income flows from abroad in the future.
Consequently, concerns that U.S. tax policies provide subsidies that lead to dynamically
inefficient foreign investment levels appear to be misplaced.

       The finding that direct investment abroad is dynamically efficient should not be
interpreted either as an endorsement of current U.S. tax policy or a claim that current policy is
efficient in all respects. The impact, and appropriate design, of the taxation of foreign income has
undergone a reevaluation in recent years, with new considerations, and previously unidentified
distortions, taking on great significance. From the standpoint of a capital-exporting country in a
growing world economy, the consequences of too much or too little foreign investment are
potentially quite large, reflecting the costs either of allocating resources to foreign investments
generating small returns or the foregone opportunity to earn significant annual positive cash
flows that might then be redeployed. Further consideration of the impact of tax policies on the
structure, conduct, and performance of foreign investment are likely to raise other issues, and
with them, tests of other aspects of efficiency.




                                                   20
References

Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers, and Richard J. Zeckhauser,
       1989. “Assessing dynamic efficiency: Theory and evidence.” Review of Economic
       Studies 56, 1–20.

Allais, Maurice, 1962. “The Influence of the Capital-Output Ratio on Real National Income.”
        Econometrica, 30, 700–728.

Cass, David, 1965. “Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation.”
       Review of Economic Studies, 32, 233–240.

Cass, David, 1972. “On Capital Overaccumulation in the Aggregative, Neoclassical Model of
       Economic Growth: A Complete Characterization.” Journal of Economic Theory, 4, 200–
       223.

Clausing, Kimberly A., 2009. “Multinational Firm Tax Avoidance and Tax Policy.” National
       Tax Journal, 62, 703–725.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., 2001. “Repatriation Taxes and Dividend
       Distortions.” National Tax Journal, 54, 829–851.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., 2003. “Chains of Ownership, Regional
       Tax Competition, and Foreign Direct Investment.” In Herrmann, Heinz and Robert
       Lipsey, (eds.), Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial
       Countries, 61–98. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., 2008. “Capital Structure with Risky
       Foreign Investment.” Journal of Financial Economics, 88, 534–553.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., 2009. “Domestic Effects of the Foreign
       Activities of U.S. Multinationals.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1,
       181–203.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., 2003. “Evaluating International Tax Reform.” National
       Tax Journal, 56, 487–502.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., 2004. “Old Rules and New Reality: Corporate Tax
       Policy in a Global Setting.” National Tax Journal, 57, 937–960.

Diamond, Peter A., 1965. “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model.” American Economic
      Review, 55, 1126–1150.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1999. “The Corporate Cost of Capital and the Return
      to Corporate Investment.” Journal of Finance, 54, 1939-1967.

                                               21
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey, 2007. “From World Banker to World Venture
      Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” In Clarida, Richard
      (ed.), G-7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, 11–55.
      University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot, 2010. “Exorbitant Privilege and
      Exorbitant Duty.” Discussion Paper No. 2010–E–20, Bank of Japan Institute of Monetary
      and Economic Studies, Japan.

Gravelle, Jane G., 2009. “International Corporate Income Tax Reform: Issues and Proposals.”
       Florida Tax Review, 9, 469–496.

Grubert, Harry, 2001. “Enacting Dividend Exemption and Tax Revenue.” National Tax Journal,
       54, 811–827.

Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, 1991. “Taxes, Tariffs and Transfer Pricing in Multinational
       Corporate Decision Making.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 73, 285–293.

Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, 2001. Taxing International Business Income: Dividend
       Exemption Versus the Current System. American Enterprise Institute Press, Washington,
       DC.

Habib, Maurizio Michael, 2010. “Excess Returns on Net Foreign Assets: The Exorbitant
       Privilege from a Global Perspective.” Working Paper No. 1158, European Central Bank,
       Germany.

Hartman, David G., 1985. “Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment.” Journal of Public
      Economics, 26, 107–121.

Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice, 1994. “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and
       American Business.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1149–1182.

Horst, Thomas, 1980. “A Note on the Optimal Taxation of International Investment Income.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94, 793–798.

Koopmans, Tjalling C., 1965. “On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth.” In The
     Econometric Approach to Development Planning. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Musgrave (Richman), Peggy Brewer, 1963. Taxation of Foreign Investment Income: An
      Economic Analysis. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth S. Rogoff , 2005. “Global Current Account Imbalances and
       Exchange Rate Adjustments.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 67–123.




                                              22
Phelps, Edmund S., 1961. “The Golden Rule of Accumulation: A Fable for Growthmen.”
       American Economic Review, 51, 638–643.

Phelps, Edmund S., 1965. “Second Essay on the Golden Rule of Accumulation.” American
       Economic Review, 55, 793–814.

Robinson, Joan , 1962. “A Neoclassical Theorem.” Review of Economic Studies, 29, 219–226.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1958. “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the
      Social Contrivance of Money.” Journal of Political Economy, 66, 467–482.

Swan, Trevor W., 1964. “Of Golden Ages and Production Functions.” In Berrill, Kenneth (ed.),
      Economic Development with Special Reference to East Asia, 3–16. St Martin’s Press,
      New York, NY.

United States Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation, 2011. Background Information on Tax
       Expenditure Analysis and Historical Survey of Tax Expenditure Estimates, JCX 15-11.
       U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.




                                             23
                                                                                          Figure 1
                        U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Measures of Cummulative Scaled Earnings and Cummulative Scaled Investment
Note: This figure presents cummulative scaled measures of earnings and investment for U.S. direct investment abroad. Annual measures are scaled by the ratio of 2010 US GDP to current year US
GDP, and then measures are cummulated across prior years. See Appendix Table 1 for definintions.

Panel A: Cummulative Scaled Distributed Earnings and Cummulatve Scaled Equity Outflows
        3,500,000

        3,000,000

        2,500,000

        2,000,000

        1,500,000                                                                                                                                           Cummulative Scaled
                                                                                                                                                            Distributed Earnings
        1,000,000

          500,000                                                                                                                                           Cummulative Scaled Equity
                                                                                                                                                            Outflows
                 0
                      1982   1984    1986    1988     1990    1992     1994    1996     1998    2000     2002    2004     2006    2008 2010/p




Panel B: Cummulative Interest and Distributed Earnings and Cummulative Equity and Intercompany Outflows
       6,000,000

       5,000,000

       4,000,000

       3,000,000                                                                                                                                       Cummulative Scaled Interest and
                                                                                                                                                       Distributed Earnings
       2,000,000
                                                                                                                                                        Cummulative Scaled Equity and
       1,000,000                                                                                                                                       Intercompany Outflows

                0
                     1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010/p
                                                                                           Figure 2
                     Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S.: Measures of Cummulative Scaled Earnings and Cummulative Scaled Investment
Note: This figure presents cummulative scaled measures of earnings and investment for foreign direct investment in the U.S. Annual measures are scaled by the ratio of 2010 US GDP to current
year US GDP, and then measures are cummulated across prior years. See Appendix Table 1 for definintions.


Panel A: Cummulative Scaled Distributed Earnings and Cummulatve Scaled Equity Outflows
        4,000,000
        3,500,000
        3,000,000
        2,500,000
        2,000,000
                                                                                                                                                             Cummulative Scaled
        1,500,000                                                                                                                                            Distributed Earnings
        1,000,000                                                                                                                                            Cummulative Scaled Equity
                                                                                                                                                             Inflows
          500,000
                 0
                      1982   1984    1986     1988    1990     1992     1994    1996     1998    2000     2002    2004     2006    2008 2010/p




Panel B: Cummulative Scaled Interest and Distributed Earnings and Cummulative Scaled Equity and Intercompany Outflows
       6,000,000

       5,000,000

       4,000,000

       3,000,000                                                                                                                                        Cummulative Scaled Interest and
                                                                                                                                                        Distributed Earnings
       2,000,000
                                                                                                                                                         Cummulative Scaled Equity and
       1,000,000                                                                                                                                        Intercompany Inflows

                 0
                     1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010/p
                                                                 Table 1
                        U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Measures of Earnings and Investment
Notes: This table displays measures of annual earnings and investment for U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. All values are in millions of
current U.S. dollars. See Appendix Table 1 for definitions of each measure. 2010 data are preliminary.

        Year                   Distributed Earnings                      Equity Outflows                           Difference
                                         (1)                                    (2)                               (3) = (1) - (2)
        1982                           23,058                                 9,708                                   13,350
        1983                           18,628                                 7,249                                   11,379
        1984                           18,687                                 2,394                                   16,293
        1985                           19,780                                 -1,672                                  21,452
        1986                           26,077                                 1,147                                   24,930
        1987                           25,264                                 4,868                                   20,396
        1988                           41,744                                 -6,662                                  48,406
        1989                           43,257                                 6,395                                   36,862
        1990                           36,553                                 8,739                                   27,814
        1991                           33,945                                17,682                                   16,263
        1992                           34,441                                14,647                                   19,794
        1993                           28,847                                24,565                                    4,282
        1994                           44,032                                33,659                                   10,373
        1995                           38,891                                40,484                                   -1,593
        1996                           45,623                                27,532                                   18,091
        1997                           55,196                                40,792                                   14,404
        1998                           56,742                                72,447                                  -15,705
        1999                           62,536                                98,929                                  -36,393
        2000                           52,863                                78,040                                  -25,177
        2001                           53,234                                60,942                                   -7,708
        2002                           54,600                                42,707                                   11,893
        2003                           59,460                                35,484                                   23,976
        2004                           81,555                               133,277                                  -51,722
        2005                          298,712                                61,937                                  236,775
        2006                          101,686                                48,970                                   52,716
        2007                          132,833                               200,850                                  -68,017
        2008                          155,414                               145,531                                    9,883
        2009                           99,393                                18,439                                   80,954
       2010/p                         104,403                                46,741                                   57,662
                                                                 Table 2
                U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Alternative Measures of Earnings and Investment
Notes: This table displays measures of annual earnings and investment for U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. All values are in millions of
current U.S. dollars. See Appendix Table 1 for definitions of each measure. 2010 data are preliminary.

                              Interest and Distributed               Equity and Intercompany
        Year                          Earnings                              Outflows                               Difference
                                         (1)                                   (2)                                (3) = (1) - (2)
        1950                            1,294                                  621                                      673
        1951                            1,492                                  508                                      984
        1952                            1,420                                  852                                      568
        1953                            1,442                                  735                                      707
        1954                            1,725                                  667                                     1,058
        1955                            1,912                                  823                                     1,089
        1956                            2,171                                 1,951                                     220
        1957                            2,249                                 2,442                                    -193
        1958                            2,121                                 1,181                                     940
        1959                            2,206                                 1,372                                     834
        1960                            2,355                                 1,675                                     680
        1961                            2,768                                 1,599                                    1,169
        1962                            3,044                                 1,654                                    1,390
        1963                            3,129                                 1,976                                    1,153
        1964                            3,674                                 2,328                                    1,346
        1965                            3,963                                 3,468                                     495
        1966                            3,467                                 3,625                                    -158
        1967                            3,847                                 3,050                                     797
        1968                            4,152                                 2,855                                    1,297
        1969                            4,819                                 3,130                                    1,689
        1970                            4,992                                 4,413                                     579
        1971                            5,983                                 4,441                                    1,542
        1972                            6,416                                 3,214                                    3,202
        1973                            8,384                                 3,195                                    5,189
        1974                           11,379                                 1,275                                   10,104
        1975                            8,547                                 6,196                                    2,351
        1976                           11,303                                 4,253                                    7,050
        1977                           13,277                                 5,497                                    7,780
        1978                           14,115                                 4,713                                    9,402
        1979                           19,219                                 6,258                                   12,961
        1980                           20,129                                 2,205                                   17,924
        1981                           19,013                                -3,912                                   22,925
        1982                           21,185                                -3,729                                   24,914
        1983                           15,067                                -4,155                                   19,222
        1984                           14,357                                -4,562                                   18,919
        1985                           15,706                                 -777                                    16,483
        1986                           22,915                                 9,972                                   12,943
        1987                           22,954                                11,700                                   11,254
        1988                           40,443                                 4,525                                   35,918
        1989                           43,442                                24,908                                   18,534
        1990                           38,335                                 9,546                                   28,789
 1991     35,199    14,369    20,830
 1992     35,625    26,353     9,272
 1993     30,528    47,233   -16,705
 1994     46,338    49,164    -2,826
 1995     41,350    44,840    -3,490
 1996     47,814    37,193    10,621
 1997     57,311    46,791    10,520
 1998     59,802    98,482   -38,680
 1999     67,377   160,685   -93,308
 2000     58,235    65,608    -7,373
 2001     58,881    72,566   -13,685
 2002     60,320    69,190    -8,870
 2003     65,729    28,875    36,854
 2004     87,698   153,316   -65,618
 2005    304,854    46,551   258,303
 2006    107,474    27,580    79,894
 2007    140,229   183,511   -43,282
 2008    163,703   111,619    52,084
 2009    106,175    28,781    77,394
2010/p   110,169    29,753    80,416
                                                                 Table 3
                    Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S.: Measures of Earnings and Investment
Notes: This table displays measures of annual earnings and investment for Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S. All values are in millions of
current U.S. dollars. See Appendix Table 1 for definitions of each measure. 2010 data are preliminary.

        Year                    Distributed Earnings                       Equity Inflows                           Difference
                                         (1)                                     (2)                               (3) = (1) - (2)
        1982                            3,486                                   9,723                                  -6,237
        1983                            3,344                                   8,699                                  -5,355
        1984                            3,508                                  15,044                                 -11,536
        1985                            4,574                                  15,214                                 -10,640
        1986                            4,700                                  25,086                                 -20,386
        1987                            4,785                                  34,319                                 -29,534
        1988                            6,113                                  45,046                                 -38,933
        1989                            7,958                                  51,776                                 -43,818
        1990                            9,367                                  56,239                                 -46,872
        1991                            7,601                                  45,811                                 -38,210
        1992                            7,036                                  31,635                                 -24,599
        1993                            8,874                                  29,674                                 -20,800
        1994                           10,272                                  37,210                                 -26,938
        1995                           13,757                                  47,890                                 -34,133
        1996                           15,487                                  63,734                                 -48,247
        1997                           18,801                                  59,498                                 -40,697
        1998                           25,214                                 147,091                                -121,877
        1999                           33,906                                 221,562                                -187,656
        2000                           37,274                                 259,641                                -222,367
        2001                           25,410                                 140,901                                -115,491
        2002                           21,191                                 105,343                                 -84,152
        2003                           43,257                                  93,420                                 -50,163
        2004                           36,287                                  92,905                                 -56,618
        2005                           64,395                                  70,725                                  -6,330
        2006                           63,230                                 115,027                                 -51,797
        2007                           49,280                                 152,807                                -103,527
        2008                           43,047                                 261,583                                -218,536
        2009                           40,230                                  94,762                                 -54,532
       2010/p                          33,306                                  76,855                                 -43,549
                                                                 Table 4
            Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S.: Alternative Measures of Earnings and Investment
Notes: This table displays measures of annual earnings and investment for Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S. All values are in millions of
current U.S. dollars. See Appendix Table 1 for definitions of each measure. 2010 data are preliminary.

                              Interest and Distributed               Equity and Intercompany
        Year                          Earnings                               Inflows                                Difference
                                         (1)                                    (2)                                (3) = (1) - (2)
        1950                             169                                     80                                      89
        1951                             186                                     90                                      96
        1952                             181                                    131                                      50
        1953                             195                                    158                                      37
        1954                             176                                    124                                      52
        1955                             180                                    197                                      -17
        1956                             177                                    232                                      -55
        1957                             187                                    155                                      32
        1958                             213                                     98                                     115
        1959                             219                                    238                                      -19
        1960                             220                                    141                                      79
        1961                             194                                     73                                     121
        1962                             185                                    132                                      53
        1963                             223                                     -5                                     228
        1964                             202                                     -5                                     207
        1965                             298                                     57                                     241
        1966                             371                                     86                                     285
        1967                             381                                    251                                     130
        1968                             388                                    319                                      69
        1969                             417                                    832                                     -415
        1970                             441                                   1,030                                    -589
        1971                             621                                   -175                                     796
        1972                             715                                    380                                     335
        1973                             699                                   1,890                                   -1,191
        1974                             266                                   3,695                                   -3,429
        1975                            1,046                                  1,414                                    -368
        1976                            1,451                                  2,687                                   -1,236
        1977                            1,248                                  2,142                                    -894
        1978                            1,628                                  5,313                                   -3,685
        1979                            2,402                                  7,921                                   -5,519
        1980                            3,303                                 11,740                                   -8,437
        1981                            3,694                                 22,250                                  -18,556
        1982                            5,651                                 16,171                                  -10,520
        1983                            5,606                                 11,858                                   -6,252
        1984                            6,438                                 22,462                                  -16,024
        1985                            7,603                                 20,400                                  -12,797
        1986                            7,820                                 36,384                                  -28,564
        1987                            8,209                                 59,002                                  -50,793
        1988                           11,023                                 56,608                                  -45,585
        1989                           15,171                                 76,400                                  -61,229
        1990                           17,534                                 62,578                                  -45,044
 1991    16,046    41,483    -25,437
 1992    13,800    31,433    -17,633
 1993    15,005    58,424    -43,419
 1994    17,268    41,237    -23,969
 1995    21,893    49,351    -27,458
 1996    24,586    77,996    -53,410
 1997    27,983    90,634    -62,651
 1998    35,576   176,203   -140,627
 1999    49,309   285,316   -236,007
 2000    57,171   321,536   -264,365
 2001    46,634   200,870   -154,236
 2002    41,660    82,788    -41,128
 2003    59,464    49,463    10,001
 2004    50,225    96,437    -46,212
 2005    79,599    70,905     8,694
 2006    81,654   174,035    -92,381
 2007    73,955   216,031   -142,076
 2008    68,545   281,342   -212,797
 2009    65,525   106,222    -40,697
2010/p   57,964   101,326    -43,362
                                                           Appendix Table 1
                                                                Definitions
      Type of
                                Data item                                                  Definition
    Investment
                                                 For incorporated foreign affiliates, distributed earnings are dividends on common and
                                                 preferred stock held by U.S. parents. Distributions can be paid out of current or past earnings,
                                                 and earnings are U.S. parents’ shares in the net income of their foreign affiliates after
                         Distributed Earnings    provision for foreign income taxes and excluding capital gains or losses. For unicorporated
                                                 affiliates, distributed earnings equal U.S. parents’ shares in the net income of their foreign
                                                 affiliates after provision for foreign income taxes, excluding capital gains or losses.
                                                 Withholding taxes are not accounted for.

                                                 Interest measures interest paid by the foreign affiliate to the U.S. parent on loans made to the
                         Interest                affiliate by the parent net of interest received by the foreign affiliate from the U.S. parent
     U.S. Direct                                 group. U.S. and foreign withholding taxes and not accounted for.
 Investment Abroad
                                                 Equity outflows measure increases in equity capital outflows net of decreases in equity capital
                                                 outflows. Increases in equity capital outflows occur when a U.S. parent increases its equity
                                                 investment in one of its existing foreign affiliates or makes a new equity investment in a
                         Equity Outflows
                                                 foreign business enterprise, either by acquiring an existing foreign business or by establishing
                                                 a new one. Decreases in equity capital outflows occur when a U.S. parent reduces its equity
                                                 interest in an existing affiliate.
                                                 Equity and other intercompany outflows include equity outflows and intercompany debt
                         Equity and Other
                                                 outflows. Intercompany debt flows consist of the increase in foreign affiliates’ net
                         Intercompany Outflows
                                                 intercompany debt to U.S. parent groups.
                                                 For incorporated U.S. affiliates, distributed earnings are dividends on common and preferred
                                                 stock held by foreign parents. Distributions can be paid out of current or past earnings, and
                                                 earnings are foreign parents’ shares in the net income of their U.S. affiliates after provision for
                         Distributed Earnings    foreign income taxes and excluding capital gains or losses. For unicorporated affiliates,
                                                 distributed earnings equal foreign parents’ shares in the net income of their U.S. affiliates after
                                                 provision for foreign income taxes, excluding capital gains or losses. Withholding taxes are
                                                 not accounted for.

                                                 Interest measures interest paid by the U.S. affiliate to the foreign parent on loans made to the
                         Interest                affiliate by the parent net of interest received by the U.S. affiliate from the foreign parent
   Foreign Direct                                group. U.S. and foreign withholding taxes and not accounted for.
Investment in the U.S.
                                                 Equity inflows measure increases in equity capital inflows net of decreases in equity capital
                                                 inflows. Increases in equity capital inflows occur when a foreign parent increases its equity
                                                 investment in one of its existing U.S. affiliates or makes a new equity investment in a foreign
                         Equity Inflows
                                                 business enterprise, either by acquiring an existing foreign business or by establishing a new
                                                 one. Decreases in equity capital inflows occur when a foreign parent reduces its equity
                                                 interest in an existing U.S. affiliate.

                                                 Equity and other intercompany inflows include equity inflows and intercompany debt inflows.
                         Equity and Other
                                                 Intercompany debt flows consist of the increase in U.S. affiliates’ net intercompany debt to
                         Intercompany Inflows
                                                 foreign parent groups.
