NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC PREPARATION FOR RETIREMENT
Michael D. Hurd
Susann Rohwedder
Working Paper 17203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17203

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

We gratefully acknowledge research support from the Social Security Administration via the Michigan
Retirement Research Center (UM06-03and UM09-08), from the Department of Labor (J-9-P-2-0033),
and from the National Institute on Aging (P01AG08291 and P01AG022481). We thank Joanna Carroll
for excellent programming assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Economic Preparation for Retirement
Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder
NBER Working Paper No. 17203
July 2011
JEL No. E21,J14,J26
ABSTRACT
We define and estimate measures of economic preparation for retirement based on a complete inventory
of economic resources while taking into account the risk of living to advanced old age and the risk
of high out-of-pocket spending for health care services. We ask whether, in a sample of 66–69 year-olds,
observed economic resources could support with high probability a life-cycle consumption path anchored
at the initial level of consumption until the end of life. We account for taxes, widowing, differential
mortality and out-of-pocket health spending risk. We find that 71% of persons in our target age group
are adequately prepared according to our definitions, but there is substantial variation by observable
characteristics: 80% of married persons are adequately prepared compared with just 55% of single
persons. We estimate that a reduction in Social Security benefits of 30 percent would reduce the fraction
adequately prepared by 7.8 percentage points among married persons and by as much as 10.7 percentage
points among single persons.

Michael D. Hurd
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
mhurd@rand.org
Susann Rohwedder
RAND
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
susannr@rand.org

1. Introduction
The most common metric for assessing the adequacy of economic preparation for
retirement is the income replacement rate, the ratio of income after retirement to income
before retirement. This metric is usually applied without regard to family circumstances
or /to the complete portfolio of economic resources, particularly wealth. Thus, it is stated
that a single person or a couple is adequately prepared if their post-retirement income is
in some fixed ratio (such as 80%) to their pre-retirement income. However both
economic theory and common sense say that someone is adequately prepared if she is
able to maintain her level of economic well-being, which is not the same as maintaining
her level of income or some fixed proportion of income because of the accumulation and
decumulation of wealth.
Consumption is a better measure of well-being or utility than the level of income at
some particular point in time. But, the relationship of consumption after retirement to
consumption before retirement is not at all well measured by the relationship of income
after retirement to income before retirement, which is the income replacement ratio.
Consumption before retirement will typically be substantially less than income before
retirement because of taxes (and Social Security contributions) and work-related
expenses, but most importantly because of saving for retirement. Consumption after
retirement will typically be greater than income because of the ability to spend out of
saving. Furthermore, many retired households pay little or no taxes and make no Social
Security contributions. The implication is that income could change by a great deal at
retirement, yet consumption could be maintained.1
The overall goal of this paper is to assess economic preparation for retirement in a
way that addresses many of the deficiencies of the income replacement rate concept. We
will find whether shortly after retirement households have the financial resources needed
to finance a consumption plan from retirement through the end of life. The consumption
plan begins at an observed starting value for each household and follows a path whose
shape is determined by observed consumption change with age in panel data. We
classify a single person as being adequately prepared if he or she dies with positive
bequeathable wealth. A married person is adequately prepared if he or she dies with
positive wealth where he or she may die as a married person or as a surviving spouse.
Because the age of death is unknown and because wealth is not completely
annuitized, someone who dies unexpectedly early may have been adequately prepared ex
post, yet someone who survives to extreme old age will not have been adequately
prepared ex post. To account for this randomness we find via simulation the fraction of
times ex post a household was adequately prepared.
Economic resources are a combination of post-retirement income, housing wealth and
nonhousing wealth. The estimations and simulations account for mortality risk, and, in
the case of couples, the lifetime of the couple and the subsequent loss of returns-to-scale
in consumption at the death of the first spouse. They recognize that consumption need
not be constant with age. They incorporate the risk of large out-of-pocket spending on
1

An additional complicating factor is whether individuals have had children: if so, they will want to spend
relatively more of their lifetime income during their working lives and thus will reach retirement with less
wealth than someone who did not have children.

1

health care. We account for taxes which for some households substantially reduce
resources available for consumption.
Our main result is that about 70% of individuals age 66-69 are adequately financially
prepared for retirement. However, some individuals identified by education, sex and
marital status are not financially prepared, most notably single females who lack a high
school education: just 29% of that group is adequately prepared.
2. Data
Our analyses are based on data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and data
from the Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS). The HRS is a biennial
panel. Its first wave was conducted in 1992. The target population was the cohorts born
in 1931-1941 (Juster and Suzman, 1995). Additional cohorts were added in 1993 and
1998 so that in 1998 it represented the population from the cohorts of 1947 or earlier. In
2004 more new cohorts were added making the HRS representative of the population 51
or older. The HRS is very rich in content. In this study we take advantage of the detailed
information on economic resources, out-of-pocket medical expenditures, and longitudinal
information on survival.
The CAMS is a supplemental survey to the HRS that is administered to a random
subsample of HRS households. One of its main objectives is to elicit total household
spending over the preceding 12 months which can be linked to the rich information
collected in the HRS core survey on the same individuals and households. The first wave
of CAMS was collected in the Fall of 2001, and longitudinal follow-up surveys have
been conducted every two years since then. When HRS inducts a refresher cohort into
the survey, a random-subsample of households that are part of the refresher group are
also inducted into the CAMS. In this study we use data on household spending from the
first four waves of CAMS, spanning the period from 2001 through 2007.2 In the first two
waves the unit response rate in CAMS was in the high 70s and it was 72 percent in waves
3 and 4. This yields spending data for just under 3,700 HRS households on average in
each wave of CAMS.
With the CAMS, the HRS is the only general-purpose survey to attempt collecting a
detailed measure of total spending. The fact that CAMS is longitudinal and that the
spending data can be linked to the rich background information in the HRS core survey
make the data unique. While the HRS cannot afford the level of detail asked about in the
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which is the survey in the U.S. that collects the
most detailed and comprehensive information on total spending, CAMS nevertheless is
notable for a number of design features that enhance data quality of the spending
information.3 These features have generated high item response rates so that relatively
little information needs to be imputed to arrive at a measure of total spending for all
households.

2

We do not use data from CAMS 2009 because of the financial crisis. Observed consumption in CAMS
2009 was unusually low and that low level is unlikely to be maintained in the future. Anchoring baseline
consumption to that temporarily low level would under-estimate actual future spending and, hence, overestimate economic preparation for retirement.
3
See data appendix for details.

2

A natural validation exercise for the spending data in CAMS is to compare them to
the CEX. As we show in Hurd and Rohwedder (2009a) the totals are almost identical
among those 55-64. At older ages the CEX shows lower spending than the CAMS,
implying a much higher rate of saving for the older population than is consistent with
actual rates of change in wealth as observed in HRS panel data. We therefore believe
that the statistics from CAMS for the older population have greater validity.4
3. Methods
Our approach relies on simulating consumption paths over the remaining lifetime for
a sample of households observed shortly after retirement. We construct life-cycle
consumption paths for each household. Whereas a model based on a particular utility
function would specify that the slope of the consumption path depends on the interest
rate, the subjective time-rate of discount, mortality risk and utility function parameters,
we estimate these slopes directly from the data. Thus our estimations use the framework
of lifetime utility maximization but they are essentially nonparametric in that we allow
the consumption path to be determined directly by the data.
We estimate the consumption trajectories from the initial level of consumption near
retirement, which we observe directly in the CAMS data, and observed panel transitions
in consumption in CAMS waves 1 to 2, 2 to 3, and 3 to 4 (three transitions). Economic
resources at retirement consist of bequeathable wealth and annuities (Social Security
benefits, DB pensions benefits and actual annuities). We ask: can the resources support
the projected consumption path? Because lifetime is uncertain, and wealth is not typically
annuitized, we perform multiple simulations making random draws from mortality tables.
We find whether the resources will sustain the path at least until advanced old age where
the probability of survival is small. If that is the case, the household will not have under
saved ex ante. We investigate whether any shortfalls in resources are large or small by
finding the fraction of the sample that would have to reduce consumption by a large
percentage to meet the adequacy criterion of being able to finance consumption to
advanced old age.
We account for consumption of health care services on average in the CAMS data.
This category of consumption is part of the CAMS measurement; consequently, it helps
us determine a single person’s initial total level of consumption and the rate of change in
consumption with age. If there were no spending risk, out-of-pocket spending for health
care would need no further treatment. However, because of spending risk, a single
person’s actual consumption of health care services will differ from the average level by
a spending shock that has an expected value of zero, but which could be quite large. We
construct that shock from HRS data on out-of-pocket spending for health care services.
We do these calculations of the consumption trajectory modified by simulated health
care spending shocks for each single person in our CAMS sample who is in his or her
early retirement years.

4

Panel wealth change shows slowly declining wealth among couples after age 70. Among single persons,
wealth declines after age 70 but at a greater rate. CEX spending when combined with HRS after-tax
income would, in contradiction, predict steadily increasing wealth for couples and too little wealth decline
among single persons.

3

For couples the basic method is similar. However, the consumption path followed
while both spouses survive will differ from the consumption path of single persons, so it
is separately estimated from the CAMS data. The couple will follow that consumption
path as long as both spouses survive, and then the surviving spouse will switch to the
consumption path of a single person. The shape of the single’s path is estimated as
described above, but the level of consumption by the surviving spouse will depend on
returns-to-scale in consumption by the couple. At the death of the first spouse, the
surviving spouse reduces consumption to the level specified by the returns-to-scale
parameter. We assume a returns-to-scale parameter that is consistent with the literature
and with practice. For example, the poverty line specifies that a couple with 1.26 times
the income of a single person who is at the poverty line will also be at the poverty line.
This implies that consumption by the surviving spouse should be 79% of consumption by
the couple to equate effective consumption. Knowing the consumption path of the
surviving spouse we find the expected present value of consumption for the lifetime of
the couple and surviving spouse.
We assess adequacy of retirement resources in three ways. First, we compare
population averages of the expected present value of consumption with average resources
at retirement to find whether the cohort can finance the expected consumption path.
Second, we move from the cohort level to the household level to determine the fraction of
households that can finance with high probability their expected consumption path.
Third we find by how much a household would have to adjust consumption to keep the
chances of running out of wealth towards the end of the life cycle small.
4. Model for singles
In this section we develop the ideas discussed previously more formally. Suppose a
single person retires at age R . Call that t  0 . He or she retires with real annuity S0 and
nominal annuity P0 , the inflation rate is f , and the nominal interest rate F , which
implies a real interest rate r  F  f . Then the real annuity at some later time t is
P0
At  S0 
. When the only source of uncertainty is mortality risk (and ignoring
(1  f )t
any bequest motive), according to the lifecycle model a single person will choose optimal
consumption to satisfy
d ln ct 1
(1)
 ( r    ht )
t
dt
as long as bequeathable wealth is positive, where  t is local risk aversion (which in
general need not be constant), r is the fixed real interest rate,  is the subjective time
rate of discount, and ht is mortality risk. Because ht is approximately exponential, at
some (relatively young) age consumption will decline with age. The optimal consumption
level will be determined by adjusting the consumption path so that at the age when
consumption has declined to equal annuity income, age T , bequeathable wealth is zero.
At that point consumption will not drop further: it will equal annuities at all subsequent
ages. Figure 1 has an example of an optimal path. Initial consumption is 100, initial
wealth is 700 (right scale), annuities are 40. The consumption path is determined by

4

equation (1) for the values r  0.01,   0.01, and  t    1.3 . Mortality risk is for men
from the year 2000 life table. The area under the consumption path but above the annuity
path equals initial bequeathable wealth and consumption equals annuities at age T  86
when wealth becomes zero.
Figure 2 shows the consumption path that is also determined by equation (1), but
where initial consumption is 110. Wealth reaches zero at age 78 but consumption at that
age is 76 so the lifetime budget constraint requires a discontinuous drop in consumption
to 40, which is not optimal. Conditional on survival to at least 79, the single person
under saved, or equivalently, over consumed at age 65.
Figure 3 shows the consumption path when initial consumption is 94. At age T  86
when consumption equals annuities, wealth is positive. Because consumption equals
annuity income at greater ages, wealth will grow at the interest rate. This person could
increase initial consumption and in this sense she has over saved.
In the empirical application we construct the consumption path {ct } such that initial
consumption, c0 , is given by observed consumption at or near retirement and the change
c
in consumption from one period to the next.
is estimated over four waves of CAMS
c
panel data by age band, education and sex. The present value of spending in excess of
T
c  At
annuities is PVT   t
. If PVT is less than initial wealth the person will die with
t
t 1 (1  r )
positive wealth. We would say that this person is adequately prepared for retirement. If
PVT is greater than initial bequeathable wealth, the empirical consumption path is not
feasible should the individual survive to T : at some prior age consumption would have
to drop discontinuously.
5. Model for Couples
The life-cycle model for couples is considerably more complicated than the model for
single persons. Under the same assumptions as for the singles model the first-order
condition for consumption by a couple is
d ln Ct 1
1 t
 ( r    ht ) 

 Ct 
dt
where ht  the couple’s mortality risk (the probability density that one of them will die at
t given that neither has died before t ), Ct is consumption by the couple,  is the risk
aversion parameter in the couple’s CRRA utility function, r is the fixed real interest rate,
and  is the subjective time rate of discount of the couple. The last term accounts for
“bequests” to the surviving spouse: t is the expected marginal utility of wealth should
one of the spouses die. It is composed of two terms: the marginal utility of wealth of the
widower weighted by the morality hazard of the wife and the marginal utility of wealth of
the widow weighted by the mortality hazard of the husband. t varies from couple to
couple according to the marginal utility of wealth of the survivor should one of the
spouses die. The marginal utility of wealth of the survivor varies by the wealth of the
couple (which the survivor will “inherit”), the mortality risk of the survivor, and the level

5

of pension and Social Security benefits that the survivor will have. Predictions about the
slope and level of the consumption path are complex because of t . But consumption
should decline if both spouses are old because the marginal utility of wealth will be small
for an old surviving spouse. The slope of the consumption path should be greater
algebraically (flatter) when one spouse is young because the marginal utility of wealth is
large for a young spouse.
To find the predicted consumption path of a couple we begin with C0 , which is
observed consumption by a couple at baseline. Then we project consumption to the next
period by Ct 1  Ct (1  Gt ) where Gt is the annual growth rate of consumption by
couples. We estimate Gt by age and education bands between waves 1 and 2, 2 and 3,
and 3 and 4 of CAMS in a non-parametric manner directly from the spending data, just as
we did for singles. The associated wealth path is Wt 1  Wt (1  r )  Ct  At where r is an
assumed real rate of interest. The couples model differs from the singles model in that
one spouse will die before the other and the surviving spouse will continue to consume,
but the consumption level will change according to returns-to-scale. Suppose the
husband dies. Then the widow will “inherit” the wealth of the couple, an annuity which
is some fraction of At , and a consumption level that reflects returns-to-scale. According
to the poverty line, the widow would need 1/1.26 = 0.794 of the consumption of the
couple; according to scaling of the wife’s and widow’s benefits in Social Security, the
widow would need 1/1.5 = 0.667. From that point on the widow will follow the singles
model taking as initial conditions the inherited wealth, the reduced annuities and the
reduced consumption level.
Figure 4 has an example under the assumption that both spouses are initially 65 and
that the husband dies at age 80. Initial consumption is 100 and initial wealth is 925.
Prior to age 80 consumption by the couple follows Ct 1  Ct (1  Gt ) . Consumption
declines when the husband dies because of returns-to-scale, and then it follows the path
of singles. In the case shown, the couple and surviving spouse could just exactly afford
the initial consumption. Should the widow survive to 91 or beyond, wealth would be
exhausted.
If initial consumption were greater than 100 the surviving spouse would be forced to
reduce consumption discontinuously should that spouse survive to age 90. If initial
consumption were less than 100 the surviving spouse would die with positive wealth.
The foregoing assumes widowing at 80, but we implement random widowing. Take
the same couple where both are initially 65. Randomly choose whether both, one or
neither spouse survives with probabilities given by life table survival hazards. If both
survive we continue calculating the couple’s consumption and wealth path. If the
husband dies, we switch to the widow’s consumption path and apply the estimated
consumption growth rates of a single female. We find the expected present value of
spending in excess of annuities. If the wife dies we perform the same calculation, except
that we use the rate of change in consumption estimated for single males. If both die, we
stop the calculations.
The outcomes of one simulation are: Did the household die with positive wealth? If
so, how much compared with initial wealth? If not, what is the wealth shortfall?

6

By repeating the simulations a number of times for the same household we can find
the probability that the household will die with positive wealth or negative wealth and the
distribution of those excesses or shortfalls in wealth.
6. Inputs into simulations
Differential mortality
A large literature on the gradient between socioeconomic status (SES) and health
documents that individuals with high SES such as high education live longer than those
with low SES (Kitagawa and Hauser, 1973; Marmot et al. 1991; Adams et al. 2003).
Because households are not fully annuitized, long-lived households have to be prepared
to finance consumption over a longer remaining time horizon. We take this into account
in our simulations by applying survival probabilities that differentiate by education as
well as by age, sex and marital status.
We obtain our estimates of differential mortality based on eight waves of HRS data
spanning the years 1992 to 2006. We estimate the probability of survival to time t+1
conditional on being alive at time t, pooling the seven transitions we observe in the HRS.
The logit model yields the estimates shown in Table 1 for males and females as a
function of age, marital status and education. For single males the odds of survival for
college graduates between waves is 44% higher than the odds of survival for high school
dropouts. For both men and women the survival odds increase in education, and for both
there is a substantial interaction between completing college and being married.
From these estimates we construct survival curves by sex, marital status and
education and normalize these to life tables so that the average survival probability given
age and sex equals that given in the life tables. Figure 5 has examples of the estimated
survival curves for females. A single female lacking a high school education has a 50%
chance of surviving to age 80 while a single female with a college education has a 50%
change of surviving to age 84. For married women the difference by education is
considerably larger: the age at which survival chances fall below 50% is about 10 years
greater among women with a college education than among women lacking a high school
degree. These survival differences translate into large differences in life expectancy. For
example, married men with a college degree have a life expectancy that is 39% greater
than single men who lack a high school degree. Such long-lived men need
correspondingly greater bequeathable wealth to finance their retirement years.
Figure 6 has similar survival curves for males. The survival chances for males are
lower than for females, but the patterns by education and by marital status are similar.

7

Estimation of consumption paths
Because survival differs by age, sex and education the slope of the consumption path
should vary by those characteristics according to equation (1). Therefore we estimate the
model
ct 1  ct
(2)
 i   j  k  u
ct
where i indicates the age category, j indicates the education category and k indicates
sex. We have four education categories: less than high school, high school, some college
and college graduate. For singles we have five age categories 65-69, 70-74, 75-79, 80-84
and 85 or over. We observed 2,037 consumption transitions among singles 65 or older
between the four waves of CAMS. For couples we have just four age categories because
of small sample size in the top age category. In addition we entered categorical variables
for the age of the spouse. We observed 4,593 consumption transitions among couples
where both spouses were 62 or older and at least one spouse was 66 – 69. We estimated
by median regression because observation error on consumption produces large outliers
in the left-hand variable which makes OLS estimates unreliable. We restricted the
sample to those with observed positive wealth because consumption change cannot be
freely chosen if a household has no wealth.
Table 2 shows the predicted one-year change in consumption by single persons based
on equation (2). It is notable that almost all the changes are negative indicating
reductions in consumption with age. Table 3 has similar results for married persons. It
has a separate panel for couples where the husband is older than the wife by five years or
more because theory predicts the slope of the consumption path will be algebraically
larger when the wife is young. In the estimation that turns out not to be the case: for
example, when the husband is 65-69 and the wife’s age differs from the husband’s by less
than five years, the slope is -0.86 (less than high school education), but when the wife’s
age differs by five years or more the slope is -2.31. A possible explanation might be that
households with a large age difference between spouses differ in some other ways from
other households. The prediction from theory assumes that all else is held the same
except the age difference.
To see the implications of these differing slopes for lifetime consumption, we show in
Figure 7 examples of fitted consumption paths for single women. The paths are
normalized at 100 at age 65. College graduates have flatter consumption paths than those
with less education as would be expected from their greater survival chances. There is
little difference among those with high school or some college. Those lacking a high
school degree have still greater rates of decline. This group has a 50% chance of
surviving to age 80 at which time consumption will have dropped to about 60% of its
level at age 65. For comparison we have graphed the optimal consumption path based
on CRRA utility where the path is generated by equation (1). Risk aversion,  , is 1.12
which Hurd (1989) estimated on wealth change data in the Retirement History Survey.
In this simulation r   . We use life table mortality risk of women. The paths generated
by the CAMS consumption changes for those with a high school degree or some college
are practically identical to the path generated by the model up to about the age of 85.5
5

The trajectories of consumption by single men have a similar pattern but are flatter. Single men comprise
18% of single persons in our sample.

8

Figure 8 shows consumption paths of couples where both spouses are the same age.
The most obvious difference from the consumption paths of single women is that
consumption by couples shows less decline. This is to be expected because the couple
has a strong desire to leave wealth to a surviving spouse as reflected in substantial
marginal utility of wealth to the surviving spouse. There is little difference in the paths by
education.6 Because of the high mortality risk of the couple the most relevant part of the
consumption path is up to about age 80. Over this age range consumption declines
slowly to about 80% of initial consumption.
Future Earnings
In our analytical sample, 24% of 66-69 year old single persons and 23% of married
persons are working for pay at baseline. Among married persons those still working are
mostly younger spouses. To forecast the future earnings of workers we first predict the
probability of working for pay in the next period, conditional on working in the current
period. We obtain these predictions from panel data estimations regressing working for
pay in the HRS on covariates, including age, sex, marital status and education. We then
multiply this probability of working with the respondent’s observed baseline earnings
adjusted for earnings growth. Earnings growth by gender and marital status is also
estimated on HRS panel data among respondents of the relevant age and with positive
earnings in adjacent survey waves. See the Data Appendix for further details.
For those who are not working for pay at baseline we assume that they will not work
in the future.
Taxes
Taxes influence economic preparation for retirement via four routes. The first is
federal and state tax paid on ordinary income such as earnings, capital income and
pension income. The second is Social Security contributions paid on earnings. The third
is that Social Security income is only partially counted as taxable income and the fraction
depends on the level of other taxable income and on the amount of Social Security
income. The fourth is that withdrawals from tax-advantaged accounts such as IRAs are
taxed and minimum withdrawals become mandatory at age 70 ½. We have accounted for
these taxes in a somewhat simplified manner, which, nonetheless addresses all of these
elements.7 See the Data Appendix for further details.
Because low income groups pay very little, if any, taxes in retirement, accounting for
taxes for them has little impact on the assessment of whether the household is
economically prepared for retirement. For example, the median tax rate among those in
the lowest annuity income quartile (pension plus Social Security) is zero, and it is just 1%
in the second annuity income quartile. In addition those who pay some income tax often
pay no tax at all on Social Security benefits. However, among high-income groups the
situation is very different. They tend to have sizeable pre-tax retirement assets (IRAs)
and they are most likely to have 85% of their Social Security benefits taxed. As a result
taking into account the effect of taxation is likely to have a greater effect on economic
6

Education is the education of the respondent to the CAMS survey
We use standard deductions and estimate the relationship between federal and state income taxes for each
household based on the NBER tax calculator, TAXSIM (see Feenberg and Coutts, 1993). We use this
relationship to estimate state taxes.
7

9

preparation for retirement for those with more education than for those with less
education.
Housing
Older households tend to retain their housing wealth, or more precisely their primary
residence, until advanced old age (Venti and Wise, 2004). In terms of financing spending
in retirement it appears that housing wealth is often not used until other assets are
exhausted. To approximately replicate these patterns we separate housing wealth held in
the primary residence from other assets. We assume that this form of housing wealth is
not depleted until all other wealth has been drawn down. This matters for taxation,
because it requires that IRA balances are withdrawn and subject to taxation before
housing equity is accessed. We assume that housing wealth appreciates at a real rate of
return of 2.5 percent which is approximately the rate observed from 1985-2006.8 We
assume that capital gains in housing accumulate tax free which is the case for the great
majority of households, because of the large federal tax exemption ($500,000 lifetime
capital gains on primary residence per person) that most people would not exhaust.
Health care spending risk
To account for health care spending risk we draw from the distribution of out-ofpocket health care spending in HRS 2008. We use that year for two reasons. When we
compared the level and distribution of out-of-pocket spending for health care in HRS
2004 with similar measures in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) and the
Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) we found that mean out-of-pocket
spending in the HRS was about 60% greater than in the MCBS or MEPS (which were
similar); yet, HRS medians were practically the same as in MCBS and in MEPS (Hurd
and Rohwedder, 2009b). The discrepancy in means is due to some very large values in
HRS. For example, the 99th percentile of spending in 2004 HRS was $24,600 expressed
in 2003 prices. The 99th percentile in the 2003 MCBS was $11,400 and $9,300 in the
2003 MEPS. Thus the risk of out-of-pocket spending for health care is substantially
greater in HRS than in MCBS or in MEPS. We determined that the main source of the
difference is in the measurement of spending for prescription drugs. The HRS modified
in 2006 the questions about spending on prescription drugs which brought HRS back in
line with MEPS and MCBS.9
The second reason we use HRS 2008 is the introduction of Medicare Part D in 2006
which reduced the risk of large out-of-pocket spending for some retirees. This reduction
should have an impact on economic preparation for retirement which we want to take into
account.
Serial correlation in out-of-pocket spending for health care
People who have chronic conditions are likely to have greater than average spending
on heath care each year, which induces serial correlation in out-of-pocket spending.
Serial correlation increases the likelihood that someone will have several successive

8

Based on the Federal Housing Finance Agency quarterly house price index adjusted by the CPI.
http://www.fhfa.gov/Default.aspx?Page=87 accessed 6/17/2011
9
See Hurd and Rohwedder (2009b) for further details

10

years of high spending, increasing the risk of not being adequately economically prepared
for retirement.
To account for serial correlation at the household level we estimate a model of out-ofpocket spending by marital status specified as follows:
ln(sijk ,t )  (i   j   k )  ( i   j   k )ln( sijk ,t 1 )
where i indexes age, j indexes sex, and l indexes education. Thus the correlation
between spending at t  1 and t will depend in an additive manner on those personal
characteristics. The categories of age and education are the same as those we have used
in the specifications for the consumption trajectories and for mortality.
We estimated this model on MCBS 2004 and 2005. We chose MCBS for several
reasons. First, we could not use HRS because our model has one-year transitions, but
HRS is a two-year panel. Second, MEPS specializes in measuring health care spending
including out-of-pocket spending, but we could not use it because it does not cover the
institutionalized population. Third, MCBS spends considerable amount of interviewing
resources to collect out-of-pocket spending data, and it compares well with MEPS for the
noninstitutionalized population.
Table 4 shows estimated serial correlation in health care spending based on the
regression of out-of-pocket spending in 2005 on out-of-pocket spending in 2004. There is
strong persistence in spending: for example among 65-69 year-old single males in the
lowest education band the coefficient on lagged spending is 0.56 which implies that
spending in the current year is comprised of 46% of last year’s out-of-pocket spending
and 54% of a new draw on out-of-pocket spending from HRS.10 Although the increase is
not monotonic in age, serial correlation tends to increase with age so that in the age band
85 or older 56% of the current year’s spending is from last year’s spending and just 44%
from a new HRS draw. This increase is likely due to the increase in chronic conditions
with age. Serial correlation declines in education which is likely due to fewer chronic
conditions among the better educated.
We incorporate the serial correlation coefficients in out-of-pocket spending for health
care, which increases the variance in spending and, hence, the likelihood of running out
of wealth prior to death. The details of the simulations can be found in the data appendix.
7. Results
To obtain the initial conditions for the simulations we need a populationrepresentative sample in which we observed all or almost all of the relevant data.
Because we want to observe Social Security and pension income we select a sample
shortly after retirement and of a sufficient age that they are likely to be receiving Social
Security if they are eligible. We select couples where one spouse is 66, 67, 68 or 69, and
the other is 62 or older; they were respondents in CAMS wave 1, 2, 3 or 4; and they were
a couple in the HRS surrounding waves. We make the age restriction on the younger
spouse because spouses younger than 62 would likely not yet be receiving Social
Security benefits even by the time we observe them in the latest available HRS wave of
2008 and so we might miss a significant fraction of retirement resources. We select
10

Current year out-of-pocket spending is a weighted average of last year’s spending and a new draw from
HRS where the weight on last year’s spending is   (1   ) and  is the serial correlation coefficient in
year-to-year spending. See the data appendix for more detail.

11

singles who were 66-69 who were respondents to CAMS wave 1, 2, 3 or 4. Our
simulation sample comprises 633 single persons and 1,092 married persons.
Table 5 compares the distributions of some characteristics of our simulation sample
with distributions from HRS using the same age selections. With few exceptions the
distributions of characteristics are similar in the two samples.
We perform 100 simulations of the consumption and wealth paths of each person
who is in the age range 66-69. By consumption we mean the consumption by the couple
as long as both spouses survive and also the consumption by the survivor. Although we
begin with 866 couple households we only have 1,092 married persons who are age
eligible (66-69), the other spouses being outside the given age range. The economic
circumstances of the 1,092 age-eligible persons will enter the tables. In these simulations
we use the poverty line for returns-to-scale in consumption (0.794) and assume that the
annuity of the survivor is 0.67 times the annuity of the couple.
Tables 6 and onward have the results of the simulations, incorporating differential
mortality and differential rates of consumption change by education level, age, sex and
marital status, random serially correlated out-of-pocket health care spending, taxes, and a
“last out” treatment of housing wealth. Table 6 shows population averages of the
simulations for single persons. In 63% of the simulations individuals die with positive
wealth, but among the least educated just 46% die with positive wealth. The sum of
initial average wealth, the average present value of earnings and the average present
value of annuities for single persons is about $463 thousand. The present value of
consumption and taxes is about $331 thousand so that average excess wealth is $131
thousand. At least as measured by average resources and spending (including taxes)
single persons are well prepared financially for retirement. The median of the householdlevel amount of excess wealth is about $51 thousand, indicating that the household of the
median person is well prepared, but not with a large margin of adjustment. The measures
increase strongly with education: among the least educated even average resources fall
short of average outflows by about $31 thousand.
Couples are much better prepared on average (Table 7). Their average resources are
about $1.2 millions. The sum of taxes and consumption is $681 thousand resulting in
$525 thousand in excess wealth. As with single persons there is a strong gradient with
respect to education.
Tables 6 and 7 show population averages, not the situation of individuals. The
fraction of simulations in which wealth is positive at death does not provide the risk of
any individual or household outliving resources. For example, the 63% in the case of
single persons would be achieved if every single person had a 63% chance or if 63% of
single persons had a 100% chance of dying with positive wealth and 37% had no chance.
Because we are interested in the fraction of individuals that runs out of resources at the
end of the lifecycle we have arranged all subsequent tables at the individual level. They
show the characteristics and results for 66-69 year olds living in couple households and in
single households at baseline.
Our individual-level metric for the probability of dying with positive wealth is based
on the fraction of simulations for which an individual in a couple or a single person dies
with positive wealth. In this metric we say that the individual is adequately prepared if
the chances of dying with positive wealth are 95% or greater. Table 8 shows among
single persons about 49% are adequately prepared. In the lowest education category only

12

27% of women are adequately prepared compared with 61% of men. Overall about 77%
of married persons are adequately prepared. The average for males and females is about
the same. As would be predicted from the wealth and consumption averages in Table 7,
those with more education are better prepared.
The preceding tables measured adequate preparation for retirement in terms of
residual wealth at death. This measure does not distinguish whether the required
adjustment to a household’s consumption path is large or small relative to current
consumption. For example, a household with generous annuities, say of eighty thousand
dollars per year, may have similar shortfalls in excess wealth as a household with very
low annuity entitlements. Yet, the consumption floor that either of these households
faces is very different and so are the welfare implications. If a household with a
consumption level of 10 thousand dollars per year has to reduce consumption by a
thousand dollars to keep the probability of running out of wealth sufficiently low this
implies a drop in consumption of 10 percent at an already very low level of consumption.
For a household with a consumption level of 80 thousand dollars per year a drop in
consumption by a thousand dollars is equivalent to a drop of only 1.25 percent at a much
higher level of consumption. Due to the concavity of the utility function the welfare loss
for the latter household will be even smaller in comparison.
A household would be far from adequately prepared if it had to reduce initial
consumption by a substantial amount in order to reduce the chances of running out of
wealth to 5% or less. To assess the sensitivity of adequate preparation to the initial
consumption level, we reduce initial consumption by each household by 10% and define
adequate preparation as before. Table 9 shows that among single persons the overall rate
is 55%. An especially inadequately prepared group is females in the lowest education
category: just 29% are adequately prepared. Among married persons about 80% are
adequately prepared, and females are slightly more likely to be prepared than men. Even
among married high school drop-outs about 70% are adequately prepared.
A comparison of Tables 8 and 9 shows that the reduction of 10% in initial
consumption increases economic preparation by 5.2 percentage points among single
persons and 3.1 percentage points among couples, which in view of the relatively large
reductions in consumption are rather small changes. The implication is that a substantial
number of persons are over consuming by an amount that places them fairly far from
being prepared.
Our definition of adequate preparation makes some ad hoc choices regarding the cut
off points for the chances of running out of wealth and the allowable reduction in initial
consumption. We have presented results for a cut off of 5 percent or less for the chances
of running out of wealth, but some might argue that this could also be higher or possibly
smaller. Similarly we have chosen a reduction of initial consumption by 10 percent or
more to signal inadequate preparation. Table 10 shows the sensitivity of economic
preparation to these cut off points. For singles the results range from a minimum of 51.8
percent adequately prepared to a maximum of 64.9% adequately prepared. The minimum
arises when limiting the reduction of initial consumption to less than 5% and the chances
of running out of wealth to less than 5%. The maximum arises when imposing the most
generous thresholds in the adequacy assessment. For couples the range is 78.3%
adequately prepared to 86.1%. For couples the results are less sensitive to the choice of
thresholds. The reason is that most couple households either fall substantially short of

13

the thresholds of adequacy or they exceed them by a large margin, resulting in floor and
ceiling effects in the statistics for preparedness.
Planning Horizon and economic preparation for retirement
The HRS asks about an individual’s financial planning horizon which might be taken
to be a measure of the propensity for forward looking behavior. The question in the HRS
is as follows:
In deciding how much of their (family) income to spend or save, people are likely
to think about different financial planning periods.
In planning your (family's) saving and spending, which of the following time
periods is most important to you (and your [husband/wife/partner]), the next few
months, the next year, the next few years, the next 5-10 years, or longer than 10
years?
Table 11 shows the percentage adequately prepared as a function of the respondent’s
planning horizon.11 Among single persons with a horizon of the next few months just
37% are adequately prepared. Especially for single males the variation by planning
horizon is sharply increasing from 32% to 80%. However, for both males and females
the major difference is between a horizon of a year or less and more than a year. Among
married persons the pattern is approximately the same but with less variation.
The results in Table 11 are consistent with a lack of forward looking behavior
contributing to the mismatch between spending and available economic resources that
leads to an elevated probability of outliving wealth.
Health and preparation for retirement
Table 12 has the percentage adequately prepared stratified by self-rated health. Those
who rate their health as fair or poor at baseline are much less likely to be adequately
prepared for retirement: the difference is about 25 percentage points among single
persons and 14 percentage points among married persons. One potential explanation is
that those in worse health have reduced subjective survival probabilities, and so they are
consuming at a higher rate than would be consistent with the survival curves we have
used in our simulations.
Scenario: eliminate risk of out-of-pocket expenditures for health care
Health care spending risk is incorporated in our previous tables via random draws
from the observed distribution of out-of-pocket spending in HRS 2008. After adjusting
for serial correlation and normalizing to mean zero, we add the shocks to spending by the
single person or couple. On average spending with the shocks will be the same as
spending in the absence of the shocks as long as wealth is positive. However, the shocks
will increase the variance of spending, and, therefore, the variance of predicted wealth,

11

This question is not asked in every wave of HRS and if asked then it is not always queried of all
respondents. For each respondent we use the earliest report which would usually pertain to the preretirement years of the individual.

14

increasing the chances of running out of wealth before death.12 To find how important
the variance in out-of-pocket health care spending is in preparation for retirement, we put
spending risk to zero and resimulated. Table 13 shows adequacy assessments when the
variance in out-of-pocket medical expenditures is zero but the average spending on health
care is unchanged (columns labeled “no out-of-pocket risk”) along with results from
Table 9 that include health care spending risk (columns labeled “with out-of-pocket
risk”). Overall the health spending shocks reduce economic preparation for retirement
among single persons by about seven percentage points. But the effect is considerably
larger for some groups. For example, health care spending risk reduces preparation for
retirement by 13 percentage points among women with some college education.
The effect of risk of out-of-pocket spending is considerably smaller for married
persons, reducing economic preparation by about three percentage points.
Scenario: Social Security benefit cut of 30 percent.
A method of assessing the importance of Social Security for adequacy of economic
preparation for retirement is to find how preparation changes when benefits are reduced.
Table 14 has the results from a reduction in Social Security benefits by 30%. Compared
with Table 9, economic preparation of single persons is reduced by 10.7 percentage
points. The reduction is especially large for those with less education ranging from 11 to
15 percentage points. Even among married persons who have considerably more
economic resources than single persons, the reduction in Social Security benefits has a
noticeable impact on preparation for retirement, causing a drop in preparation of 7.8
percentage points.
These results suggest that by providing longevity insurance Social Security has an
important role in economic preparation for retirement. While large among single persons
and the less educated, is nonetheless important for all the groups we have studied.
9. Conclusions
Our main finding is that a substantial majority, about 71%, of those just past the usual
retirement age are adequately prepared for retirement in that they will be able to follow a
path of consumption that begins at their current level of consumption and then follow an
age-pattern similar to that of current retirees. Thus we do not find inadequate preparation
for retirement on average. This is not true, however, for all groups in the population. In
particular, many singles who lack a high school education are not well prepared: even
were they to reduce initial consumption by 10 percent, about 64% would still face a
probability of running out of wealth greater than 5 percent. Economic preparation by
couples is much better than preparation by singles. Nonetheless there is substantial
variation by education with some 89% of college graduates being prepared compared
with 70% among those lacking a high school education.
Our method of assessing the adequacy of retirement resources involves comparing
resources with spending levels and spending patterns that we observe in today’s data. If
spending requirements increase substantially faster than they have in the past, then
12

We assume that if wealth is driven to zero by a spending shock, that person or household will consume at
the level of annuity income. This implicitly assumes that future health care spending shocks are paid for by
a public program such as Medicaid once wealth is depleted.

15

resources ex post will look inadequate whereas ex ante they looked adequate. Out-ofpocket spending on health care is an obvious area where this could happen. Accounting
for this would require a sound method of forecasting what future health care expenses
will be on average and in variance. We note, however, that the consumption slopes that
form the basis of our forecasts have imbedded in them adjustments to spending that
resulted from out-of-pocket health care spending trends and shocks during the period
2001-2007. Such shocks would have flattened the consumption paths (i.e. less decline in
consumption with age) resulting in higher predicted lifetime spending in our simulations.
Thus future increases would have to be greater than those that occurred over our sample
period in order for the actual future spending trajectory to be flatter than our estimated
trajectory, and for actual future spending to be greater than predicted spending.
Our assessment of the adequacy of economic preparation for retirement is more
optimistic than those of the National Retirement Risk Index published by the Center for
Retirement Research at Boston College. The National Retirement Risk Index measures
the share of American households ‘at risk’ of being unable to maintain their preretirement standard of living in retirement. It finds that 51% of working age households
are at risk (Munnell, Webb and Golub-Sass, 2010). Among the early baby boomers 41%
are at risk with the implication that 59% are not at risk or are adequately prepared. Our
estimate from a slightly older cohort is that 71% are adequately prepared. Our sample
comes from people born in the mid-1930s to early 1940s which is an earlier cohort than
the early baby boomers. However, comparisons of the economic resources of those 5156 in HRS 1992, 1998 and 2004 shows approximately constant real economic resources
among singles and increasing economic resources among couples.13 Thus we would
expect that the early baby boomers, who were 51-56 in 2004, will have greater resources
when they reach 66-69 than our sample had. The implication is that more than 71% of
early baby boomers are on track to be adequately prepared.
Our assessment of economic preparation for retirement is somewhat more pessimistic
than that of Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun (2006). Based on a life-cycle model that
accounts for life-time earnings they estimate that “Fewer than 20 percent of households
have less wealth than their optimal targets, and the wealth deficit of those who are
undersaving is generally small.”
Our paper uses a very different approach from these two papers. The most obvious
difference is that our estimated spending paths are based on rates of change in spending
as observed in panel data, rather than on the assumption of constant spending as in
Munnell, Webb and Golub-Sass or on model-based estimates as in Scholz, Seshadri and
Khitatrakun. A second aspect is our treatment of mortality. It recognizes that a married
household will naturally reduce spending at widowing; and it classifies some low-wealth
households as adequately prepared because of their reduced survival chances. Whether
these or other differences are primarily responsible for the differing outcomes is beyond
the scope of this paper to investigate.

13

Authors’ calculations based on HRS. Pension wealth as reported in Hurd and Rohwedder (2007).
Particularly pertinent is that DB pension entitlements at the household level were not lower in the early
baby boom cohort than in earlier cohorts because an increased entitlement among wives offset a decline in
entitlements among husbands.

16

References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2005, “Consumption vs. Expenditure,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(5), pp. 919-948.
Adams, P, M. D. Hurd, D McFadden, A Merrill, T Ribeiro - "Healthy, wealthy, and
wise? Tests for direct causal paths between health and socioeconomic status", Journal
of Econometrics, 2003
Feenberg, Daniel Richard, and Elizabeth Coutts, An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, vol 12 no 1, Winter 1993, 189-194.
Hurd, Michael D., 1989, "Mortality Risk and Bequests," Econometrica, 57, pp. 779-813.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2005, “The Consumption and Activities Mail
Survey: Description, Data Quality, and First Results on Life-Cycle Spending and
Saving” typescript, RAND.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2007, “Trends in Pension Values around
Retirement,” in Brigitte Madrian, Olivia Mitchell and Beth Soldo, eds., 2007,
Redefining Retirement, New York: Oxford University Press, 234-247.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2009a, “Methodological Innovations in Collecting
Spending Data: The HRS Consumption and Activities Mail Survey,” Fiscal Studies,
30(3/4), 435-459.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2009b, The Level and Risk of Out-of-Pocket
Health Care Spending, Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 2009218.
Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2010, “The Effect of the Risk of Out-ofPocket Spending for Health Care on Economic Preparation for Retirement,”
Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 2010-232
Juster, F. Thomas and Richard Suzman, 1995, “An Overview of the Health and
Retirement Study, Journal of Human Resources, 30 (Supplement), S7-S56.
Kitagawa, E. and P. Hauser (1973). Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study
in Socioeconomic Epidemiology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Marmot, M. et al (1991) “Health Inequalities Among British Civil Servants: the
Whitehall II Study,” Lancet, 337, 1387-93.
RAND HRS Data, Version K. Produced by the RAND Center for the Study of Aging,
with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security
Administration. Santa Monica, CA (March 2011).
Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun, 2006, Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 114, no. 4, pp. 607-643.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, 2004, “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look,”
in Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, David A. Wise, editor, University of
Chicago Press, p. 127 – 180

17

Data Appendix
The starting point for almost all variable derivations is RAND HRS version K.14 All
amounts are expressed in 2008 dollars.

Appendix 1. Measurement of household spending in CAMS and derivation of the
variable “household consumption” used in the analyses
Survey design features of CAMS enhancing data quality
First, CAMS asks separate questions about spending in a relatively large number of
categories (6 big-ticket items and 33 other categories that mostly refer to non-durable
spending, with some exceptions such as home furnishings, or home repair or vehicle
repair). This level of detail is designed to help respondents to remember all categories of
household spending, while keeping respondent burden acceptable. Second, CAMS is a
self-administered survey (paper-and-pencil format) which allows respondents to take the
time they need to reflect upon their answers or possibly consult records or other members
of the households. Third, the instructions requested that for the spending part of the survey
the person most knowledgeable about this topic be involved in answering the questions.
Fourth, CAMS reduces recall error—the tendency to forget to report spending amounts,
especially those lying further in the past—by offering a choice of recall period for more
regular or more often occurring spending items. Depending on the category, respondents
can choose the reference period as “last week, “last month” or for the “last 12 months.”
For example, it would be difficult for many respondents to give an estimate of food
spending over the last 12 months, but much easier to report food spending of the household
over the last week or last month.15
Imputation of missing information
Item non-response rates in the CAMS spending categories are mostly less than 10
percent, many even less than 5 percent, which is low in comparison to other economic
variables in the HRS. In imputing missing observations we take advantage of information
from the HRS core for informed logical imputations wherever possible. For example, in
the spending categories with the highest rate of nonresponse, we have information from the
HRS core that we can use for imputation. For example, rent has almost the highest rate of
nonresponse. However, we have data in the HRS about homeownership which we can use
with considerable confidence to impute rent to many nonresponders: most of the
nonresponders were homeowners and so we imputed zero rent. At the end of this process
63.5% of CAMS wave 1 respondents are complete reporters over all categories of
spending. For the remaining missing observations we imputed the average amount
observed among non-missing responses for a particular spending category. An exception
14

The RAND HRS data file is an easy to use longitudinal data set based on the HRS data. It was
developed at RAND with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security
Administration.
15
There has been some variation in the recall periods offered to respondents across the CAMS waves
reflecting survey experience. In the later waves, the “last week” option has only been offered for three
high-frequency categories of spending (food in, food out and gasoline).

18

are the big-ticket items for which we imputed zero if there was no entry for whether the
household bought that big-ticket item over the last 12 months. When the respondent
reported that there was a purchase of the big-ticket item and only the amount was
missing, then we used for imputation the prediction from a simple regression of the
purchase price on some basic household characteristics.
Identification and adjustment of extreme values
We also applied some cleaning of outliers, following a systematic algorithm. We used
cross-wave comparisons to identify outliers in the case of those spending categories that
tend to be regular and fairly flat over time such as utilities. We only changed a value
when there was evidence that the respondent had mixed up the recall period (e.g., one
entry being 12 times the amount of the other entry) then the outlier would be brought in
line by multiplying or dividing by 12. We also checked whether the outlier could be
explained by a slippage in the decimal (multiples of 10 or 100), in which case we would
change the value also. Finally, we winsorized the top and bottom 5 values in each
category. We applied the same cleaning and imputation methods to all four waves of
CAMS.
Derivation of total household consumption
Total household consumption is defined as the sum of all annualized spending
categories elicited in CAMS, subject to some adjustments to those categories of spending
that have a savings component. For big ticket items that are consumed over multiple
periods we estimate consumption services derived from durables as described in
Appendix 2. For mortgage and car payments we only count the interest as part of
consumption, because payments towards the principal are part of the household’s saving.
For observations using CAMS 2001 data, the consumption measure is adjusted to reflect
the lower number of spending categories that was collected in CAMS 2001 compared to
subsequent waves.
Estimating consumption services derived from durables
For five of our big ticket items (excluding automobile purchases) our general strategy
is to estimate in CAMS the probability of a purchase and the expected value conditional
on a purchase as functions of important covariates such as income, wealth, age and
marital status. Then we impute an annual purchase amount which, in equilibrium, will be
equal to the annual consumption with straight line depreciation. In particular we make
the following assumptions and calculations. We assume straight-line depreciation and
that average annual consumption is equal to average annual depreciation. We estimate
logistic functions for the probability of annual purchase. Covariates are age, income,
marital status, and number of household residents. We estimate spending conditional on
purchase using the same covariates as for purchase. Then predicted average annual
consumption on five big-ticket items is calculated as:
average annual consumption on five big-ticket items =



(probability of purchasing item i)  (expected amount given purchase of item i)

i1...5

19

To give an example of the resulting consumption services from durables that we
obtain in this manner, the mean consumption in 2001 of the five big ticket items is
estimated to be $282 per year with a range of $70 to $2,682.
Because we have the value of automobiles and other vehicles used for transportation
in the HRS in 2000 and 2002, we calculate the flow of services from the actual values.
This calculation will more accurately estimate the flow of services for low income
households. We make these assumptions and calculations: The value of transportation
(almost all automobiles) is measured in the HRS core; user cost is the sum of interest on
the value, depreciation on a 12-year schedule, and observed maintenance costs from
CAMS. We find that the mean flow of services is $2,912 per year with a range of $0 to
$41,040.
We follow a similar strategy to estimate the flow of consumption services from
owner-occupied housing by estimating a rental equivalent: the amount the housing unit
would rent for in a competitive market in equilibrium. In particular we make the
following assumptions and calculations. (1) The interest cost is the value of housing
multiplied by the prevailing interest rate. We use the observed house value from the HRS
core and assume an interest rate of 7.16 percent, which was the average 30 year mortgage
interest rate in 2001. (2) We estimate depreciation from maintenance costs which are
observed in CAMS and from the observed house value: we assume depreciation of 2.14
percent per year which is equivalent to a depreciation period of 47 years. The flow of
housing services is the sum of these items, amounting to $13.5 thousand dollars at the
mean among home owners and $10.0 thousand dollars at the median.
Appendix 2. Details of the measurement and definition of key variables
Consumption
We use the observations on household consumption in two ways. First, to measure
initial consumption for each household in our simulations, that is, the level of spending
from which we project out the subsequent spending path. It is critical to minimize
observation error in this measure of initial consumption, because observation error would
affect our adequacy assessments. Therefore to compute baseline consumption for each
household we average observed total consumption, as derived above, over all adjacent
waves where marital status is constant.16 For example, if marital status was constant
from 2000-2008, then consumption in 2001, 2003, 2005, and 2007 is averaged.
Likewise, if marital status was constant from 2002-2006, then consumption in 2003 and
2005 is averaged for baseline consumption. Second, we use longitudinal observations on
household consumption to estimate the shape of the life-cycle consumption, stratified by
sex, marital status and education (see “Estimation of consumption path” in section 6 of
the paper).
Income from pensions and annuities
We use the annualized measure of income from pension and annuities. We assume
that this income stream is not indexed to inflation. To reduce measurement error we
average the observations across adjacent waves where available, provided marital status
16

Holding marital status constant is important so that changes in spending are not due to household
dissolutions, widowing or marriage.

20

does not change. More specifically, if marital status is constant in the following two
HRS waves, then baseline pensions are the average of pension income in the following
two HRS waves. If marital status is not constant in the following two HRS waves, then
baseline pension income is equal to the following HRS wave’s reported pension. In the
case of couples we use the sum of income from pensions and annuities for the respondent
and spouse. Once one of the spouses dies pension and annuity income is assumed to be
reduced to two thirds, reflecting the fact that most pension and annuities have some
survivor provisions.
Income from Social Security
To measure income from Social Security for the respondent (and the spouse in the
case of couples) we use the latest report available in the HRS. This way we capture
Social Security income also for those individuals who claim late. In projecting Social
Security income out into the future for each household we take into account that Social
Security is indexed to inflation. In the case of widowing among couples, total Social
Security income of the household is reduced to two thirds.
Current and future earnings
The latest available reported income from earnings is used as baseline earnings.
To forecast future earnings we first predict the probability of working for pay in the next
period, conditional on working in the current period. We obtain these predictions from a
logistic regression estimated over nine waves of HRS panel data (1992-2008). The lefthand variable is working for pay at time t+2, conditional on working for pay at time t.
The estimation sample is therefore restricted to those working for pay at time t. The
right-hand variables are age at time t, sex, marital status and education. We then multiply
the predicted probability of working with the respondent’s observed baseline earnings
adjusted for earnings growth. (Real) earnings growth by gender and marital status is also
estimated on two-year transitions observed in the HRS 1992-2008 panel data, but the
estimation sample is restricted to those working in consecutive waves (t to t+2). Because
the time unit in our simulations is one year, both the predicted probability of working at
time t+2 and the 2-year growth rate in earnings are converted into one year rates.
Wealth
Our measure of total bequeathable assets includes the value of all assets (primary
residence, secondary residence, other real estate, transportation, business or farm,
individual retirement accounts (IRAs and similar), stocks and stock mutual funds,
checking and savings accounts, CDs, bonds, other assets) minus all debt (mortgage on
primary residence, other home loans on primary residence, mortgage on secondary
residence, other debt (RANDHRS variable HxATOTB). Baseline wealth for each
household is calculated as the average of the adjacent HRS wave’s total of all assets.
Averaging achieves two things: first, it reduces measurement error in bequeathable
wealth. Second, it approximates bequeathable wealth in the baseline period anchored to a
certain wave of CAMS that lies between two HRS waves. For example, for an
observation anchored to CAMS 2005 we average wealth from HRS 2004 and HRS 2006.
Taxation

21

We account for federal taxes, state taxes, partial taxation of Social Security benefits
as a function of total taxable income, and the taxation of IRA withdrawals. In the
simulations, we calculate the total taxes owed by the each household in each period.
Federal taxes
We calculate gross taxable income as the sum of income from pensions and annuities,
the taxable portion of Social Security benefits, interest income and earnings. We subtract
all applicable deductions to obtain adjusted gross income (AGI). Every household is
assumed to claim the standard deduction ($5,350 for singles and $10,700 for couples).
Additional deductions are applied if the respondent and/or spouse is age 65 or older. To
the adjusted gross income, we apply the tax brackets implied by the federal tax law,
taking into account marital status for determining the bend points.
State taxes
We approximate the amount in state taxes owed by each household in any one
simulation period by applying an average state tax rate that is stratified by age band and
marital status. We obtained these average state tax rates from running all relevant
information available for the HRS 2004 sample through the NBER TAXSIM calculator.
The NBER TAXSIM calculations return for each HRS 2004 household an estimate of
state taxes and federal taxes for each of the 50 states (plus Puerto Rico). We first
calculate an average state tax rate for each HRS 2004 household by taking the ratio of the
average of state taxes owed across the 51 states divided by the average of federal taxes
owed across the 51 states. In a second step we average the resulting household-level state
tax rate by age band and marital status.
Taxation of Social Security benefits
According to federal tax law, the fraction of Social Security benefits that is subject to
taxation depends on the household’s total taxable income. The household only pays tax
on Social Security benefits if the sum of total other income plus 1/2 of the household’s
Social Security income is greater than the base amount, which is $32,000 for couples and
$25,000 for singles. Depending on by how much the base amount is exceeded, between
50% and 85% of Social Security benefits are subject to tax (with again different
thresholds for single and couples). At most 85 percent of Social Security benefits are
taxable. In the simulations we implemented these rules exactly in the computation of
taxable income for each household in each period.
IRA Withdrawals
For each household and each simulation period we calculate the amount of IRA
withdrawals using the following algorithm. First we calculate after-tax income of the
household, taking into account any applicable required minimum IRA distributions at
ages greater than 70. We check whether the household’s after-tax income (including any
mandatory IRA withdrawals) is sufficient to finance the household’s consumption in that
period. If after-tax income is greater than consumption then there is no need for the
household to draw down any other savings. However, if consumption is greater than
after-tax income we calculate how much of that period’s consumption a household needs
to finance out of savings. We assume that housing assets are depleted last (see discussion

22

of housing). Therefore withdrawals from savings are assumed to come proportionally
from IRA assets and from non-housing, non-IRA assets for as long as these are not
depleted. We recalculate the tax liability to take into account that a larger withdrawal
from IRA assets increases the household’s tax liability and may even lead to an increased
marginal tax rate.

Appendix 3: Serial correlation in out-of-pocket spending on health care
To simulate serially correlated out-of-pocket spending we note that in a simple model
of serial correlation
ut   ut 1  vt
where the vt are i.i.d. (0,  2 ) . Then the u are i.i.d. (0,  2 /(1   2 ) . In our spending
data from HRS 2008 we have observations on the u and so we can calculate the variance
of u and the variance of v as V (v)  V (u )(1   2 ) .
Let sat be actual out-of-pocket spending as observed in HRS, and let st be spending
assigned to a person. Then we can simulate the estimated serial correlation and preserve
the distribution of out-of-pocket spending by drawing from the actual distribution in the
first period of the simulation, sa1 and assigning that to out-of-pocket spending in period
1: s1  sa1 . In the next period we draw from the actual distribution, sa 2 and then assign
out-of-pocket s2 as
s2   s1  sa 2 1   2

Then V ( s2 )  V ( sa ) . We continue in this manner
st 1   st  sat 1 1   2
This ignores that we want to only modify wealth by health care spending shocks, that
is, deviations from means. The shock in any period would be
st  sa

where sa is the mean of spending in the HRS. It does not have a t subscript because we
are always drawing from the same distribution (2008 HRS).
The preceding applies to each group defined by age, education, sex and marital status:
each group has its own distribution of sa and its own value of  as shown in Table 4.

23

Table 1: Logistic estimates of the effects of personal characteristics on survival
Males (N=37,797)
Females (N=49,224)
Coefficient Standard Error P-value Coefficient Standard Error P-value
married
0.290
0.043
0.000
0.271
0.043
0.000
education
less than high school
------high school
0.139
0.044
0.001
0.268
0.040
0.000
some college
0.234
0.055
0.000
0.388
0.051
0.000
college or more
0.363
0.106
0.001
0.338
0.075
0.000
couple*college or more
0.196
0.120
0.102
0.290
0.131
0.027
Age spline: age<64
-0.079
0.061
0.197
-0.150
0.073
0.040
age 64-73
-0.083
0.008
0.000
-0.072
0.009
0.000
age 74-83
-0.094
0.006
0.000
-0.103
0.006
0.000
age 84+
-0.109
0.009
0.000
-0.116
0.006
0.000
constant
7.836
3.898
0.044
12.824
4.648
0.006
Source: Authors’ calculations
Table 2: Estimated one-year change in consumption. Single persons (N=2037)
Education
Less than High-school
High-school graduate

N
Female Age
65-69
403
-3.35
70-74
366
-2.49
75-79
316
-4.08
80-84
296
-6.14
85 or over
283
-4.53
Male Age
65-69
114
-1.89
70-74
79
-1.03
75-79
73
-2.62
80-84
67
-4.68
85 or over
40
-3.07
Source: Authors’ calculations

Some
college

College and
above

-2.29
-1.44
-3.02
-5.08
-3.47

-2.31
-1.46
-3.05
-5.11
-3.50

-1.09
-0.23
-1.82
-3.88
-2.27

-0.83
0.02
-1.56
-3.62
-2.01

-0.85
0.00
-1.59
-3.65
-2.04

0.37
1.23
-0.36
-2.42
-0.81

24

Table 3: Estimated one-year change in consumption. Couples (N=4,593)
Education
Less than
High-school
Some
Male Age Male Age
N High-school
graduate
college
Female Age
<5 years
62-64
92
3.59
3.59
3.18
65-69
1,227
-0.86
-0.86
-1.28
70-74
1,060
-1.40
-1.40
-1.81
75-79
689
-1.38
-1.38
-1.79
80+
379
-2.38
-2.38
-2.79
5+ years
65-69
143
-2.31
-2.31
-2.72
70-74
381
-2.85
-2.85
-3.26
75-79
315
-2.83
-2.83
-3.24
80+
307
-3.83
-3.83
-4.24
Source: Authors’ calculations

25

College and
above
3.23
-1.23
-1.77
-1.75
-2.75
-2.68
-3.21
-3.20
-4.19

Table 4. Serial correlation in out-of-pocket medical expenditures
Education
less than high-school high-school some college college or more
Single males
Age 65-69
0.559
0.490
0.454
0.435
70-74
0.682
0.613
0.577
0.558
75-79
0.680
0.610
0.574
0.556
80-84
0.702
0.633
0.597
0.578
85+
0.701
0.632
0.596
0.577
Single females
Age 65-69
0.590
0.521
0.484
0.466
70-74
0.713
0.644
0.608
0.589
75-79
0.711
0.641
0.605
0.587
80-84
0.733
0.664
0.627
0.609
85+
0.732
0.663
0.627
0.608
Couples
Age 62-69
0.529
0.460
0.423
0.405
70-74
0.652
0.583
0.547
0.528
75-79
0.650
0.580
0.544
0.526
80+
0.672
0.602
0.566
0.548
Source: Authors’ calculations

Table 5: Comparison of simulation sample with HRS 2008.
Single Persons
Married persons
Simulation
HRS Simulation
HRS
sample
2008
sample
2008
female (%)
76.6
73.5
61.4
53.5
married (%)
----Education (% distn)
less than high school
25.9
27.2
17.1
20.3
high school
39.2
35.6
43.4
39.0
some college
20.9
21.4
20.4
20.0
college or more
14.1
15.8
19.0
20.7
N
633
831
1092
1519
Source: Authors’ calculations

26

All
Simulation
sample
67.0
63.3
20.3
41.9
20.6
17.2
1725

HRS
HRS
2008 weighted
60.6
58.2
64.6
63.8
22.8
37.8
20.5
18.9
2350

19.0
37.7
21.8
21.5
2350

Table 6. Economic resources and expenditures. Single persons, thousands 2008$
N
percent mean mean mean PV mean mean PV mean median
positive initial PV of annuities PV consumption excess excess
wealth earnings
taxes
wealth wealth
Less than high-school
164
High-school
248
Some college
132
College and above
89
All
633
Source: Authors’ calculations

45.6%
68.0%
66.6%
75.8%
63.0%

60.2
232.2
317.5
538.2
248.4

6.0
13.8
20.1
44.0
17.4

106.8
193.0
226.1
329.2
196.7

3.2
23.3
41.4
95.3
32.0

201.3
266.8
353.3
490.9
299.4

-30.9
149.5
170.8
325.1
131.9

-7.7
74.4
96.7
201.3
50.6

Table 7. Economic resources and expenditures. Couples, thousands 2008$
N percent mean
mean mean PV mean
mean PV
mean median
positive initial
PV of annuities PV taxes consumption excess excess
wealth
future
wealth wealth
earnings
Less than high-school 187
75.1
284.6
14.0 265.4
27.9
321.2
215.0
137.2
High-school
474
84.3
499.2
16.5 395.7
75.7
441.9
394.2
261.5
Some college
223
85.3 1,024.5
22.7 477.6
227.9
595.9
701.4
337.9
College and above
208
88.9 1,406.7
56.7 651.0
319.2
880.4
913.9
572.3
All
1,092
83.8
742.6
25.0 438.7
145.0
536.2
525.2
287.6
Source: Authors’ calculations

27

Table 8. Percent adequately prepared: 95 to 100 percent chance of dying with positive wealth
Single Persons
Married Persons
All
Males
Females
All
Males
Females
Less than high-school
High-school
Some college
College and above
All
Source: Authors’ calculations

33.5
54.4
50.8
61.8
49.3

60.6
61.9
62.5
65.0
62.2

26.7
51.9
47.0
60.9
45.4

66.8
77.4
76.2
85.1
76.8

65.5
74.7
73.4
83.3
74.6

68.0
78.8
77.8
86.6
78.2

Table 9. Percent adequately prepared: 95 to 100 percent chance of dying with positive wealth
after reducing consumption by 10%
Single Persons
Married Persons
All
Males
Females
All
Males
Females
Less than high-school
High-school
Some college
College and above
All
Source: Authors’ calculations

36.0
62.1
53.8
68.5
54.5

63.6
66.7
62.5
65.0
64.9

28

29.0
60.5
51.0
69.6
51.3

70.1
79.5
80.7
88.5
79.9

70.2
77.2
77.2
86.5
77.9

69.9
80.8
82.6
90.2
81.1

Table 10. Sensitivity of adequacy assessment to thresholds.
Percent of persons adequately prepared based on variation in chances of dying with positive
wealth and reduction in initial consumption.
Reduction in initial consumption
Percent chances
Singles
Married persons
of dying with
5 percent 10 percent 15 percent
5 percent 10 percent 15 percent
positive wealth
 95
51.8
54.5
57.2
78.3
79.9
81.4
 90
55.3
58.0
61.1
79.8
81.2
83.0
 85
57.8
60.8
63.5
80.7
82.3
84.6
 80
59.7
Source: Authors’ calculations

62.1

64.9

81.5

83.0

Table 11. Percent with adequate resources by financial planning horizon
Percent adequately prepared: 95 to 100 percent chance of dying with positive
wealth after reducing consumption by 10% by financial planning horizon
Single Persons
Married Persons
All Males Females All Males Females
Next few months
37.1
Next year
46.7
Next few years
67.7
Next 5 to 10 years
63.1
Longer than 10 years
60.0
Total
55.2
Source: Authors’ calculations

32.4
58.3
81.1
82.8
80.0
64.9

38.6
42.4
63.7
58.3
53.3
51.3

70.0
82.2
78.7
81.6
86.2
79.7

68.9
83.0
79.0
76.9
84.3
77.9

70.7
81.7
78.6
84.9
87.5
81.1

Table 12. Percent with adequate resources by self-rated health
Percent adequately prepared: 95 to 100 percent chance of dying with positive
wealth after reducing consumption by 10% by self-rated health
Single Persons
Married Persons
All Males Females
All Males Females
Fair or poor
37.7
Good to excellent
62.5
Total
54.5
Source: Authors’ calculations

44.1
78.7
64.9

35.2
58.2
51.3

29

68.9
83.3
79.9

68.1
81.5
77.9

69.5
84.4
81.1

86.1

Table 13. Effect of out-of-pocket medical expenditure risk on adequacy assessment
Percent adequately prepared: 95 to 100 percent chance of dying with positive wealth
after reducing consumption by 10%
No out-of-pocket risk
With out-of-pocket risk
All
Males
Females
All
Males
Females
Single persons
Less than high-school
43.3
High-school
66.9
Some college
63.6
College and above
74.2
All
61.1
Married persons
Less than high-school
72.7
High-school
82.3
Some college
86.1
College and above
89.4
All
82.8
Source: Authors’ calculations

63.6
66.7
62.5
65.0
64.9

38.2
67.0
64.0
76.8
60.0

36.0
62.1
53.8
68.5
54.5

63.6
66.7
62.5
65.0
64.9

29.0
60.5
51.0
69.6
51.3

73.8
80.2
81.0
86.5
80.5

71.8
83.3
88.9
92.0
84.2

70.1
79.5
80.7
88.5
79.9

70.2
77.2
77.2
86.5
77.9

69.9
80.8
82.6
90.2
81.1

Table 14. Effect of Social Security benefit cut of 30% on adequacy assessment
Percent adequately prepared: 95 to 100 percent chance of dying with positive wealth after
reducing consumption by 10%
30% benefit cut
No benefit cut
All
Males
Females
All
Males
Females
Single persons
Less than high-school
23.8
High-school
48.4
Some college
47.0
College and above
62.9
All
43.8
Married persons
Less than high-school
59.9
High-school
71.1
Some college
73.5
College and above
83.7
All
72.1
Source: Authors’ calculations

48.5
55.6
59.4
65.0
56.1

17.6
45.9
43.0
62.3
40.0

36.0
62.1
53.8
68.5
54.5

63.6
66.7
62.5
65.0
64.9

29.0
60.5
51.0
69.6
51.3

58.3
68.5
69.6
82.3
69.8

61.2
72.4
75.7
84.8
73.5

70.1
79.5
80.7
88.5
79.9

70.2
77.2
77.2
86.5
77.9

69.9
80.8
82.6
90.2
81.1

30

Figure 1. Optimal spending. Single person

Figure 2. Overspending. Single person

31

Figure 3. Under spending. Single person

Figure 4. Optimal spending by couple and subsequent survivor. Widowing at age 80

32

Figure 5. Fitted survival curves. Women by marital status and education (< high school
or college graduate)

Figure 6. Fitted survival curves. Men by marital status and education (< high school or
college graduate)

33

Figure 7. Fitted life-cycle consumption paths. Single females
120
100
80

<high school
high school
some college
college grad
model

60
40
20
0
65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95

Figure 8. Fitted life-cycle consumption paths. Married persons. Age is husband’s age.
Age difference between husband and wife five years or less

34

