NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPLIER RESPONSES TO WAL-MART'S INVASION OF MEXICO
Leonardo Iacovone
Beata Smarzynska Javorcik
Wolfgang Keller
James R. Tybout
Working Paper 17204
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17204

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2011

We thank Andy Bernard, Jan De Loecker and the audiences at the 2008 LACEA, the 2009 NBER
Spring Productivity Meeting, and the 2009 Princeton Summer Trade Conference for comments and
suggestions. We thankfully acknowledge support from the World Bank's Research Support Budget.
The authors are grateful to Gerardo Leyva and Abigail Durán for granting us access to INEGI data
at the offices of INEGI in Aguascalientes under the commitment of complying with the confidentiality
requirements set by the Mexican Laws. Special thanks go to all INEGI employees who provided assistance
and answered our questions, in particular to Gabriel Romero, Alejandro Cano, Araceli Martinez, Armando
Arellanes, Ramon Sanchez, Otoniel Soto, Candido Aguilar, and Adriana Ramirez. We also wish to
thank Thomas Withiam for his excellent work preparing the maps that appear in this paper, and Mauricio
Varela for help with the data. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and should
not be attributed to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the World Bank, its Executive Directors
or the countries they represent.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Leonardo Iacovone, Beata Smarzynska Javorcik, Wolfgang Keller, and James R. Tybout.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Supplier Responses to Wal-Mart's Invasion of Mexico
Leonardo Iacovone, Beata Smarzynska Javorcik, Wolfgang Keller, and James R. Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 17204
July 2011
JEL No. F23,L1,O33
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effect of Wal-Mart's entry into Mexico on Mexican manufacturers of consumer
goods. Guided by firm interviews that suggested substantial heterogeneity across firms in how they
responded to Wal-Mart's entry, we develop a dynamic industry model in which firms decide whether
to sell their products through Walmex (short for Wal-Mart de Mexico), or use traditional retailers.
Walmex provides access to a larger market, but it puts continuous pressure on its suppliers to improve
their product's appeal, and it forces them to accept relatively low prices relative to product appeal.
Simulations of the model show that the arrival of Walmex separates potential suppliers into two groups.
Those with relatively high-appeal products choose Walmex as their retailer, whereas those with lower
appeal products do not. For the industry as a whole, the model predicts that the associated market share
reallocations, adjustments in innovative effort, and exit patterns increase productivity and the rate
of innovation. These predictions accord well with the results from our firm interviews. The model's
predictions are also supported by establishment-level panel data that characterize Mexican producers'
domestic sales, investments, and productivity gains in regions with differing levels of Walmex presence
during the years 1994 to 2002.

Leonardo Iacovone
1818 H St, NW, Mail-stop J8-808
Private and Financial Sector Development
Africa Region, The World Bank
1818 H St, NW, Mail-stop J8-808
Washington, DC 20433
Liacovone@worldbank.org
Beata Smarzynska Javorcik
University of Oxford
beata.javorcik@economics.ox.ac.uk

Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and University of Colorado
and also NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu
James R. Tybout
Department of Economics
Penn State University
517 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
jtybout@psu.edu

1

Introduction

After joining the General Agreement on Tariﬀs and Trade (GATT) in 1986, Mexico adopted a more
welcoming stance toward foreign investors and opened its borders to foreign trade. Taking stock of
these developments–as well as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) negotiations and
the growing purchasing power of Mexico’s middle class–in 1991 Wal-Mart invested in a joint venture
with a major Mexican retailer (Chavez 2002). Following six years of explosive growth, Wal-Mart took
majority control of its investment, becoming Wal-Mart de Mexico (Walmex for short). By 2001 it
controlled nearly half of the Mexican retail market, and by 2003 it had become Mexico’s largest private
employer (Chavez 2002, Case 2004).1
This paper analyzes the eﬀects of Walmex ’s ascendence on Mexico’s manufacturers of consumer
goods. After summarizing the ways in which Walmex changed the retail market, we formalize the
eﬀects of these changes on consumer good suppliers using an industrial evolution model that builds on
Ericson and Pakes (1995) and Weintraub et al (2008). Its key distinctive feature is that heterogeneous
producers can choose each period whether to sell their output through Walmex or traditional retailers.
Those that opt for Walmex reach a larger consumer base, but they must accept Walmex ’s pricing
schedule, and this generally leads to lower mark-ups.
Importantly, our modeling exercise was informed by a series of interviews on the impact of WalMart’s FDI that we conducted with Mexican firm representatives and industry experts.2

Those

interviewed frequently mentioned that Walmex ’s entry had considerably sharpened the distinction of
high- versus low-performing firms. They also stated that, among firms choosing to deal with Walmex,
the productivity eﬀects were often positive.
Simulations of our model show that it delivers exactly these predictions. The availability of a
1

For details of Wal-Mart’s expansion into Mexico see Chavez (2002), Tegel (2003), and Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout
(2008).
2
We have conducted two series of interviews on which we are drawing, in the years 2005 and 2007; results from the
2005 interviews are summarized in Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout (2008).

1

Walmex option can cause producers to self-select into two groups on the basis of their product’s
appeal to consumers. Firms that enter the current period oﬀering high-appeal products choose to
sell through Walmex, while the rest continue selling through traditional retailers. Further, some of
the former firms invest more in product upgrading, especially at the upper end of the product appeal
distribution, while others scale back their investments. In addition, firms that switch to Walmex see
their prices and mark-ups fall, especially those producing moderate- as opposed to high-appeal goods.
And finally, high-appeal firms gain market share when the Walmex option arrives, while low-appeal
firms contract or exit entirely.
While we lack the data necessary to estimate the structural parameters of our model, we show it
is consistent with the observed behavior of Mexican producers during the Walmex expansion period
1994 through 2002. Specifically, using plant-level panel data obtained from the Mexican Statistical
Oﬃce (INEGI), we find the predicted adjustments in size distributions, productivity distributions,
investment, and innovative activity occurred exactly where one would expect them: among producers
who both (1) produced the types of goods sold at Walmex and (2) were located in regions where
Walmex established a presence. These results are based on an estimator that treats the local presence
of both Walmex and non-Walmex retailers as endogenously determined.
Our study contributes to a number of literatures. First and most obviously, it adds to the growing
body of evidence on the causes and eﬀects of Wal-Mart’s operations.3 Unlike most of this literature,
however, it focuses on Wal-Mart’s eﬀects on upstream manufacturers rather than its eﬀects on other
retailers.4 Second, we extend the large literature concerning the impact of foreign direct investment
3

See Basker (2007) for an overview.
Wal-Mart’s entry into U.S. regions has been found to be associated with lower retail prices (Basker 2005a), while
the evidence on job creation has been mixed mixed (Basker 2005b). Using a model of strategic competition to analyze
market share reallocation between two major—Wal-Mart and Kmart—and a fringe of smaller retailers, Jia (2006) finds
that Wal-Mart is largely responsible for the demise of small discount retailers. Holmes (2011) examines the dynamic
pattern of store openings in the U.S. to estimate Wal-Mart’s implied gain from establishing stores near to each other,
due perhaps to the sharing infrastructure, distribution centers, and advertising expenditures.
4

2

(FDI) on host country firms.5 To the analysis of the reduced-form eﬀect of FDI that is typical in this
literature, our approach adds a dynamic structural model that describes the nature of the linkages
between Wal-Mart and its upstream suppliers and also characterizes firms’ behavior in key dimensions
such as sales, upgrading, and productivity.6 Third, our work adds to the heterogenous firm literature
by describing a new way in which changes in the business environment lead to dramatically diﬀerent
responses by firms with diﬀerent productvity levels or product appeal.7 And finally, we contribute a
new application to the growing empirical literature on industry dynamics.8
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides background on Wal-Mart’s entry into
the Mexican retail market. Section 3 introduces the basic trade-oﬀ that suppliers contemplating selling
through Wal-Mart face, embeds this trade-oﬀ in an industrial evolution model, and characterizes the
implications for industries that produce consumer goods. Regression results are presented in section
4, while section 5 summarizes the results and oﬀers conclusions.

The Wal-Mart invasion in Mexico

2
2.1

Changes in business practices

As we have noted elsewhere, Walmex acted as a catalyst for two fundamental changes in the Mexican
retail sector:

First, the sector modernized its warehousing, distribution, and inventory management.
Second, it changed the way it interacted with its suppliers. The former changes partly
reflected the growing availability of information technology. But they also reflected the
5

Surveys of the literature include Keller (2010), Lipsey and Sjoholm (2005), as well as Görg and Greenway (2004).
The reduced-form impact of global retail chains on supplying industries is estimated in Javorcik and Li (2008).
7
In particular, a number of recent papers in the trade literature link product market conditions to joint adjustments
in market shares and investments in innovation (Yeaple 2005, Ederington and McCalman 2007, Bustos 2007, Constantini
and Melitz 2008, Verhoogen, 2008, and Iacovone, Keller, and Rauch 2011).
8
Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry, and Pakes (forthcoming) provide a recent survey of this literature.
6

3

innovations that Walmex imported from the United States. Walmex not only introduced
the system of channeling deliveries from suppliers through centralized warehouses, it also
require[d] delivery trucks to have appointments and drivers to carry standard identification
cards. Those that missed appointments were subject to fines. Shipments [had to] be on
standardized palettes (rentable from Walmex ), they [had to be] shrink-wrapped with corner
protectors, and they [were] subject to third-party quality audits. (Javorcik, Keller, and
Tybout 2008)

Walmex has maintained two separate distribution systems in Mexico: one for its supermarket
chains and one for Sam’s chain of wholesale stores.9 Many producers serve both types of distribution
centers. The principal diﬀerence between the two is the size of product packaging. All suppliers
have the option of delivering their products to a single distribution center, but those with multiple
plants around the country are encouraged to deliver to multiple centers. A single truck-load is the
usual unit of delivery volume, though three centers are able to receive deliveries of smaller sizes and
aggregate them into full truck-loads. Distribution centers specialize in terms of product type: dry
goods, clothing, and perishables, including frozen products. Further, only some of the perishables
sold in Walmex stores are channeled through distribution centers–many are purchased locally. Thus,
proximity to Walmex retailers is particularly important for perishable goods producers.
Centralized distribution systems, the use of palettes, and other innovations introduced by Walmex
have diﬀused to the other major retail chains. According to Tegel (2003), in the early 2000s Walmex
was "the only Mexican retail chain that [had] its own centralized distribution system. Suppliers
thus [could] deliver their goods just once to any of 11 Walmex depots scattered across the country,
rather than to each individual store." Interviews conducted for this study in 2005 and 2007 revealed
that since the time of Tegel’s writing, other major retailers have followed suit and introduced similar
9

Its clothing store chain Suburbia and restaurant chain VIP support separate distribution centers as well.

4

organizational changes in their relationships with suppliers such as centralized warehousing and the
use of palettes.
Despite this diﬀusion of retail practices, Walmex has remained a technological leader in Mexico.
This is partially because Walmex continues to make improvements to its distribution system, and
partly because local competitors have not always adopted Walmex ’s innovations. For example, while
all perishables sold by Walmex were packaged into carton boxes and wooden crates in 2003, 90
percent of them were packaged in replenishable plastic containers (RPCs) by 2007.10 The leading
Mexican supermarket chain, Soriana, already uses this technology and some others are in the process
of introducing it. But Soriana is the only retailer besides Walmex that has a cold chain. Similarly,
Walmex is the only retailer that uses computerized tracking of sales and inventories and is able to
provide suppliers with daily sales and inventory figures at the level of individual stores.
The profound changes in the retail sector, initiated by Walmex and partially diﬀused to other
retailers, have resulted in a significant decline in distribution costs faced by Mexican suppliers. And
critically, the spectacular expansion of Walmex ’s retail network has allowed its suppliers to reach a
larger segment of the Mexican market. Several other factors make Walmex an attractive downstream
retailer. First, it pays the agreed upon amount on time, while other supermarket chains are often late
with payments or subtract arbitrary fees from the payment.11 Second, the high creditworthiness of
Wal-Mart allows its suppliers to benefit from factoring. Factoring involves selling commercial trade
receivables in order to obtain working capital. Thus rather than waiting 30 or 90 days to receive
a payment, a Wal-Mart supplier may sell for a small fee its account receivables and immediately
obtain working capital. In many countries, factoring has become an important source of financing –
10

RPCs have many advantages over carton boxes and wooden crates. They are more sanitary and better keep the
desired temperature. They also reduce the handling costs as they have a standardized weight, are more stable and easier
to move, fit exactly on a pallet and can be easily stocked one on top of another. Finally, they are more environmentally
friendly.
11
According to interviews with Mexican entrepreneurs, supermarket chains often match rebates oﬀered to consumers
by their competitors. While Wal-Mart will cover the costs of such impromptu rebates, other supermarket chains try to
pass them on to the suppliers of discounted goods.

5

especially short term working capital-for small and medium-size enterprises.(Klapper 2006)
The benefits of dealing with Walmex come at a cost, however. Because it controls such a large
share of the retailer market, it has far greater bargaining power than its rivals. This allows it to drive
down its suppliers’ profit margins, making take-or-leave-it oﬀers. Often it extracts price concessions
ranging from 5 to 25 percent below the prices of the same product at other outlets.12 Further, Walmex
demands annual wholesale price reductions of those suppliers who do not improve their product from
one year to the next. "Those firms that are unable to frequently introduce new goods—and thus avoid
establishing a benchmark price—are squeezed relatively more (Fishman 2003). Those suppliers that
balk at Wal-Mart’s demands are simply discontinued, and new suppliers are brought in" (Javorcik,
Keller, and Tybout 2008). In section 3 below, we will develop a model that captures each of these
features of the Mexican retail sector in the Walmex era.

2.2

The geography of Walmex ’s growth

Diﬀerent suppliers gained access to the option to sell through Walmex at diﬀerent points in time. In
Figures 1 to 4, we show the growth of Walmex in terms of geographic space over the years 1993 to
2007. Figure 1 shows the location of various formats of Wal-Mart shops in the year 1993 across the
thirty-two Mexican states. Since diﬀerences in demand play a key role for Wal-Mart’s expansion, we
have shaded the states in terms of population density. The darker the color, the higher is population
density, which in 1993 attains its maximum in the area of the Mexico City (Distrito Federal ).
Among the diﬀerent Wal-Mart formats, we distinguish Bodega Aurreras, which are lower end grocery stores, Superamas, which are basic big box stores that do not sell food, and Walmex Supercenters,
which are "big box" stores that sell groceries. Finally, Sam’s Club is a bulk version of the Supercenter.
We also note the location of Walmex distribution centers, of which there were nine in 2007.
12
We base these percentages on studies of Walmart in the United States (Basker (2005a, Business Planning Solutions
2005). For discussion of these studies, see Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout (2008).

6

Wal-Mart’s geographic expansion strategy in Mexico diﬀered from its strategy in the United States,
where it gradually radiated out from Bentonville, Arkansas (see Holmes, 2011). Although it began in
the highly populated central areas, reflecting the existing locations of its venture partner (Aurrera),
it quickly planted stores in the far North-West as well as in the South-East of Mexico (Figure 2). At
the same time, as Figures 3 and 4 indicate, the concentration of Walmex stores remains higher in the
central states of Mexico throughout the period of 1993 to 2007. Finally, note that the establishment
of distribution centers has generally followed the opening of stores. Thus the distribution centers have
tended to reinforce the eﬀects of the stores on local suppliers’ access to Walmex ’s consumer base.
We will exploit these expansion patterns when we test for the eﬀects of Walmex on consumer
goods suppliers in Section 4. Before we do so, however, we develop an industrial evolution model with
retailers that generates our testable predictions.

Modeling Upstream Industry Evolution with Walmex

3
3.1

The Essential Walmex Eﬀects

Walmex does two things that consumers like. First, it brings together many products that they wish
to purchase in convenient locations, thereby decreasing their transactions costs. And thanks to its
unique computerized inventory and sales tracking system, Wal-Mart is considered to be the only chain
that is "never out of stock."13 Second, Wal-Mart oﬀers quality merchandise at very competitive prices.
Taken alone, the fact that Walmex eﬃciently moves goods to a very large customer base makes it
very attractive to producers. However, this is tempered by the price concessions per unit of product
appeal (or quality) of the product that Walmex demands. The suppliers we interviewed reported
being asked for a "logistics discount," eﬀectively compensating Walmex for the lower distribution
costs it realizes with its centralized logistics and sourcing system Similarly, Walmex recognizes that
13

This assertion is based on our interviews with executives.

7

its large consumer base allows its suppliers to reap scale economies and argues that this justifies the
lower wholesale prices it demands. And, as mentioned earlier, Walmex expects annual declines in
prices from all of its suppliers. Even large multinationals may have a hard time resisting price cuts,
according to one executive–if Walmex does not like the way negotiations are going in Mexico, it will
escalate them to the level of U.S. headquarters.
The ability of Walmex to demand increases in quality of the goods, relative to its price, also stems
from the fact that by lowering the distribution costs it has turned many small producers, previously
operating in their local markets, into national suppliers selling under their own brands or Walmex ’s
store brands. While major industry players often own a fleet of trucks which they use to distribute their
products nationwide, smaller producers are usually unable to bear the cost of product distribution
beyond their locality. By allowing small producers to deliver their products locally and have them
distributed nationwide, Wal-Mart turned small producers into viable competitors of the large players.
Producers weigh the larger market size versus the lower quality-adjusted price they receive when
deciding whether to use Walmex as a retailer.
The presence of Walmex also aﬀects incentives to engage in process or product innovation. Anecdotal evidence and interviews suggest that making product improvements allows suppliers to escape
the mandatory price cuts from one year to the next that kick in when producers do not upgrade their
product. Similarly, suppliers can obtain higher prices by introducing new product varieties. Interviewees in Mexico often reported that Walmex wants to source products that are diﬀerent from those
supplied to the competing supermarket chains. Finally, the usual Schumpeterian forces are at play
when Walmex increases the size of the customer base, and thereby increases the number of units over
which one can reaps the benefits of a cost-reducing innovation.
We now turn to describing a formal model of these interactions.

8

3.2

A Model of Walmex ’ Upstream Industry

Drawing on Pakes and McGuire (1994), Pakes and Ericson (1995), and Weintraub, Benkard and van
Roy (2008), here we develop an industrial evolution model that captures these main consequences
of Walmex ’s presence. The model characterizes supplying firms’ pricing decisions, retailer choices,
investments in product quality improvements, and entry as well as exit decisions.
The structure of our model is similar to Weintraub et al.’s (2008), with the additional feature
that firms choose how to retail their products. Specifically, forward-looking, risk-neutral firms make
optimal decisions as they compete against each other in an infinite-horizon dynamic game. Time is
measured in discrete increments, and within each period the following sequence of events occurs:

1. Taking into consideration its scrap value, its current product quality, and other firms’ product
qualities, each incumbent firm decides whether to continue operating or shut down. Those that
do not shut down also decide how much to invest in quality improvement.
2. Each potential entrant calculates the present value of the profit stream from a new firm, takes
stock of sunk entry costs, and decides whether to become a producer next period.
3. Taking stock of Walmex ’s take-it-or-leave-it price oﬀer and minimum quality requirements, each
incumbent firm decides whether to use Walmex as its retailer or deal with traditional retailers.
4. Incumbent firms compete in the spot market and generate their current period operating profits.
Those that are selling through Walmex must oﬀer their goods at Walmex ’s dictated prices; others
are free to choose their own price.
5. The outcomes of firms’ investments in quality improvements are realized, and the industry takes
on a new state.
6. The next period begins.

9

3.2.1

The profit function

To develop firms’ profit functions, we begin with a logit demand system that allows for a retailer eﬀect.
Let I denote the set of incumbent firms in period , each of which produces a single, diﬀerentiated
project. Also let firm ’s product have quality level   relative to goods outside the industry of
interest,14 and (suppressing time subscripts) express the net indirect utility of product  for the 
consumer as:

 = 1 ln(  ) +    + 2 ln ( −  ) + 

(1)



=   +  

Here    0 measures the extra appeal of product  when it is available at Walmex,  is a dummy
variable that takes a value of unity if producer  sells through Walmex,  is the (exogenous) expenditure level of a typical household, and  is a Type I extreme value disturbance that picks up
unobserved idiosyncratic features of consumer . The parameter   is positive because products
available at Walmex are relatively accessible to the average consumer.15
Assuming that each consumer purchases a single unit of the product that gives her the highest
indirect utility, and letting the mass of consumers be measured by  it is well known that (1) implies
the total demand for product  is


 =  · 
where:
14

Quality in this model is simply an index of product demand, controlling for price. So   may be thought of as
responding to investments in either advertising or product improvements.
15
Holmes (2011) also uses a logit specification, but makes the opposite assumption that consumers lose satisfication
by shopping at Wal-Mart rather than other retailers.

10

£ ¤
exp  
£ ¤
 = (|w P ξ) = P

 exp   + 1

(2)

©
ª
w = { | ∈ I}  P = { | ∈ I}  and ξ =   | ∈ I  Further, if all firms sell all of their output
through traditional retailers (i.e.,  = 0 ∀  ∈ ), the set of pure strategy Bertrand-Nash prices

satisfies (2), (1) and:
 =  +

 + 2  (1 −  )
 ∈I
1 + 2

(3)

where  is the marginal cost of production for firm  (Berry 1994).
We make several assumptions at this point to keep the model tractable. First, firms diﬀer in terms
of their product quality, but not their marginal costs. Thus, we hereafter drop the  subscript on
. Second, each supplier either sells through traditional retailers or through Walmex, but not both.
While this is not entirely realistic, it will be close to the truth in markets where local retailers and
Walmex are both present, since the latter will underprice the former and capture most of the market.
Third, Walmex ’s take-it-or-leave-it price oﬀer to any supplier –hereafter denoted   –depends upon
  according to:

  = 0 + 3 ln(  ) 3  0

(4)

This specification implies that the improvements in product quality ease Walmex’s price ceiling, while
reductions in quality relative to the outside good force firms to cut their prices, as discussed in section 2
above. Finally, in addition to the pricing constraint (4), we assume that Walmex imposes a minimum
quality standard on all its suppliers:   ≥  ∀ ∈ W1  where W1 ={| = 1  ∈ I} is the set of
suppliers who do business with Walmex.
Since there are no sunk costs associated with starting or stopping a Walmex relationship, suppliers
choose their retailers period by period, without worrying about the implications of their current choices

11

for their future retailing options. When the subset W1 of incumbent firms chooses to use Walmex as
their retailer, and the remaining incumbent firms W0 ={| = 0  ∈ I} compete pure Bertrand-Nash

ª
©
in prices, the set of prices for these non-Walmex firms–hereafter denoted P0 =  | ∈ W0 –solves

©
ª
1
(1), (2) and (3), given that Walmex firms’ prices are fixed at P =   | ∈ W1 . The associated

profits for the   non-Walmex firm are

  = (  = 0|w−  ξ) = ( − ) · 0 · 
where w− = (1  2   −1  +1   ) collects the retailing decisions of all firms except firm 
1

and 0 is the share function (2) evaluated at P =P ∪ P0 , ξ and w.16 Analogously, if firm  were to
switch from traditional retailers to Walmex, and all other firms were to stick with their initial retailing
choices,  would earn operating profits:

¡
¢
  = (  = 1|w−  ξ) =   −  · 1 · 
where 1 is given by (2) evaluated at the same w− and ξ but at the equilibrium price vector that
would obtain if firm  were to switch to Walmex. Firms’ retailer choices are Nash equilibria so, given
the choices of other supplier firms, no firm will wish to adjust its choice of retailer. Thus in all
equilibria:

[(  = 1|w−  ξ) − (  = 0|w−  ξ)] · 
+[(  = 0|w−  ξ) − (  = 1|w−  ξ)] · (1 −  ) ≥ 0 ∀ 
16
In principle, the   Walmex supplier might want to price at less than the ceiling    We check that no Walmex
supplier does better at a price below its ceiling in each equilibrium we calculate.

12

While multiple equilibria may exist, we limit our attention to equilibria in which all firms above
some quality threshold sell their product through Walmex, and all firms below that threshold sell their
product through traditional retailers. Doing so allows us to establish a mapping from ξ to w and to
thereby express the profits of all incumbent firms as a function of the vector ξ alone. Hereafter we
¡
¢
will express the profits for firm  when the industry is in state ξ as  ∗    ξ−  where ξ− gives the
product quality levels for all incumbent firms except  0 . (Thus ξ =  ∪ ξ− .)

3.2.2

The dynamic problem

Although current period retailing decisions do not aﬀect future period earnings, there are two features of our model that make it forward-looking. First, entry and exit are not frictionless. When
entrerpreneurs create new firms, they incur sunk start-up costs (hereafter  ), and when they shut
down their firms they receive its scrap value (hereafter    ). Their entry and exit decisions thus
involve comparisions of expected future profit streams with entry costs and scrap values, respectively.
Second, each firm’s product appeal () evolves over time, and the processes that these indices follow
are dependent upon firms’ R&D expenditures.
Define  to be the current level of R&D undertaken by the   producer in order to influence its
product appeal next period, hereafter denoted  0 . Further, assume that for any firm , all realizations
©
ª
on   are elements of a discrete ordered set  1     ,     +1 ∀ ∈  +  that   moves at most one

position in the ordered set per period, and that   is measured relative to the appeal of goods outside
the industry. Then, if R&D eﬀorts are successful with probability


1+ 

and if outside goods improve

one step in quality with exogenous probability , firm ’s product quality evolves according to:

13

£
¤
Pr  0 =  +1 |  =   =


1+

· (1 − )

´
³
£ 0
¤



Pr   =  |  =  = 1 − 1+ (1 − ) +
³
´
£
¤

Pr  0 =  −1 |  =   = 1 − 1+  


1+ 

(5)

We now summarize the dynamic optimization problem that firms solve. At the beginning of each
period, each incumbent firm takes stock of its current product quality and the product quality of all
of its rivals. It then decides whether to continue operating or shut down. If it continues operating,
it also chooses an R&D level,  and a retailing strategy, . To characterize these decisions, let the
state of the industry be summarized by s = (1  2    ), where  is the number of firms that are
currently at the  quality level. Similarly, let s− be the same vector, except in that it leaves firm 
out of the count.17 Then firm  chooses its R&D level to solve:

¡

    s−

¢

∙
¸
© ∗¡
¢
£ ¡ 0 0 ¢¤ª
= max   max     s− −  ·  + Ω     s−


(6)

Here  is the unit cost of R&D,  is the one period discount factor, and the expectation operator is based on firm ’s beliefs about the transition density for the industry state, excluding itself:
³
´
Ω s0− |s− . This perceived transition density in turn reflects firm ’s perceptions of the policy

functions that other firms in the industry use to make their exit or entry decisions and to choose their

R&D spending levels.
Finally, there is a large pool of potential entrants who stand ready to create new firms. They do
so when the expected profit stream covers their entry costs,   so the mass of entrants each period
is just large enough to drive the net expected profit stream for the marginal entrant to zero, except
in the corner case where even a single entrant expects negative net returns. New entrants start with
17

This vector contains the same information as −  but it is smaller dimension, and it does not track individual firms
through time. Since firms need only keep track of the state of the industry, and not of the individual shocks to their
various competitiors, it is better suited for analysis of the dynamic equilibrium.

14

some relatively modest product quality,   .

3.2.3

Equilibrium

The industry is in dynamic equilibrium when all firms correctly solve their optimization problems and
their beliefs about industrial evolution patterns (as characterized by Ω (·)) are consistent with the
realized Markov process for industry states. Several methods for identifying this kind of equilibrium
have been developed; we rely on the approach developed by Weintraub et al. (2008).18
The basic idea is the following. So long as the number of incumbent firms is fairly large, the
industry state is insensitive to the idiosyncratic outcomes of R&D investments by individual firms.
And since there are no other shocks in the model, each firm’s optimal behavior is approximated by
³
´
its behavior under the assumption that s− is time-invariant and Ω s0− |s− is thus a degenerate

distribution. The associated equilibrium concept is called an "oblivous equilbrium" by Weintraub et
al. (2008) to highlight the assumption that firms ignore the variations in s− due to idiosyncratic
product appeal shocks.

3.2.4

Implications

To estimate the parameters of our model would require information on firm-level retailing decisions,
with and without a Walmex option. Unfortunately, such data are unavailable. We therefore proceed
by finding parameter values that generate plausible size distributions of suppliers, entry and exit
patterns, R&D patterns, and firm mark-ups. Then, by comparing simulated equilibria under two
polar cases–complete access to Walmex and zero access to Walmex–we characterize the likely eﬀects
of the Walmex invasion on Mexican producers of consumer goods. Finally, in section 4 we confirm the
relevance of these possible eﬀects using micro data on the changes in industrial structures that have
18

The main challenge is to deal with the fact that
of possible industry states  is very large, and num the number

ber of transition probabilities summarized by Ω s0− |s− is the square of this very large number. Ackerberg et al.
(forthcoming) provide a useful discussion of solution techniques in the context of dynamic model estimation.

15

Table 1: Parameters used for Simulation
Parameter
C


3

Parameter determines
Marginal costs
  boost
Minimum   appeal
Product appeal-price relationship

Value
1.5
1.0
2.0
0.4

occurred in regions where Walmex ’s presence has grown.

3.3

Model Simulations

To generate our simulation experiments, we adapt Weintraub et al’s (2010) code to accomodate profit
functions with endogenous retailer choice.19 The key parameter values we use are reported in Table 1
and the simulation results are summarized in Figure 5.
The first (upper-left) panel of this figure shows that in the absence of Walmex, all firms have
substantial mark-ups, and price increases slightly with product quality (the smooth [blue] line at a
price of about 2.4).20 When the option to sell through Walmex is oﬀered to firms, the lower quality
(or appeal) firms decline to do so, even some with quality above the minimum acceptable to Walmex.
Accordingly, these firms continue to price around 2.4, maintaining a large mark-up over their marginal
cost of 1.5. On the other hand, those with product quality of roughly 2.2 find it worth their while to
sell through Walmex and take a major price cut because they gain access to a much larger consumer
base. The higher the firm’s product quality, the more attractive Walmex is, since their market share
increases almost in proportion to their quality, and since Walmex is willing to let high quality firms
charge higher prices.
It is noteworthy that the firms with product quality just high enough to induce them to work with
Walmex are not better oﬀ in the Walmex equilibrium than in the no-Walmex equilbrium. To the
19

For details on the equilibrium concept and solution algorithm, the reader is referred to Weintraub et al. (2007).
The lack of price sensitivity to quality reflects the fact that even high-quality firms have small market shares, so
changes in its product appeal does not lead to large changes in their market power.
20

16

contrary, they would have preferred that Walmex had never become an option for anyone. However,
once the option is there, competition from suppliers who sell through it causes these firms to do worse
if they rely on traditional retailers than if they cut their prices and tap into Walmex ’s large consumer
base.
The top-right panel of Figure 5 shows that the lowest quality firms that sell through Walmex invest
less in innovation–and thus innovate less frequently–than they would have if they had not had a
Walmex option (the Walmex case has a higher maximum innovation, for the highest-quality firms).
This is also true of those firms that opt to remain with traditional retailers. The reason is that these
firms lose market share (and profit margin) relative to the high quality firms when Walmex becomes
a retailing option. Accordingly, the returns to successful innovation for these firms become smaller.
Once the quality level rises above about 2.5, firms—all of whom retail through Walmex —innovate
more than they did in the absence of Walmex (Figure 5, top right). The accompanying increase in
product quality (see equation 5) together with the price setting in the presence of Walmex implies a
lower quality-adjusted price, and therefore higher sales (see equation 1). In contrast, low-quality firms,
which do not sell through Walmex and also do not upgrade their product, will tend to experience lower
sales because their quality-adjusted price increased. Our model therefore predicts a reallocation of
market shares from low- to high-quality firms.
The model predicts for capital investment a pattern similar to the one we have found for innovation
(Figure 5, lower left): firms that decide to retail through Walmex choose higher investment rates than
firms that stick with traditional retailers. More generally, in a model with multiple dimensions of
innovation (product, process, organizational, etc) it is reasonable to believe that firms that choose
to sell through Walmex will generally do more of all of these things compared to firms that decide
not to go through Walmex. We therefore expect that productivity gains after Walmex entry will be
concentrated among firms that decide to sell through Walmex.

17

The final panel of Figure 5 shows that, although Walmex increases industry-wide sales by making
products more accessible and lowering their prices relative to product appeal, it reduces the number
of suppliers. It is a consequence of the fact that firms at all but the highest appeal levels earn lower
operating profits when Walmex is present. So, against the positive welfare eﬀects of Walmex for
consumers who are able to consume high-appeal brands at a more convenient location and a lower
price, one must weigh the capital losses imposed on entrepreneurs whose profitability is reduced,
sometimes to the point of exit, and the welfare losses of consumers who preferred the brands that are
driven from the market.
We now ask whether our model’s characterization of supplier reactions to Walmex is consistent
with the evidence from Mexican manufacturing firms during Walmex ’ expansion in Mexico.

4

Regression evidence from micro data

4.1

Data sources and definitions

Our analysis is based on establishment-level data from the Encuesta Industrial Anual (EIA) and the
Encuesta Industrial Mensual (EIM) administered by the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía
(INEGI) in Mexico. The EIA is an annual industrial survey that covers about 85 percent of Mexican
industrial output, with the exception of “maquiladoras.” The EIA was started in 1963 and then
expanded in subsequent years, with the last expansion taking place in 1994 after the 1993 census.
In our analysis, we use the information for the 1993-2002 period. The unit of observation is a plant
described as “the manufacturing establishment where the production takes place”.21

Each plant is

classified by industry (clase) on the basis of its principal product. The industry classification is
equivalent to the 6-digit level Mexican System of Classification for Productive Activities (CMAP).
21

In the following, we occasionally use the term firm instead of establishment (or plant). It should be kept in mind
however that several establishments can be part of the same firm.

18

Our sample includes 6,867 plants spread across 205 classes of activity. In each of the selected 205
clases the survey samples the largest firms until the coverage reaches 85% of the sectoral output. In
sectors with fewer than 20 plants, all entities are surveyed. Moreover, plants with more than 100
employees are always included in the sample. In addition to standard plant-level data, the EIA survey
includes details of plant-level activities associated with production upgrading, such as investment in
physical assets and R&D expenditures. This feature of the dataset makes it particularly suitable for
examining the question at hand.
The Encuesta Industrial Mensual is a monthly survey that is collected by INEGI to monitor shortterm trends and dynamics. The survey has been run in parallel with the EIA and has covered the
same plants. We use the EIM data for the period 1994-2002 covering the same 205 clases. The
principal diﬀerence with EIA is its periodicity, its data content (it records the physical quantity and
value of domestic sales, which allows for calculation of unit values) as well as the level of aggregation
(plant-product rather than plant level). We aggregate monthly EIM data into annual observations.
The EIM contains information on 3,396 unique products. Each clase contains a list of products,
which was developed in 1993 and remained unchanged during the entire period under observation.
For instance, the clase of distilled alcoholic beverages (identified by the CMAP code 313014) lists 13
products: gin, vodka, whisky, fruit liquors, coﬀee liquors, liquor “habanero”, “rompope”, prepared
cocktails, cocktails (made from agave, brandy, rum, table wine), alcohol extract for liquor preparation. The clase of small electrical appliances contains 29 products, including vacuum cleaners, coﬀee
makers, toasters, toaster ovens, 110 volt heaters and 220 volt heaters (within each group of heaters the
classification distinguishes between heaters of diﬀerent sizes: less than 25 liters, 25-60 liters, 60-120
liters, more than 60 liters). These examples illustrate the narrowness of product definitions and the
richness of micro-level information available in this dataset.
We combine the plant-level data with time series information on the number and floor space of

19

Walmex stores in each Mexican state. To construct our measure of access to Walmex, we express
Walmex floor space in each state as a share of total retailer floor space, which we obtained from the
Asociacion Nacional Tiendas de Autoservicio y Departamentales (ANTAD).22 In this calculation, the
floor space of all four of Walmex relevant store formats in Mexico (Wal-Mart Supercenters, Bodegas
Aurrera, Sam’s, and Superamas) are combined. Data are missing for some years, in part because
Walmex did not participate in the industry association ANTAD in all years. We have estimated the
missing floor space data based on the number of Walmex stores by state, using information that was
provided to us by Walmex itself. Details can be found in Appendix 1.
In the following we discuss the empirical approach of this section.

4.2

Empirical strategy

To examine whether the model gives a good description of producers’ reactions to Walmex, we estimate
a series of reduced form regressions. These regressions relate the cross-establishment distributions of
variables such as sales and R&D to the presence of Walmex and non-Walmex retailing opportunities.
Walmex eﬀects on local industry structures are identified by diﬀerences in diﬀerences. The first
dimension in which we distinguish establishments is their product type: we contrast those 6-digit
industrial clasifications that include goods carried by Walmex with those that do not. The other
dimension is the geographic location of the establishments: we posit that establishments located in
proximity to Walmex stores should be aﬀected to a larger extent than those located farther away.
In principle, proximity to a Walmex distribution center should give a supplier access to Walmex’s
national consumer base. However, proximity to Walmex’ s retail stores should improve access for
several reasons. First, producers located close to Walmex stores are likely to be better informed
about the goods Walmex carries and the supplier-buyer relationships it oﬀers. Second, our interviews
22

Non-Walmex retailers here include Mexican-owned stores as well as other foreign-owned chains such as Carrefour
and HEB. We are grateful to Mauricio Varela for help with these data.

20

with Walmex executives, Mexican firms, and industry experts suggest that Walmex makes an eﬀort
to source from local producers. This eﬀort is made in order to appeal to the tastes of local consumers,
cut down on transportation costs (especially for perishables) and build goodwill in local communities.

4.2.1

Relating Walmex presence to industry structure

We are interested in whether producers with diﬀerent levels of product appeal respond to Walmex ’s
presence diﬀerently, as implied by our model. To this end we sort our sample of Mexican suppliers
into quartiles  ∈ {1 2 3 4} based on their initial sales levels, since our model implies that sales are
monotonic with product appeal, .23 Diﬀerential responses can then be gauged using estimates of:
¢
¡
()
()
()
()

 −  () =  1  _ +  2 ( _ × _() ) +  3 _() +  4  ()
()

()

 + 
+  5  ()
6

() ¡

ln () +  7

¢
()
()
  × ln () +  + () +  

(7)

where the superscript () allows parameters to vary with establishment ’s size quartile, and  is the
outcome variable for establishment i at time t, expressed as a deviation from its (6-digit) industry-wide
period- average value. By using this deviation form, we limit the identification of Walmex eﬀects to
changes in the shapes of industry distributions.
The two key explanatory variables in this regression are  _ , a dummy identifying establishments whose 6-digit product categories are found at Walmex stores, and _()  Walmex ’s share
of the retail market in establishment ’s region, ()24 The interaction term  _ × _() measures the eﬀect of Walmex ’s regional presence on producers who supply the type of goods carried by
Walmex versus other types of producers, and comparisons of  2 across size quantiles indicate how the
23
Quartile cut-oﬀs are specific to firms’ 4-digit industries. To avoid simultaneity problems, we do not let quartile
assignments vary over time for a given establishment. Firms are assigned to a quartile based on their position in the
sales distribution in 1994. INEGI did not make an eﬀort to systematically record firm entry, so our data set does not
include new entrants.
24
To construct  _, we classify goods on the basis of information available on Walmex ’s website, store visits, and
industry analysis.

21

responses of producers in these product categories depend upon product appeal.
The remaining variables are controls:  is the log of the gross domestic product of the estab and    are Mexican and U.S. nominal tariﬀ rates, respectively,
lishment’s state, and  ()
()

in the establishment’s 6-digit industry.25 These latter variables are included to capture changes in
the degree of competition that were brought about by the NAFTA liberalizations. Finally, we include
time eﬀects,   which capture nationwide changes in market conditions that aﬀect all establishments
in the quartile equally.

4.2.2

Endogeneity of Walmex expansion patterns

When Walmex first entered Mexico, its store locations were predetermined by the existing retail
outlets of its joint venture partner, Bodegas Aurrera. But thereafter Walmex was free to choose the
location of new stores, and those soon accounted for most of Wal-Mart’s floor space in Mexico. As
Figures 1 to 4 show, while Walmex expanded beyond the Mexico City area, some areas were clearly
served earlier and more densely than others. For example, despite its relative proximity to the capital,
the state of Oaxaca saw its first Walmex only in the year 2002 (Figure 4).
Since Walmex expansion patterns have almost surely responded to local economic conditions, and
these conditions are not completely captured by regional  figures, we treat Walmex ’s market
shares as endogenous when estimating (7). To do so, we think of Walmex as playing a Markovperfect game in floor space choices with local retailers, region by region. Then we approximate
the policy functions of Walmex and the rival retailers (treated as a single firm) as reduced-form
functions of the characteristics of the local economy. Specifically, we express the log of current Walmex
floorspace in state  (ln   ) as a function of the log of lagged Walmex floorspace, the log of lagged
non-Walmex retail floorspace in the same state (ln   −1 ), recent size of the regional economy
25
The Mexican tariﬀs were obtained from the Ministry of Economics (www.economia.gob.mx), while for U.S. tariﬀs
we employ figures prepared by John Romalis, see http://faculty.chicago.gsb.edu/john.romalis/research/TariﬀL.ZIP

22

(ln −1  ln −2 ), state eﬀects, and country-wide time eﬀects.26 Also, reversing the roles of
ln   and    we obtain an analogous equation to characterize the floorspace of non-Walmex
retailers:

ln   =  1 ln  −1 +  2 ln   −1

(8)

+ 3 ln −1 +  4 ln −2 +  +   +  
ln    =  1 ln  −1 +  2 ln   −1

(9)

e + e
 + 
e 
+ 3 ln −1 +  4 ln −2 + 

After estimating these equations using a standard instrumental variable (IV) estimator for dynamic
panel data (Blundell and Bond 1998), we use them to impute Walmex’s predicted share of the local
retail market for each state and year, given local conditions in the previous period:

d =
_


exp(d
  )
d
exp(   ) + exp(d
   )

(10)

These instrumented market shares should be free of correlation with the error  in equation (7).
Thus, when they are used in place of actual market shares when estimating that equation, they should
aﬀord consistent estimation of  0
2 
One complication arises in estimating (8): Walmex was completely absent in some states during
the early sample years. We deal with the associated selection problem using a Heckman (1979) correction.27 The region- and time-specific probabilities needed to construct this correction are obtained
26

Walmex floor space is the sum of floor space in Walmex Supercenters, Bodega shops, Sam’s and Superamas in the
province. Recall that while the first three store types sell groceries and other consumer products, Superama is a grocery
store.
27
For predicting non-Walmex floor space we do not need a selection correction or the Wooldridge (2005) estimator
because first-time entry is not an issue.

23

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Log domestic sales

37,353

9.56

1.77

-0.14

15.53

R&D spending

41,262

0.60

1.70

0.00

12.60

Investment

37,946

3.60

3.53

-4.68

14.72

Imported inputs (%)

37,092

20.37

29.04

0.00

100.00

Average wage

38,758

3.09

0.64

0.00

6.65

Price

31,154

5.21

0.42

3.67

7.28

TFP

37,595

-0.21

0.92

-11.74

8.93

using a dynamic probit model with unobserved eﬀects, estimated using Wooldridge’s (2005) technique.
Estimates of this probit and of equations (8) and (9) are provided along with further discussion in
Appendix 1.

4.3

Results

We are now prepared to discuss our econometric findings concerning producers’ responses to a local
Walmex presence. For this exercise we study the plant characteristics listed in Table 2, each of which
is expressed in logs and used in turn as the  variable in equation (7).28
Several observations merit note. First, we measure investments three ways: with R&D spending,
with investments in physical capital, and with reliance on imported inputs, which we take to improve
products. Second, the EIM data allow us to construct time series on prices for individual goods produced, establishment by establishment. These we aggregate to establishment-level series on output
prices, using Tornqvist indices. Also, since the resulting series reflect heterogeneous product mixes,
we normalize each establishment-level price to a value of 100 in the base period. Third, the same
establishment-level information from the EIM allows us to construct a measure of total factor productivity. Here again we deal with heterogeneous products by normalizing all total factor productivity
measures to 100 in the base period and we construct series for real outputs as plant-specific Tornqvist
28

We drop observations with missing values or zeros for domestic sales. For all other variables, we add 1 to observations
with zero values before taking logs.

24

b )
Table 3: Walmex Eﬀects on Producer Characteristics (
2
by Initial Establishment Size∗

Small ( =1)
Midsmall ( =2)
Midlarge ( =3)
Large ( =4)

Pooled sample

Fixed

Intermediate

Sales

R&D

Investment

Imports

Wages

Prices

TFP

-5.273***

-0.468

-2.385

-22.140*

-0.596**

-0.266

-0.809

[0.770]

[0.567]

[1.500]

[13.239]

[0.300]

[0.219]

[0.606]

0.328

-0.055

-3.631**

-5.595

0.263

0.364**

0.521

[0.448]

[0.478]

[1.199]

[10.565]

[0.216]

[0.158]

[0.368]

0.121

0.219

-1.812

20.958**

-0.348*

0.151

0.103

[0.392]

[0.635]

[1.296]

[10.372]

[0.189]

[0.143]

[0.305]

2.988***

1.984**

-0.310

11.031

1.793***

0.060

0.912**

[0.444]

[0.927]

[1.515]

[10.760]

[0.193]

[0.123]

[0.361]

-0.032

0.287

-2.080**

2.760

0.285**

0.148*

0.412**

[0.324]

[0.345]

[0.709]

[5.538]

[0.115]

[0.076]

[0.191]

*Complete results from estimated equations are reported in Appendix 2

indicies of the quantities of individual goods produced. Our multilateral TFP index is calculated using
the formula developed by Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (1982), and also used by Aw, Chen and
Roberts (2001). Finally, the exact number of observations varies across variables due to missing data.
Having constructed these variables, we examine their association with local Walmex retailing
opportunities using each in turn as the dependent variable in equation (7). This yields four sets of
parameter estimates for each variable, corresponding to the four subsamples based on initial sales
quantiles. Given the number of parameters estimated, we relegate the complete set of findings to
b ) These are collected in
Appendix 2 and focus here on the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence coeﬃcients (
2

Table 3, along with their standard errors.

4.3.1

The reallocation of market shares across plants

Consider first our estimates of Walmex eﬀects on sales at diﬀerent positions in the initial firm size
distribution. According to our model, low- firms should contract when Walmex appears as a retailing
option because these firms do not find it profitable to meet Walmex ’s conditions, but nonetheless find
25

themselves competing with cheap Walmex goods in the retail market. High- firms, on the other
hand, opt to sell through Walmex and thus expand as they gain access to Walmex ’s larger consumer
base.
These adjustment patterns are precisely what our estimates imply. The response of log sales to
b1 = −5273) while it
Walmex ’s market share is large and negative for the smallest size quartile (
2
4

b = 2988) Responses in the middle quantiles are
is large and positive for the biggest producers (
2
insignificant, as is the estimated response for the pooled sample. Thus the results indicate that focusing

on the response of the mean (or median) plant misses the key result that firms at diﬀerent points in
the quality distribution respond in diﬀerent ways to Walmex ’ presence.

4.3.2

Walmex and upgrading

R&D Spending and fixed investment Our simulations suggest that firms selling through Walmex
have a relatively strong incentive to improve their products’ appeal. Also, from industry reports as
well as the interviews summarized above we know that such firms need to upgrade various aspects of
their operations to guarantee compatibility with Walmex business practices. Some of these activities
are likely to involve formal R&D spending, so we next examine whether Walmex entry has led to
diﬀerential R&D spending patterns for Walmex- and non-Walmex suppliers. The second column of
Table 3 shows the results.
As with domestic sales, the pooled sample results indicate that Wal-Mart has had an insignificant
overall eﬀect on R&D. However, increased local Walmex presence has induced the largest firms to
b4 = 1984) while it has induced the smallest firms to cut
significantly increase their R&D spending (
2

b1 = −0468) (The latter eﬀect is not statistically significant.). This
back on innovative spending (
2
increase in the concentration of innovative activity at the top through the arrival of Walmex is in line

with what our model predicts (Figure 5, upper right panel). At the same time, the Walmex impact

26

on R&D of diﬀerent plants is not as precisely estimated as Walmex eﬀect on their sales.
In our model, R&D is the only way firms can increase their product appeal. But in practice firms
have a number of ways to do so. We now turn to several of these that are observable in our data set,
starting with fixed capital investments.

Capital Investment New investment will raise productive capacity if successive vintages of capital
goods become better over time. Even when capital is homogenous new investment will reduce the
average age of the firm’s capital stock, which can lead to improvements by reducing downtimes of the
equipment.
Our investment results are shown in the third column of Table 3. In contrast to R&D, the overall
b = −2080. But once again, the quantileimpact of Walmex has been to reduce investment: 
2
specific results indicate that there are diﬀerences in terms of how much capital investments were cut.

Generally, the cuts were larger among smaller firms, and the largest firms’ investments are essentially
flat. With negative or zero investment responses to Walmex, the results suggest that cooperation
with Walmex requires less capital investments than technology investments. At the same time, the
relatively high investment levels for larger firms are consistent with the market share reallocation from
smaller to larger firms that we have documented above.

Imported Intermediate Inputs An important dimension of firm upgrading is often the quality
of intermediate goods that it employs. Indeed, we were told by several interviewees that using better
inputs would be a relatively easy way of upgrading product quality. While direct information on the
quality of intermediates is not available to us, we do know the fraction of intermediate inputs that are
imported by each firm. As long as imported intermediates are typically higher quality than domestic
ones–a plausible assumption–changes in the share of imported intermediates provide information on
whether firms respond to Walmex through upgrading their intermediate goods sourcing.

27

The fourth column of Table 3 shows that the arrival of Walmex tends to raise the share of imported
intermediates for larger firms, while the opposite is true for smaller firms. The coeﬃcients are significantly diﬀerent from zero for the moderately large (q=3) and the smallest plants (q=1), respectively,
although they are not very precisely estimated. The findings suggest that entry of Walmex sharpens
the diﬀerences between firms in terms of their sourcing of intermediate inputs along the same lines as
for R&D and sales: relatively small firms, producing goods of relatively low quality, import a lower
share of intermediate inputs while larger firms, which produce products of relatively high quality,
import a greater share of their intermediates from abroad.
We now turn to the average wage received by the employees.

Average Wages If workers are paid the value of their marginal product, the cross-plant wage
distribution should simply reflect diﬀerences in the mix of workers employed by diﬀerent producers. In
particular, plants using more sophisticated technologies need higher-skilled workers, and thus should
pay higher wages. But if labor market frictions limit arbitrage across employers, wage dispersion
may also reflect rent sharing between workers and employers, with rents responding to recent capital
accumulation, technology investments, or increases in product appeal. Walmex ’s presence may have
aﬀected wages through all of these channels, but without matched employer-employee data we cannot
source out their individual roles. We can, however, look at their net eﬀect.
b estimates for which the log average wage is the
To this end column 5 of Table 3 presents 
2

left-hand side variable. We see that the arrival of Walmex strongly raises the average log wage at
b4 =1.793), while changes in average log wages at other establishments are either
the largest plants (
2

b2 = 0263) or negative (
b1 = −0596 
b3 = −0348). This pattern suggests that among
insignificant (
2
2
2

large producers, the combination of technology upgrading, relatively strong capital accumulation, and
greater rents due to stronger sales worked to the benefit of employees.
We now analyze how the firms’ price setting changes with the increased presence of Walmex.
28

4.3.3

Walmex and prices

Our model predicts that conditional on product appeal, the entry of Walmex leads to a relative decline
in the prices of firms that sell through Walmex (Figure 5, upper-left panel). In estimating equation
(7) for the pooled sample, we find that log prices increased with the arrival of Walmex, on average


b
(
2

= 0148). Relative to this, the estimate for the largest firms suggests a lower price growth,

b4 = 0060. This is consistent with the model’s prediction that large firms, which are likely to sell
at 
2

through Walmex, are held to relatively low prices.

b4 is not precisely estimated, and it would be impossible to reject the hypothesis
At the same time, 
2

that it is equal to the overall eﬀect of 0148 Moreover, according to the model, the firms with the

strongest relative decline in their quality-adjusted price are those with quality just above the threshold.
If the threshold is close to the median-sized plant in our sample, this suggests that the Walmex eﬀect
b4 , whereas if anything we find the opposite. Thus,
for moderately large firms should be lower than 
2
b1 ) that our model clearly
even if we ignore the low albeit imprecise estimate for the smallest firms (
2
does not capture, there is no strong support for the pricing prediction of our model.

One reason for this might be price responses to tariﬀ changes, although the tariﬀ coeﬃcients in
our pricing regressions appear to be small (refer to Table A7, Appendix 2). It may also be that the
smallest firms are relatively strongly aﬀected by new import competition, in particular from China.29
Consistent with this, we find that the mark-up of price over cost for the smallest firms declines much
more strongly than for the largest firms.
We now examine the eﬀect of Walmex expansion on the productivity of its suppliers.
29

This channel is outside of the analysis here but see Iacovone, Keller, and Rauch (2011).

29

4.3.4

Walmex and firm productivity

In our model, firms’ technology investments stochastically raise their product appeal. But innovations
and upgrading activities are likely to aﬀect productivity levels as well. In this section we examine
whether the arrival of Walmex led to this type of adjustment.
In the last column of Table 3 we report the results of estimating (7) with total factor productivity
(TFP) as the left hand side variable. The pooled sample results show that the local expansion of


b
Walmex are associated with productivity increases, on average (
2

= 0412). And as the estimates

for the individual size groups make clear, these overall productivity gains are due largely to significant

b4 = 0912), while the productivity changes among the other firms are
gains among the largest firms (
2

b2 = 0521 
b3 = 0103). This result is consistent
b1 = −0809 
insignificantly diﬀerent from zero (
2
2
2
with the findings on sales, R&D, and wages, where we also found a major distinction between the top
quartile and all other firms.
We have also considered labor productivity (not reported) as an alternative measure of productivity,

which leads to similar results as TFP. One diﬀerence is that with labor productivity the diﬀerence
between the Walmex impact on the smallest versus the largest plants productivity is also statistically
diﬀerent at standard levels.30
To sum up, the responses of Mexican firms to Walmex are–in multiple dimensions, and with
the exception of prices–well captured by our model. The arrival of a dominant retailer bisects
the distribution of supplying firms and leads to dramatically diﬀerent choices at large versus small
firms. More generally, the pooled sample results indicate that focusing on the response of the typical
establishment would have meant missing much of the adjustment process.
30
We have also examined the eﬀects of Walmex’ entry on the exit behavior of upstream plants. They are close to zero
and do not vary much across plants.

30

5

Conclusions

This paper provides new microfoundations for the within- and between-firm productivity gains that are
frequently observed in countries after they liberalize their trade and FDI regime. Analyzing the eﬀects
of Wal-Mart’s entry into Mexico on upstream suppliers of merchandise and food, testable predictions
are developed using a dynamic industry model in which the firms that do not exit choose how much to
invest in innovation and whether to sell their products through Walmex. In making the latter decision,
they weigh the benefits of increased access to consumers against the constraints that Walmex places
on their product quality and pricing. Simulations of the model show that firms producing high-quality
products should react diﬀerently from others to the arrival of Walmex. High-quality firms will upgrade
in order to sell their product through Walmex, while low-quality firms will not. At the industry-level,
the model predicts that productivity and the rate of innovation may increase, both because market
shares are reallocated to the stronger firms and because within-firm performance improves.
We find support for these simulation results from regressions showing the impact of Walmex on
Mexican plants between 1993 and 2002. There is evidence that the arrival of Walmex has bisected
the distribution of Mexican plants: high-quality firms tend to repond diﬀerently to Walmex than
low-quality firms in terms of both current behavior and investment patterns. Our regression results
are strongest on sales and productivity. We find that high-quality firms have sold more and become
more productive in response to Walmex ’ FDI in Mexico, while low-quality firms have lost ground in
both dimensions. At the same time, our results are less clear on pricing, where our analysis does not
yield a clear pattern. Future work will have to clarify whether this finding is unique to the behavior
of Mexican plants or not; in the latter case the model will have to be modified so that the decision
to sell through Walmex depends not only on quality but also additional factors, such as the specific
geographic location of the supplier relative to both Walmex retail stores and Walmex distribution
centers.

31

Our analysis shows that trade and FDI liberalization may have important indirect eﬀects. Not only
did the FDI deregulation of NAFTA that facilitated Wal-Mart’s entry into Mexico reshape Mexico’s
retail market, but as we showed it also had a major impact on the upstream supplying manufacturing
industries. The relationships we have studied also reveal that performance increases in the goods
producing sector may have had their source in other sectors of the economy. This is important
because most formal analysis to date has focused on the goods producing sector, which is shrinking
rapidly in many advanced economies, while in contrast other sectors of the economy are much less
well understood.
Finally, our analysis suggests there may be high returns to identifying the exact reasons for changes
in firm performance in response to trade and FDI liberalization. In the present case, several of the
major mechanisms came up in the interviews that were conducted, where we heard what Walmex
oﬀers to and demands from its would-be suppliers. This adds a valuable new perspective to the literature on measured productivity changes, which does not typically shed much light on the underlying
mechanisms.

32

References
[1] Ackerberg, D., L. Benkard, S. Berry, and A. Pakes (forthcoming), "Econometric Tools for Analyzing Market Outcomes", Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 6, North-Holland.
[2] Arellano, M., and O. Bover (1995), "Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of
error-components models", Journal of Econometrics 68(1): 29-51.
[3] Aw, Bee Yan and Chen, Xiaomin and Roberts, Mark J. (2001), ”Firm-level evidence on productivity diﬀerentials and turnover in Taiwanese manufacturing,”Journal of Development Economics
66(1), pages 51-86.
[4] Basker, E. (2007), ”The Causes and Consequences of Wal-Mart’s Growth”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21, Summer: 177-198.
[5] Basker, E. (2005a), ”Selling a Cheaper Mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s Eﬀect on Retail Prices”, Journal
of Urban Economics 58: 203-229.
[6] Basker, E. (2005b), ”Job Creation or Destruction? Labor Market Eﬀects of Wal-Mart’s Expansion”, Review of Economics and Statistics 87(1): 174-183.
[7] Berry, S. (1994), "Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Diﬀerentiation," RAND Journal
of Economics, vol. 25(2), pages 242-262.
[8] Blundell, R., and S. Bond (1998), "Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel
data models", Journal of Econometrics 87: 115-143.
[9] Business Planning Solutions (2005), The Economic Impact of Wal-Mart, Washington, D.C.
[10] Bustos, P. (2010), "The Impact of Trade on Technology and Skill Upgrading: Evidence from
Argentina", American Economic Review.

33

[11] Case, B. (2004), "Welcoming Wal-Mart to Mexico", Dallas Morning News, November 9, 2004.
[12] Caves, Douglas W., Laurits Christensen, and Erwin Diewert (1982), ”Output, Input, and Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers,”Economic Journal, 92, pp. 73-96.
[13] Chavez, M. (2002),”The Transformation of Mexican Retailing with NAFTA,” Development Policy
Review 20(4), pp 503-13.
[14] Costantini, J., and M. Melitz (2008), "The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade Liberalization" in textitThe Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, E. Helpman, D. Marin, and
T.Verdier (eds.), Harvard University Press.
[15] Ericson, R. and A. Pakes (1995) "Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical
Work," Review of Economic Studies, 62, 53-82.
[16] Durand, C. (2007), ”Externalities from foreign direct investment in the Mexican retailing sector”,
Cambridge Journal of Economics, February, 1-19.
[17] Ederington, J. , and P. McCalman (2008), "Endogenous Firm Heterogeneity and the Dynamics
of Trade Liberalization", Journal of International Economics 74: 422-440.
[18] Fishman, Charles (2003). “The Wal-Mart You Don’t Know,” Fast Company (December) 77.
Downloaded February 15, 2006 from http://pf.fastcompany.com/magazine/77/walmart.html.
[19] Görg, H., and D. Greenaway (2004), ”Much ado about nothing? Do domestic firms really benefit
from foreign direct investment?”, World Bank Research Observer 19.
[20] Holmes, Thomas J. (2011). “The Diﬀusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” Econometrica,
79(1): 253-302.
[21] Iacovone, L., W. Keller, and F. Rauch (2011), "Innovation Responses to Import Competition",
mimeo, Princeton University, March.
34

[22] Javorcik, B., W. Keller, and J. Tybout (2008), ”Openness and Industrial Responses in a Wal-Mart
World: A Case Study of Mexican Soaps, Detergents and Surfactant Producers”, World Economy,
December.
[23] Javorcik, B. and Y. Li (2008), Do the Biggest Aisles Serve a Brighter Future? Global Retail
Chains and Their Implications for Romania", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #
4650.
[24] Jia, Panle (2006), ”What Happens when Wal-Mart comes to Town? An Empirical Analysis of
the Discount Retailing Industry”, MIT working paper.
[25] Keller, W. (2010), "International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and Technology Spillovers",
in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, B. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Elsevier North
Holland Publishers.
[26] Klapper, Leora (2006), ”The role of factoring for financing small and medium enterprises,”Journal
of Banking & Finance, 30(11): 3111-3130
[27] Lipsey, R., and F. Sjoholm (2005), "The Impact of Inward FDI on Host Countries: Why so
Diﬀerent Answers?", in Does FDI Promote Development? (eds. T. Moran, E. Graham, and M.
Blomstrom), Institute of International Economics, Washington, DC.
[28] McKinsey (2003), New Horizons: Multinational Company Investment in Developing Countries,
McKinsey Global Institute, Washington, DC.
[29] Pakes, A., and P. McGuire (1994), "Computing Markov-Perfect Nash Equilibria: Numerical
Implications of a Dynamic Diﬀerentiated Product Model," RAND Journal of Economics vol.
25(4), pages 555-589, Winter.

35

[30] Tegel, S. (2003), “Every Day Higher Sales: Mal-Mart Wunderkind Walmex shows them how it’s
done in a down economy: The Giant 24,” Latin Trade (August). Downloaded February 15, 2006
from http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0BEK/is_8_11/ai_106860473
[31] Verhoogen, E. (2008), "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector", Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.
[32] Wal-Mart de Mexico (2006), Annual Report 2006, accessed on the Internet in 2007.
[33] Weintraub, G. L. Benkard, and B. Van Roy (2008), ”Markov Perfect Industry Dynamics with
Many Firms”, Econometrica 76 1375-1411.
[34] Weintraub, G., C. L. Benkard, and B. Van Roy. (2010) "Computational Methods for Oblivious
Equilibrium," Operations Research 58(4) Part-2, pp. 1247-1265.
[35] Wooldridge, J. (2005), "Simple Solutions to the Initial Conditions Problem in Dynamic, Nonlinear
Panel Data Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity", Journal of Applied Econometrics 20: 39-54.
[36] Yeaple, S. (2005), "Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages", Journal of International
Economics 65 (1): 1-20.

36

Appendix 1: Modeling Retail Floorspace
Our econometric analysis of Walmex’ s eﬀects on upstream industries is based on variation in
Walmex retail floor space relative to its local competitors. This appendix describes the sources of our
retail floor space data and summarizes our estimation of the predicted floor space shares.
Information on Retail Activity
While Wal-Mart de Mexico supplied us with figures on the number of retail stores by year and
Mexican state, they did not provide us with data on the retail floor space of its stores. Such data can
be found in the publication of the industry association, Asociacion Nacional Tiendas de Autoservicio
y Departamentales (ANTAD). However, Walmex did not participate in all our sample years in this
association, and the data are therefore incomplete.
We employ Walmex floor space data for the years 1995 to 2001, with the exception of 1998, from
the ANTAD yearbooks.31 Data for the year 1998 is linearly interpolated from the 1997 and 1999
values, while the year 2002 is extrapolated from the 2001/2000 growth trend. The Walmex floor space
by state for the years 1993 and 1994 is estimated in proportion to the number of Walmex stores by
state. We also estimate the local floor space for 1993 and 1994 from the 1997/94 and 1998/95 growth
trends, respectively.
Predicted retail floor space
As discussed in the text, Walmex was not present in all states for all years of the sample, and
moreover, this decision was likely taken by Walmex in a non-random fashion. When estimating the
Walmex policy function (8) we deal with the associated selection problem by including an inverse Mills
ratio as an explanatory variable.
To constuct the inverse Mills ratio, we must first obtain estimates of the probability that Walmex is
present in each state for each sample year. We generate these probabilities using using a dynamic probit
31

We are grateful to Mauricio Varela for sharing his data with us.

37

model, dealing with unobserved heterogeneity and the initial conditions problem as in Wooldridge
(2005). This amounts to including a number of variables in the probit estimation in addition to the
predictors of interest: (1) the initial realization on all lagged endogeneous variables, and (2) each
exogenous variable as a separate variable, broken down by time period (one variable per time period).
In our case, the initial realizations of the endogeneous variables are (i) whether Walmex was present
in a particular state in the year 1993, and (ii) the 1993 value of local floor space in a given state.
The exogenous variable in our case is lagged state-specific GDP. Results of the dynamic probit are
reported in the first column of Table A1.
When estimating (8), we use the panel techniques developed by Arellano and Bover (1995) and
Blundell and Bond (1998). In doing so, we treat local floor space and the Mills ratio implied by our
probit model as endogeneous, and we treat lagged state-level GDP as predetermined. The results are
shown in the second column of Table A1. Note that Walmex floor space tends to be high whenever
local floor space is high, while it also is positively related to state-level GDP. The correlation of
predicted with actual Walmex floor space is 0.95.
The policy function for traditional retailers (9) was estimated in the same way as (8), except no
selection correction was needed. The third column of Table A1 shows the corresponding results. It
is perhaps not surprising that there is more persistence in local floor space than Walmex floor space
(coeﬃcient of 0.86 on the lagged local floor space, versus 0.67 for lagged Walmex floor space in column
2). Also local floor space responds positively to state-level GDP. At the same time, Walmex floor
space has a lower impact on local floor space than local retailers have on Walmex (coeﬃcient of 0.03 in
column3, versus 0.22 in column 2). The correlation of the predicted with actual local floor space is 0.99.
Finally, the predicted share of Walmex floor space used to estimate equation (7) is constructed from
d =
the predicted values of the regressions reported in columns 2 and 3 as _


38

exp(
  )


exp(   )+exp(
   )

Table A1: Walmex and non-Walmex Floor Space

log Walmex floor space, t-1

−1 · (ln  −1 )

log local floor space, t-1

(ln   −1 )
log state GDP, t-1

(ln −1 )
log state GDP, t-2

Walmex present
(probit)
-5.455***
[0.204]
-3.232***
[0.245]
-22.764***
[0.177]
—

(ln −2 )
Walmex not present, t-1

1 − −1

Inverse Mills ratio
Walmex present, 1993

-54.645***
[0.196]
—

log Walmex
floor space (ln   )
0.620***
[0.001]
0.216***
[0.010]
1.305***
[0.001]
-1.242***
[0.001]
—

log non-Walmex
floor space (ln    )
0.030
[0.129]
0.856***
[0.001]
0.281***
[0.005]
-0.204***
[0.051]
—

-0.499***
[0.134]
—

—
—

—

—

log state GDP, all years
Year eﬀects

36.944***
[1.00]
8.306***
[0.064]
yes
yes

no
yes

no
yes

log-likelihood
N

-16.18
288

174

203

1993
log local floor space, 1993

1993 · ln  1993

*Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient

Appendix 2: Estimates of Equation (7)
The tables below provide estimated parameters and standard errors for equation (7), quantile by
d is constructed as described
quantile, as well as for the pool panel of establishments. The variable _

d correspond to those reported in
in Appendix 1. Coeﬃcients for the interaction term  _ × _

Table 3 of the text.

39

Table A2: Log Real Sales†

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(  )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-5.586***
[1.113]
-5.273***

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
0.481
1.730**
[0.664]
[0.601]
0.328
0.121

Large (q=4)
-1.792**
[0.650]
2.988***

All
-0.766
[0.481]
-0.032

[0.770]
1.670

[0.448]
0.848

[0.392]
-0.109

[0.444]
-0.816

[0.324]
0.224

[1.080]
0.056***
[0.008]
-0.013***
[0.004]
0.323
[0.700]
0.353***
[0.066]
0.036
5,887

[0.636]
0.005
[0.005]
0.001
[0.002]
-0.108
[0.433]
-0.039
[0.039]
0.025
9,331

[0.576]
-0.016***
[0.004]
0
[0.002]
0.008
[0.382]
-0.091**
[0.035]
0.019
10,545

[0.608]
-0.023***
[0.005]
0.007**
[0.002]
0.118
[0.429]
0.076**
[0.038]
0.043
10,681

[0.465]
-0.001
[0.003]
-0.002
[0.002]
-0.106
[0.315]
0.047*
[0.028]
0.018
37,353

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient
†

Table A3: R&D

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(  )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-0.126
[0.818]
-0.468

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
0.411
-1.925**
[0.716]
[0.973]
-0.055
0.219

Large (q=4)
-3.565**
[1.364]
1.984**

All
-1.274**
[0.512]
0.287

[0.567]
0.374

[0.478]
-0.276

[0.635]
1.176

[0.927]
1.121

[0.345]
0.713

[0.762]
0.012**
[0.006]
0.001
[0.003]
0.704
[0.508]
0.006
[0.048]
0.02
7,494

[0.691]
0.019***
[0.005]
-0.002
[0.003]
-1.127**
[0.472]
-0.023
[0.042]
0.0099
10,293

[0.919]
-0.007
[0.007]
-0.005*
[0.003]
-0.673
[0.612]
0.114**
[0.057]
0.011
11,223

[1.272]
-0.016
[0.010]
0.003
[0.004]
1.273
[0.892]
0.168**
[0.080]
0.013
11,212

[0.491]
0.001
[0.004]
-0.001
[0.002]
-0.058
[0.335]
0.068**
[0.030]
0.0033
41,262

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient

40

Table A4: Investment

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(  )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-1.041
[2.162]
-2.385

†

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
-4.523**
-0.108
[1.791]
[1.999]
-3.631**
-1.812

Large (q=4)
-1.459
[2.235]
-0.31

All
-2.054*
[1.053]
-2.080**

[1.500]
-0.377

[1.199]
2.672

[1.296]
2.847

[1.515]
-1.243

[0.709]
0.578

[1.984]
0.052***
[0.014]
-0.011
[0.007]
-0.161
[1.322]
0.068
[0.128]
0.045
6,895

[1.723]
0
[0.013]
-0.005
[0.007]
-3.784**
[1.180]
0.286**
[0.105]
0.015
9,431

[1.877]
0.016
[0.013]
-0.007
[0.006]
-0.977
[1.255]
0.031
[0.118]
0.014
10,276

[2.090]
-0.01
[0.016]
-0.005
[0.007]
1.142
[1.477]
0.082
[0.131]
0.029
10,356

[1.006]
0.012
[0.007]
-0.006*
[0.004]
-1.304*
[0.688]
0.135**
[0.062]
0.0084
37,946

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient
†

Table A5: Intermediate Input Imports

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(   )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-78.268***
[19.303]
-22.140*

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
-42.425**
-9.9
[15.644]
[15.951]
-5.595
20.958**

Large (q=4)
-7.98
[15.754]
11.031

All
-32.531***
[8.210]
2.76

[13.239]
14.853

[10.565]
-0.989

[10.372]
-10.838

[10.760]
-5.758

[5.538]
-1.385

[18.821]
0.471***
[0.133]
0.134**
[0.066]
17.026
[12.156]
4.539***
[1.141]
0.089
6,001

[15.022]
0.240**
[0.113]
0.038
[0.057]
1.951
[10.232]
2.289**
[0.920]
0.031
9,310

[15.342]
-0.141
[0.109]
-0.044
[0.051]
-0.342
[10.137]
0.355
[0.937]
0.03
10,506

[14.957]
-0.147
[0.111]
-0.057
[0.051]
0
[10.449]
0.224
[0.927]
0.027
10,368

[8.004]
0.055
[0.058]
-0.009
[0.028]
3.339
[5.403]
1.720***
[0.483]
0.026
37,092

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient

41

†

Table A6: Wages

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(   )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-0.312
[0.431]
-0.596**

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
-0.174
-0.950**
[0.321]
[0.292]
0.263
-0.348*

Large (q=4)
-0.614**
[0.285]
1.793***

All
-0.662***
[0.171]
0.285**

[0.300]
-0.34

[0.216]
0.104

[0.189]
-0.423

[0.193]
-0.421

[0.115]
-0.254

[0.411]
0.013***
[0.003]
0.001
[0.001]
0.342
[0.270]
0.018
[0.026]
0.036
6,692

[0.309]
0.010***
[0.002]
0.001
[0.001]
0.480**
[0.210]
0.004
[0.019]
0.027
9,652

[0.277]
0.006**
[0.002]
-0.003***
[0.001]
0.483**
[0.184]
0.060***
[0.017]
0.037
10,695

[0.266]
-0.008***
[0.002]
-0.001
[0.001]
0.390**
[0.188]
0.015
[0.017]
0.045
10,766

[0.164]
0.004**
[0.001]
-0.001*
[0.001]
0.413***
[0.112]
0.034***
[0.010]
0.019
38,758

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient
†

Table A7: Prices

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(  )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-0.194
[0.321]
-0.266

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
0.281
-0.348
[0.234]
[0.219]
0.364**
0.151

Large (q=4)
0
[0.179]
0.06

All
-0.006
[0.113]
0.148*

[0.219]
-0.067

[0.158]
-0.082

[0.143]
-0.113

[0.123]
-0.223

[0.076]
-0.132

[0.307]
0.003
[0.002]
-0.002*
[0.001]
-0.265
[0.202]
0.017
[0.019]
0.036
4,586

[0.224]
0
[0.002]
0.002**
[0.001]
0.121
[0.149]
-0.02
[0.014]
0.014
7,837

[0.209]
0
[0.001]
-0.001
[0.001]
0.142
[0.138]
0.017
[0.013]
0.013
9,073

[0.173]
-0.001
[0.001]
0.001*
[0.001]
-0.103
[0.121]
-0.002
[0.011]
0.012
9,634

[0.110]
0
[0.001]
0
[0.000]
0.023
[0.074]
-0.001
[0.007]
0.0038
31,154

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient

42

Table A8: TFP†

Walmex Product

( _)
Share interaction

d )
( _ × _
Walmex share

d
_

U.S. tariﬀ

(   )
Mexican tariﬀ

(  )
regional GDP

ln 
GDP interaction

 _ × ln 
R2
N

Smallest (q=1)
-2.082**
[0.855]
-0.809

Quartile
MidSmall (q=2) MidLarge (q=3)
0.503
1.209**
[0.549]
[0.471]
0.521
0.103

Large (q=4)
-0.542
[0.533]
0.912**

All
-0.082
[0.284]
0.412**

[0.606]
-0.532

[0.368]
0.253

[0.305]
-0.31

[0.361]
-0.61

[0.191]
-0.303

[0.818]
0.014**
[0.006]
0.004
[0.003]
-0.261
[0.536]
0.119**
[0.051]
0.014
6,442

[0.514]
0.002
[0.004]
-0.003
[0.002]
0.277
[0.350]
-0.036
[0.032]
0.011
9,397

[0.446]
-0.008**
[0.003]
0.001
[0.001]
-0.134
[0.297]
-0.071**
[0.028]
0.015
10,522

[0.496]
0.001
[0.004]
0
[0.002]
0.042
[0.353]
0.026
[0.031]
0.02
10,334

[0.271]
0.002
[0.002]
0
[0.001]
-0.075
[0.185]
0
[0.017]
0.0044
37,595

†Shares are instrumented as described above. Standard errors appear in square brackets below each coeﬀficient

43

F IGURE 1

44

F IGURE 2

45

F IGURE 3

46

F IGURE 4

47

Figure 5: Model Simulations

48

